     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Modernization of Public Finance Mgmt (P144952)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0023294

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P144952                                    Modernization of Public Finance Mgmt

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Myanmar                                    Governance


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-54020,TF-17910                        30-Sep-2019                                          35,311,313.37

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 02-Apr-2014                               31-Mar-2021

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           30,000,000.00                                    20,000,000.00

 Revised Commitment                            44,282,536.92                                    14,110,666.82

 Actual                                        35,456,993.74                                    14,110,666.82




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Rima Al-Azar               Clay Wescott                 Jennifer L. Keller              IEGEC (Unit 1)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Financing Agreement (Schedule 1, p. 5), and the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, p. 7),
   the Project Development Objective (PDO) was "to support efficient, accountable and responsive delivery of
   public services through the modernization of the recipient's public finance management systems and
   strengthening institutional capacity."

   For the purpose of this ICRR, the project’s PDO can be restated as follows:


                                                                                                  Page 1 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Modernization of Public Finance Mgmt (P144952)



   Objective 1. Increase the efficiency of public financial management;

   Objective 2. Improve the accountability of public service delivery;

   Objective 3. Increase the responsiveness of public service delivery; and

   Objective 4: Strengthen institutional capacity.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project had four components that were interlinked around the PFM cycle and a fifth cross-cutting
   component.

   Component A: Improving revenue mobilization through bringing more revenues from natural
   resources on budget and strengthening tax administration (initial cost of US$11.0 million and a
   revised allocation of US$11.94 million). This component was designed to (i) support government efforts
   to implement the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative (EITI) by putting in place the appropriate
   rules, regulations, protocols, and reporting systems to ensure compliance with EITI requirements; (ii) pilot
   the establishment of the Large Taxpayer's Office (LTO), before moving to the subsequent establishment of
   Medium Taxpayer's and then Small Taxpayer's Offices; (iii) provide resources and technical assistance to
   review and reform the legal and regulatory framework as necessary; and (iv) offer financial and technical
   support to ensure the necessary training and capacity building for Internal Revenue Department (IRD) staff.

   Component B: Supporting responsive planning and budget preparations (initial cost of US$14.0
   million and a revised allocation of US$8.57 million) This component aimed at supporting the mandates
   of the Budget and Planning Departments and the evolving decentralization process in Myanmar through two
   sub-components:

   (B1): This sub-component focused on the Budget framework and aimed (i) to move the budget compilation
   process to one that is excel-based and which stores budget information in a centralized database to
   facilitate analysis; and (ii) to support the Budget Department to undertake these new roles effectively.

   (B2): This sub-component focused on the Planning framework aimed at (i) supporting the bottom-up
   planning process by developing guidelines and procedures so that the states and regions have the
   information and tools to plan responsively; (ii) strengthening budgeting for investment projects through
   strengthening the Finance and Investment Directorate of the Planning Department; (iii) developing technical
   guidance for investment appraisal that applies across sectors, as well as sector-specific guidance in key
   strategic sectors (e.g., roads, water, electric power and irrigation) by supporting the Project Appraisal and
   Progress Reporting Department Assistance.




                                                                                                   Page 2 of 24
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  Modernization of Public Finance Mgmt (P144952)



Component C: Supporting effective budget execution and financial reporting (initial cost of US$15.0
million and a revised allocation of US$17.38 million) through two sub-components:

(C1): This sub-component supported the Treasury Department and the Myanmar Economic Bank (MEB) in
budget execution functions based on the autonomy of the Central Bank of Myanmar (CBM). Specifically,
the project supported (i) the effective operationalization of the new Treasury Department at the Ministry of
Planning and Finance (MoPF); (ii) the debt and cash management functions of the new Treasury
Department; (iii) the internal controls on budget execution and reporting; and (iv) public procurement
establishing procurement rules and practices that generate value given that the increasing proportion of
spending will take place through the procurement system.

(C2): This sub-component aimed at improving management of State Funds Account by strengthening the
ICT systems at the MEB and by rolling out the ICT systems to branches as planned improvements to
telecommunication and electricity supply come on line. It also included the provision of technical assistance
to line ministries to improve reporting processes around budget execution and the establishment of the
Financial Information Reporting System for Treasury (FIRST).

Component D: Fostering External Oversight and Accountability (initial costs of US$6.0 million and a
revised allocation of US$5.36 million) by strengthening two institutions responsible for external oversight
and accountability and thus complementing improvements in the quality and transparency of budgetary
information:

(D1): This sub-component supported the Parliamentary Public Accounts Committee through (i) the provision
of a skills development program for parliamentarians; and (ii) the establishment of a dedicated Public
Accounts Committee Office (PACO) to provide Parliamentarians with independent and non-partisan
analysis of the budget cycle and fiscal policy.

(D2): This sub-component enhanced the operational effectiveness of the Auditor General's Office. Both
short-term activities interventions (training, scholarships, secondments, twinning with a developed Supreme
Audit Institution) as well as mid-term interventions (workforce development, ICT strengthening, and
adopting the International Standards for Supreme Audit Institutions over a five- year period) were planned.

Component E: Establishing a sustainable institutional platform and skills base for PFM (initial costs
of US$9.0 million and a revised allocation of US$6.75 million) by

(E1): Operationalization of a PFM Academy. This component aimed at addressing the specific challenges
faced by Myanmar with respect to the skills required to operate a modern PFM system by first providing
essential ICT and language training and then establishing a PFM Academy meant to be the MoPF's
permanent training arm. In addition, the PFM systems were meant to be inclusive and ensure that public
service delivery benefits are enjoyed by various groups, especially women and minorities by (i)
incorporating gender- and minority-informed views in the bottom-up planning at the local level; and (b)
building the capacity of the newly formed Fiscal Policy Division at the Budget Department to undertake
basic analysis on the incidence of public spending across genders and ethnicities.

(E2): Supporting Project Management. The government has formed a PFM Executive Reform Team and a
PFM Reform Secretariat to articulate, manage, and monitor the overall reform program, including the
project. This subcomponent would support the capacity strengthening of the Secretariat.



                                                                                                Page 3 of 24
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Modernization of Public Finance Mgmt (P144952)




e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project cost: The original cost was US$50 million (Loan Agreement, p. 1; PAD, p. 2), which was revised to
  US$44.28 million. At the project closing on 31 March 2021, the amount disbursed was US$35.31
  million. Approximately 20 percent of the loan/grant proceeds remained undisbursed, partly due to delays in
  procurement and to the military takeover which took place on 1 February 2021, when all project
  disbursements were put on hold in accordance with OP/BP 7.30. (ICR, p. 5).

  Financing: The project was jointly financed by an IDA Credit (US$30 million), and a Recipient Executed
  Trust Fund (US$20 million). The disbursement percentages are IDA-54020 at 55 percent and TF-17910 at
  45 percent on all project expenditures (PAD, p. 44). A third restructuring (July 2020) reduced the funds
  available to the project due to exchange rate movements. This resulted in a reduction in funds by US$2.5
  million under the TF grant and a revision of the project's co-financing ratio between IDA and the trust fund
  (TF), which was initially 60 percent (IDA): 40 percent (TF).

  Borrower Contribution: None planned or made.

  Dates: The project was approved on 2 April 2014 and became effective on 9 October 2014. The original
  closing date was 30 September 2019. The actual closing date was 31 March 2021.

  Closing date: Based on a Government request (May 2019), a no-cost 18-month project extension from 30
  September 2019 to 31 March 2021 was approved to account for the delays in the two complex Information
  Technology (IT) procurement cases and support the acquisition of the Integrated Tax Administration System
  (ITAS) for the IRD and the Core Banking System (CBS) for the MEB. The project extension also allowed for
  continued support to other critical PFM reforms under the project, while a follow-on project was being
  prepared to avoid a gap in support.

  The project underwent three restructurings:

      1. In September 2016 and following the Mid Term Review (MTR) (May 2016), the following changes
         were introduced: (i) extension of closing date, (ii) refinement of Results Framework by adding and/or
         revising the indicators, (iii) reallocation of costs across the components, (iv) revision of disbursement
         estimates, (v) introduction of risk ratings per project category, and (vi) revision of the implementation
         schedule.
      2. In March 2020, the audit report due date was extended from six to nine months to provide sufficient
         time for the Project Financing Agreement covenant related to the submission of audit reports to be
         fully compliant. This was part of a blanket restructuring applied across the entire Myanmar portfolio.
      3. In July 2020, a reduction in funds by US$2.5 million under the TF grant resulted from exchange rate
         movements (please see note 1 below) and necessitated (i) reallocations across project components;
         and (ii) a revision of the project's co-financing ratio between IDA and the TF, from 60 to 61 percent
         (IDA) and from 40 to 39 percent (TF) (ICR, p. 15).

  [Note 1] Due to exchange movements, the amount received from donors under the TF was USD 17,470,861
  instead of the originally stated amount of USD 20,000,000, representing a reduction of USD 2,529,139.




                                                                                                    Page 4 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Modernization of Public Finance Mgmt (P144952)



3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The project's objectives were highly relevant and aligned with the government's strategies, the World
Bank's re-engagement in Myanmar, and commitments by other development partners.

The project was aligned with the Government's strategies, including the PFM reform strategy, which was
updated in 2013 and 2018 (PAD, p. 5). In addition, the project followed the government’s phased reform
program, which covered a 10-15 year period. By supporting “efficient, accountable and responsive delivery
of public services through the modernization of Myanmar’s PFM systems”, the project was also in line with
the Government's Framework for Economic and Social Reform which emphasized a responsive and
transparent planning and budget process as crucial to political reform (PAD, p. 6). It was also relevant to
the Government’s priorities articulated in the Myanmar Sustainable Development Plan (2018–2030). Under
the Plan, modernizing the PFM system was a critical strategy to support macro-fiscal stability, improve the
allocative efficiency of public resources, and enhance the transparent and responsive delivery of public
services. Furthermore, the project – by strengthening institutional capacity - was also fully aligned with the
Myanmar Country Partnership Framework (FY15–17) and (FY20–23), supporting the achievement of
Objective 1.3 "Strengthen the capacity of public institutions to make policies, plan, and deliver services
more effectively, transparently, and equitably" and Objective 2.1 "Build human capital and fostering
peaceful communities." Finally, the National Strategic Plan for the Advancement of Women (2013–2022)
outlined a comprehensive approach in 12 priority areas for improving the situation of women and girls in the
country. An efficient and effective PFM system could improve the quality of public service delivery that
promotes gender equality. To ensure continued alignment, the project's progress was discussed during the
quarterly and Multi-Donor Trust Fund and biannual implementation support meetings.

The project was central to the World Bank Group's re-engagement with Myanmar after decades of
isolation. It supported the transformation of the MoPF from an accounting department with little policy role
under military rule to a modern MoPF across the PFM chain. Since public financial management reform
was a core element of the World Bank's interim strategy, the project contributed directly to this strategy
which included three pillars closely tied to the PFM reform agenda. Specifically, the strategy outlines
support around three pillars, each closely tied to PFM reform. The project contributed to the first pillar by
supporting reforms of government PFM institutions to improve the allocation and use of funds used by
government agencies responsible for public service delivery. In addition, the project was aligned with the
strategy’s second pillar, which aimed at building confidence in the ongoing reform process, including PFM
reforms. Finally, the third pillar focused on laying the ground for the resumption of a full country program. By
improving fiduciary management and oversight, the project aimed at building confidence to resume
programming across a broader portfolio that channels resources through Myanmar PFM systems, including
budget support operations.

In addition, Bank-executed technical assistance was instrumental and contributed to achieving project
results. Furthermore, the project indirectly supported the World Bank's strategic goals of eliminating
extreme poverty and promoting shared prosperity by improving the allocation of scarce resources to
essential social services, especially health and education, and building trust through increased
transparency and accountability of public resources.

Finally, the project was aligned with the commitments and interventions of other development partners in
the same sector, including bilateral partners (e.g., Japan, Norway, Australia, United Kingdom and United

                                                                                                     Page 5 of 24
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                      Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Modernization of Public Finance Mgmt (P144952)



               States) and multilateral ones (e.g., International Monetary Fund, Asian Development Bank, and European
               Union). To ensure a sustained dialogue to strengthen the coordination and harmonization of their
               interventions in the PFM reform agenda, the World Bank and other development partners participated in the
               Macroeconomic Management Sector Coordination Group Meeting, which was held twice a year since 2018.
               Lastly, by contributing to improved fiscal transparency and strengthened fiduciary controls, the project
               addressed development partner concerns regarding the use of government systems (PAD, p. 7).


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Increase the efficiency of public financial management

                             Rationale
                             Before the project, Myanmar's Union Government had a low official revenue-to-GDP ratio of around 9.1
                             percent of GDP (2012/2013). This was due to two reasons: (1) about 40 percent of revenue mainly from the
                             natural resource sector was off budget; and (2) an outmoded tax administration. The project aimed to support
                             the government's ambitions to increase the revenue effort to above 12 percent by 2019 by including off-
                             budget revenues on-budget and by improving tax administration and tax collection. Furthermore, the budget
                             preparation process was predominantly manual, which was time-consuming and cumbersome, and ministries
                             did not have allocated budget ceilings nor a Medium-Term Expenditure Framework.

                             To improve PFM, the project supported various public institutions including the MoPF, MEB and Treasury by:
                             (i) increasing tax revenues from Large Taxpayers, (ii) improving responsive planning and budget
                             preparations; (iii) modernizing Treasury and banking systems; and (iv) improving the timeliness of processes
                             (e.g., issuing of budget ceilings and reconciled budget reports).

                             Inputs and Outputs

                             Through consultancies, technical assistance provided by two resident tax advisers, training, and procurement
                             of large IT systems (inputs), the project produced the following outputs: (1) the LTO and Medium Taxpayers'
                             Office (MTO) were established; (2) a self-assessment system (SAS) was rolled out and a total of 7,637 (952
                             large and 6,685 medium) taxpayers were serviced from October 2020 to March 2021; (3) a total of 195
                             auditors were trained; and (4) the tax administration law was modernized.

                             However, the automation requirements of the IRD, including the Integrated Tax Administration System (ITAS)
                             were delayed. Although IRD had successfully procured a vendor for its ITAS, it turned out to be non-
                             performing which led the Department to cancel the contract and retender. This was successfully completed


                                                                                                                            Page 6 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Modernization of Public Finance Mgmt (P144952)



through limited international bidding; however, the contract was not signed after the military takeover (ICR, p.
18).

Finally, the ICR did not discuss another process which could improve PFM efficiency process as was
envisaged in the PAD (p.29): no information is provided as to whether the unique Taxpayer Identification
Number (TIN) system was successfully rolled out.

Outcomes

Key Outcome indicator (KOI): Increased tax collection from Large Taxpayers

This indicator was revised during the MTR. It was considered that the initial indicator measuring tax to GDP
ratio went beyond the project's scope and thus raised attribution questions. The indicator was re-focused to
measure increased taxes collected from large taxpayers since the project directly supported the LTO. As a
result of the different inputs described above, the project succeeded in increasing by 280 percent tax from
Large Taxpayers. However, the procurement of the ITAS was put on hold after the military takeover.

      Baseline FY2015/2016: MMK 1,106 billion.
      Target 2020: MMK 3,250 billion.
      Actual: MMK 4,190 billion (280 percent increase) – Achieved

Interim Results Indicator: Number of large and medium tax-payers completing self-assessment

      Baseline FY2015/2016: 0
      Target: 2,300
      Actual: 7,637 (332 percent more than the targeted figure). Achieved.

Interim Results Indicator: Modernization of tax administration information system

      Baseline: There is no integrated tax information and administration system at IRD.
      Delivery of an integrated tax information system for testing in IRD headquarters, LTO and MTO.
      Actual: ITAS was procured but not put in place. ITAS contract negotiation was started in November
       2020 by IRD and the successful bidder identified. However, the signing stage of ITAS was on
       hold when OP/BP 7.30 was invoked. Partially achieved.

Key Outcome Indicator: Efficient budget preparation process

      Baseline: No issuance of budget ceilings, no MTEF.
      Target: Issuance of budget ceilings and preparation of MTEF.
      Actual. The budget preparation process was strengthened by (i) issuance of budget ceilings on time
       to line ministries since FY2015/2016; (ii) preparation of the MTEF; and (iii) the budget process moved
       from manual to electronic budget submission with all 181 agencies submitting recurrent and capital
       budget forms electronically for the FY2019/20 budget. However, the MTEF still lacked the bottom-up
       spending projections for line ministries.




                                                                                                   Page 7 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Modernization of Public Finance Mgmt (P144952)



Interim Results Indicator: Improving information base for linking budgets to plans - number of
departments submitting recurrent and capital budget forms electronically

      Baseline: 0
      Target: 40
      Actual: Achieved end target of 40. All 181 agencies submitted recurrent and capital budget forms
       electronically for the FY2019/20 budget.

Furthermore, the project supported the modernization of IT systems in the MEB and Treasury as well as the
process of reconciling budget execution reports with the objective of improving their efficiency.

Interim Results Indicator: Delivery of a core banking system (CBS) (new – introduced after MTR)

      Baseline: No such system existed. MEB treasury processes remain largely paper-based.
      Target: The CBS to be acquired and tested in Head office and a large branch in Yangon.
      Actual: CBS contract was finalized by MEB and the successful bidder. World Bank and Government
       approved the CBS contract. However, the signing of contract was put on hold with activation of OP/BP
       7.30. Partially achieved.

Interim Results Indicator: Treasury Automation (FIRST) (new – introduced after MTR)

      Baseline: Financial reporting is largely manual, cumbersome and prone to errors and delays.
      Target: The automated treasury system FIRST has been developed and implemented in 20
       Government Agencies as a pilot project by the end of the project.
      Actual: FIRST developed and implemented in 168 agencies. Achieved.

The ICR does not provide any information explaining why or how the project reached 168 agencies, instead
of the 20 which were originally planned. Furthermore, the ICR does not discuss whether the project faced
challenges in rolling out any systems due to a lack of connectivity, hardware and intermittent electricity
supply, as was noted as a potential challenge in the PAD (p. 33).

Interim Results Indicator: Timeliness of reconciled budget execution reports

      Baseline: Greater than six months
      Target: Three months or less
      Actual: Treasury completed the Monthly Union Fund account within two months following the
       accounting month and submitted it to MoPF, OAG, and Cabinet. Achieved.

The project improved the efficiency of several institutions responsible for public financial management,
including the IRD, Treasury, MEB, and MoPF by (i) increasing their ability to collect taxes; (ii) introducing IT
systems and moving from a manual to an electronic system; (iii) improving budget preparation processes,
including setting budget ceilings and the timely submission of budget reports. Where the project partially
achieved this objective was in its ability to complete the procurement process of the two large IT systems
which were halted due to the military takeover – something outside the control of the project.




                                                                                                    Page 8 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Modernization of Public Finance Mgmt (P144952)




Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Improve the accountability of public service delivery

Rationale
Prior to the project, accountability of public service delivery was weak due to (i) lack of fiscal transparency, (ii)
insufficient external oversight, and (iii) weak citizen engagement. Fiscal transparency was undermined
because a significant share of revenues, mostly from the natural resource sector and estimated at 40 percent
(PEFA, 2012), were managed through Other Accounts and were off budget. Moreover, the Parliament,
private sector, and civil society had limited information on the budget due to the paucity of information being
published as well as to the inaccessible format of the information that was being published. This limited
transparency and availability of information negatively impacting oversight, accountability, and participation of
the different segments of society.

To complement the targeted improvement in the quality and transparency of budgetary information, the
project also sought to strengthen Myanmar's structures for external oversight and accountability, namely that
of members of parliament, and in particular, the Joint Public Accounts Committee (JPAC) and the Office of
Auditor General (OAG) both centrally as well as in the Regions. The causal chain for this objective is that, by
increasing the availability of fiscal documents, as well as by strengthening these two oversight institutions,
then external accountability for the management of public funds would be enhanced.

Finally, the Project aimed to improve citizen engagement in the budget processes through consultations with
the public as part of determining budget priorities (PAD, p. 15).

The causal chain is that by making fiscal documents available to the public, engaging with citizens regarding
the budget process, and strengthening the oversight institutions, accountability would be increased.

Fiscal Transparency

Inputs and Outputs

Through technical assistance, several documents were produced and made publicly available.

Outcome

Key Outcome Indicator: Government commitment to fiscal transparency in line with global good
practice, including a report on revenues from natural resources (initial KOI as described in PAD, p. 25)
revised to "Number of key budget and fiscal documents published on the MoPF website for public
access" (ICR, p. 37). It is to be noted that the KOI reflected partially the project’s stated objective to
improve accountability since it was limited to “fiscal transparency” and did not cover the other
aspects of accountability (citizen engagement and oversight).

The "number of key budget and fiscal documents published on the MoPF's website for public access"
originally included the publication of the EITI[1] report on revenues from natural resources. Following the

                                                                                                       Page 9 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Modernization of Public Finance Mgmt (P144952)



MTR, the publication of the EITI report was removed as part of this indicator since, as the ICR noted that the
indicator's target “was not supported by the project and thus raised attribution concerns" (ICR, p. 12). It is
unclear how the issues are linked: Publishing the EITI report on MoPF's website does not lead automatically
to any attribution of the report being produced by the project.

Though this indicator is presented as a KOI, the re-wording introduced following the MTR is closer to an IRI
since it does not capture the outcome-level achievements, such as greater citizen participation.

      Baseline: in 2012/13 only the enacted budget was published.
      Target: The end-of-project target for the number of key fiscal documents publicly available has been
       increased to 9, including a budget dashboard and a report on gender-informed budgeting for 1 service
       sector from 2021 onward.[2]
      Actual: 12 budget and fiscal documents were published on the Ministry of Planning and Finance's
       (MoPF) website.[3] Achieved.

The increase in the number of publicly available fiscal documents is substantial. However, the ICR does not
discuss the extent to which the published documents are considered “core” documents per good international
practice. According to the PEFA, six of the nine “core” documents became publicly available. While the
audited financial reports are not published (PEFA 2020, p. 57). Furthermore, the ICR does not comment on
the ease of locating these documents on the MoPF's website nor the extent to which they have been
accessed by the public. Per the project team, this increased transparency was well-received by donors and
NGOs. Unfortunately, the budget dashboard is not operational (ICR, p. 37).

Interim Results Indicator: Information on procurement opportunities and contract awards (above USD
100,000) are publicly available for five Union ministries.

      Baseline: 0
      Target: 70 percent
      Actual: Achieved the end target of 70 percent. 99 percent of Information on procurement opportunities
       and contract awards (above USD 100,000) are publicly available for the largest seven Union ministries
       (Ministry of Education, Ministry of Health and Sports, Ministry of Planning, Finance and Industry,
       Ministry of Construction, Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Irrigation, Ministry of Transport and
       Communication, Ministry of Electricity and Energy). Achieved.

The ICR states that "the project contributed to the achievement of other significant benefits such as improved
fiscal transparency, which reduced information asymmetry and uncertainty" (ICR, p. 56).

External Oversight

In terms of strengthening external oversight, there was no specific Key Outcome Indicator associated with
it. As a result, there was no information as to whether the increased capacities resulting from the project's
support led to an improvement of oversight by either the JPAC or the OAG. Nevertheless, there were specific
activities that were implemented that may have contributed to achieving this outcome.

Inputs and outputs




                                                                                                 Page 10 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Modernization of Public Finance Mgmt (P144952)



The inputs were technical assistance and training provided to the parliament and OAG staff which resulted in
the following outputs: (1) OAG developed a strategy for audit and oversight of the expenditures related to the
COVID-19 Economic Relief Plan, drawing on the International Standards of Supreme Audit Institutions
(ISSAI) 5500 series; and (2) A Joint Public Accounts Committee (JPAC) certification program was initiated to
strengthen budget oversight and legislative scrutiny. A training program was delivered to the state and
regional JPAC team to improve the budget review and oversight efficiency. However, the ICR does not
provide information on the number of staff trained. Neither is there any information on the quality of the
training or the results achieved.

Interim Results Indicator: Adoption of IPSAS transition plan (new – introduced after MTR)

This was a new indicator introduced as a result of the MTR. The causal chain is that the modernization of
accounting and financial reporting requires adopting modern and international accounting standards such as
IPSAS. However, as this is a long-term reform it is important to have a clear transition plan on how and when
to get there.

      Baseline: IPSAS standards are not applied in Myanmar accounting and financial reporting.
      Target: MoPF and OAG have adopted a transition plan for the adoption of IPSAS over the medium
       term
      Actual: The plan for adopting IPSAS over the medium term was jointly adopted by OAG and MoPF as
       of 30 November 2019. Achieved.

Interim Results Indicator: Timeliness of submission of Audit Report to Parliament

According to the ICR (p. 19), audit reports were submitted to Parliament between 10 and 12 months after the
end of the fiscal year.

      Baseline: Number of months after end of fiscal year: over 1 year.
      Target: Less than 10 months.
      Actual: Less than 12 months (The Audit Report for FY 2018/19 was submitted to Parliament on 4
       September 2020 and within 12 months). Partially achieved because of COVID-19-related delays.

Interim Results Indicator: Capacity building of JPAC to strengthen parliamentary oversight (new -
introduced after MTR)

The causal chain is that since JPAC plays a crucial role in the accountability of PFM and in the modernization
of the PFM legal framework, it should benefit from project-financed technical assistance and capacity
building. It was expected that the capacity building would result in the publication of the draft PFM bill with
inputs from JPAC.

      Baseline: JPAC received initial capacity building on English and ICT skills and IT
       modernization. There is a need to strengthen JPAC's involvement in the drafting of the new PFM bill.
      Target: Publication of the draft PFM bill with inputs from JPAC.
      Actual. A JPAC certification program was implemented to train state and regional JPAC staff to
       improve budget review and oversight efficiency. In addition, JPAC provided the inputs to the draft
       PFM Bill under review by Parliament. Achieved.


                                                                                                 Page 11 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Modernization of Public Finance Mgmt (P144952)



Furthermore, according to the PEFA (2020), some of the recommended actions by the legislature are
implemented by the executive (p. 167).

Citizen Engagement

In terms of increasing citizen engagement and its potential impact on improving accountability, this outcome
was explicitly stated in the Theory of Change (PAD, p. 15). According to the PAD, activities to achieve this
objective were expected to "be closely coordinated with work being financed by UK AID to strengthen social
accountability which will build capacity of civil society to understand PFM reform, planning and budgeting
processes and develop tools and platforms to help them engage directly and constructively with government
to have more responsive service delivery" (PAD, p. 12). The project produced a citizens’ budget, which was
made publicly available. However, though it was planned that public consultations would be held to determine
budget priorities, no information is provided as to whether these consultations took place. Finally, neither the
project's results framework nor the ICR provide further information regarding inputs/outputs and results
achieved regarding this stated outcome.

[1] The Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative (EITI) is a global standard for transparency and
accountability in the oil, gas and mining industries. In July 2014 Myanmar became an EITI candidate country,
joining the 48 countries which have signed up to the initiative. Under EITI, governments publish what they
receive from extractive companies and companies publish what they pay to governments.

[2] Nine core documents include: (i) pre-budget statement; (ii) annual Executive budget proposal
documentation, (iii) enacted budget, (iv) in-year and year end budget execution reports, (v) audited annual
financial statements, (vi) external audit reports, (vii) summary of the Executive budget proposal; (viii) medium
term budget proposal, (xi) summary of enacted budget.

[3] The public can access the following documents at https://www.mopf.gov.mm: (1) Citizen’s budget, (2) Pre-
budget statements (2020–2021), (3) 2019–2020 Union (3rd quarter), (4) 2019–2020 Union (2nd Q), (5) Mid-
Year review (2019–2020), (6) Six months 2019–2020 FY 1st SR, (7) 2019–2020 FY Union, (8) Government
Financial Statistics (GFS, 2020)[3], (9) GFS (Quarterly), (10) GFS annual, (11) PEFA 2020, and (12) 2019–
2020 FY 3 quarter rev and expend, COVID related



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
Increase the responsiveness of key public service delivery

Rationale
Before the project, budget credibility was low due to large deviations in the volume and composition of
expenditure (PAD, p. 3). This limited the ability of ministries to plan and deliver services
effectively. Furthermore, the lack of up-to-date financial rules and regulations decreased the efficiency of
budget execution and as well the effectiveness of key public service delivery](health, education, and
transport) by decreasing the variation between allocated budget (adjusted for in-year allocations) and actual

                                                                                                  Page 12 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Modernization of Public Finance Mgmt (P144952)



spending. For example, the lack of such clear rules and regulations led the spending agencies to
develop their own internal regulations (including on public procurement), creating confusion and increasing
the chance of wasting time and money (PAD, p. 3). The causal chain was that by improving policy-based
budget preparation, strengthening overall budget credibility and improving the budget outturn variance in
three key public service sectors (health, education and transport), and updating the financial rules and
regulations, would contribute to an improvement in public service delivery. would be improved.

Inputs and outputs

Technical assistance and training led to better-prepared budgets and the drafting of updated financial rules.

Key Outcome Indicator: The project’s stated outcome was to improve policy-based budgeting to enable
more strategic and sustainable allocation of resources for better service delivery. The project did not have
any activities/indicators to assess whether the allocation of resources for better service delivery did take
place; nor did the ICR provide a discussion on whether this linkage between a more efficient PFM and a more
credible budget process indeed resulted in better service delivery.

A recent World Bank report (2021) “Improving Health Services in Myanmar through Public Financial
Management Reform,” indicates that this outcome is yet to be achieved since the ministries of health and
education have large service delivery programs at the state, region, township, and district levels. Their ability
to prepare timely and reliable consolidated budgets and consolidated financial reporting is limited by the
current chart of accounts and by the lack of distributed or remote access to any national-level Integrated
Financial Management Information System (IFMIS). The review of PFM functions that affect health/education
service delivery will need to balance the Ministries’ urgent needs for more timely and reliable consolidated
budgeting and financial reporting with MoPF’s medium-term time frame for reform of the chart of accounts
and rollout of any new IFMIS (p. 113).

Interim Results Indicator: Composition of expenditure outturn compared to original approved (new –
introduced after MTR)

      Baseline: 18 percent
      Target: 14 percent
      Actual: Achieved the final target of 14. The composition of expenditure (temporary actual) outturn
       variance compared to the original approved FY2019/20 was -0.36 percent. Achieved.

This improvement is also confirmed in the PEFA (2020), which states that the rating of the indicators
“Composition of expenditure out-turn compared to original approved budget” improved from D+ in 2013 to B+
in 2019 (p. 163). This improvement in the effectiveness of budget execution was due to (i) a more realistic
budgeting supported by the MTEF and budget ceilings and (ii) better cash reconciliation and management
(ICR, p. 19).

Interim Results Indicator: Improved budget credibility and budget outturn in key public service
sectors (health, education and transport)

      Baseline: 24 percent
      Target: 14 percent


                                                                                                   Page 13 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Modernization of Public Finance Mgmt (P144952)




      Actual: 6.47 percent. The composition of expenditure (provisional actual) outturn variance compared
       to the original approved budget (excluding loans and grants) of FY2019/20 was 6.47 percent for the
       three ministries—MoHS (−10.4 percent), MoE (8.9 percent), and Ministry of Transportation (0.13
       percent). Achieved the end target of 7.7%. The composition of expenditure (provisional actual) out-
       turn variance compared to the original approved budget (excluding loans and grants) of FY2019/20
       was 6.47% for the Ministry of Health and Sports, Ministry of Education, and Ministry of
       Transportation.

This result is also confirmed in the PEFA (2020) which states that the rating for the indicator “Aggregate
expenditure out-turn compared to original approved budget” improved from C in 2013 to A in 2019 (p. 163).

Interim Results Indicator: New financial rules and regulations are enacted and published

      Baseline: Financial rules and regulations outdated and not widely available.
      Target: Updated financial rules and regulations published and adopted.
      Actual: Updated and published Financial Rules and Regulations in 2017. The official English version
       of the financial rules and regulations (FRR) was approved and posted on the MoPF website in
       October 2018. Achieved.

The achievement of this result contributed to both enhancing the effectiveness of PFM by having updated
rules and regulations as well as to the outcome of increased transparency.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 4
Objective
Crosscutting Objective: Strengthen institutional capacity

Rationale
A 2020 PFM Capacity Building Assessment Report showed that two-thirds of staff from the departments of
the MoPF did not perform any PFM functions (ICR, p. 6). To ensure the sustainability of capacity
strengthening of PFM in Myanmar, the project supported the establishment of a PFM Academy, which was
envisaged to provide just-in-time, on-the-job, operational training. The causal chain is that by establishing the
PFM Academy as MoPF's permanent training arm, capacity strengthening would be institutionalized and
sustainable.

Inputs and Outputs

Through technical assistance (input), the following outputs were achieved: (1) organizational structure for
PFM Academy training center under Budget Department was approved; (2) training modules were developed;
(3) face-to-face and online training was delivered for government officials of all line ministries, including at the
state and regional levels. The training consisted of four PFM modules per the PFM Academy curriculum and



                                                                                                     Page 14 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Modernization of Public Finance Mgmt (P144952)



other technical modules supported by the development partners. And (4) virtual knowledge exchange
programs were conducted with PFM Academies in the region (Myanmar, Cambodia, Vietnam, and Malaysia).

This objective did not have an associated KOI. As such, there was no assessment regarding the outcomes
(quality, change in knowledge, change in practice) related to the training offered to government
staff. Furthermore, there is no assessment of whether the PFM Academy was allocated a budget and staff to
ensure its sustainability. Furthermore, the ICR did not discuss whether the delay in setting up the PFM (in
February 2020) had any effect on the capacity building that was necessary to achieve the other outcomes.

The initial IRI in the PAD was split into two following the MTR and first restructuring to better capture the
institutionalization and, therefore, sustainability of the MoPF training function upon project end.

Interim Results Indicator: Number of beneficiaries of training courses

      Baseline: 0
      Target: 300
      Actual: 1,428 staff benefited from the PFM Academy as of 31 March 2021. Achieved.

Interim Results Indicator: Establishment of the PFM training academy to enhance sustainability of
PFM training

      Baseline: PFM academy is not operational.
      Target: PFM academy is established and carrying out initial training. A gender disaggregated training
       monitoring and evaluation framework.
      Actual: Established PFM academy in February 2020 and carried out initial trainings and a refresher
       gender responsive budgeting trainings. Achieved.

Other achievements noted in the ICR included a training developed and delivered in close cooperation with
the PFM Academy, Gender Response Budgeting Committee, and the development partners on GRB and
Gender-Responsive Budget Statements in which 40 mid to senior management staff from four ministries
(ICR, p. 20).

Finally, other achievements which are captured in the ICR (but not the Results Framework) and which
contribute to increasing the responsiveness of public service delivery and the effectiveness of PFM include
the following: (i) a new comprehensive PFM law was drafted to institutionalize the numerous PFM reforms
supported by the project; (ii) t (iii) financial rules and regulations were updated and published in 2017; (iv) an
ICT strategy for the MoPF was prepared; (v) a joint Gender-Responsive Budgeting (GRB) task force was
established with representatives from the Ministry of Education, Ministry of Health Services, and MoPF, to
serve as a coordination mechanism; and (vi) training on GRB and gender PEFA supplementary framework
were delivered (ICR, p. 20).

Rating is not applicable since it is a cross-cutting objective



Rating
Not Rated/Not Applicable

                                                                                                    Page 15 of 24
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Modernization of Public Finance Mgmt (P144952)




OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The project's overall efficacy is Substantial. Of the 13 IRIs, 11 were fully achieved and the remaining two
                            were partially achieved due to the military coup which resulted in halting project activities. Of the five KOIs,
                            four were fully achieved. However, examining the three project’s objectives related to efficiency,
                            accountability and responsiveness, the KOI of one objective (accountability) was inadequate to determine the
                            extent to which the objective was fully achieved. Specifically, it is not clear to what extent the project
                            achieved the outcomes related to increased transparency and increased accessibility of information (as
                            opposed to availability) to the public. Finally, the link to the improved service delivery was not made in the
                            ICR nor was it possible to determine based on the available documentation.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   The ICR states that no formal economic analysis was conducted since direct attribution of benefits to PFM
   reforms is difficult to assess and/or measure. However, though several of the project's benefits are mostly
   intangible and cannot be quantified and compared with the project's costs in the conventional sense, a
   formal economic and financial analysis could have estimated the costs and benefits of budget predictability. The
   team could have estimated the costs incurred at appraisal due to inadequate budget information and cash flows.
   Payment arrears to contractors could trigger contract penalties and increased debt service costs. Delays in
   project completion could lead to delays in expected economic benefits to citizens and project revenue (e.g., tolls
   on highways). This could lead to an inability to make loan repayments that could trigger loan penalty charges
   and possibly reduce credit ratings. The ICR team could then have estimated the financial and economic benefits
   due to improved budget and cash predictability supported by the project. However, with hindsight, many of the
   potential benefits of budget predictability would be reduced by one big factor beyond the control of the project,
   the 2020 military takeover. Nevertheless, the ICR discusses the main elements of efficiency (costs, timeliness,
   institutional arrangements, human resources) under different sections, including "Efficiency", “Key Factors”, and
   “M&E”.

   There was no project cost overrun. The planned project activities were completed within a revised budget of
   US$44.12 million against an initial cost estimate of US$55 million. The ICR considers that “more was achieved
   with less” and concludes that this is “a significant indicator of the project being considered efficient” (ICR, p. 56).
   However, it does not provide an explanation of how this efficiency was achieved and the reason for which
   several outputs were substantially over-achieved.

   The project experienced several delays. The first was a delay in the effectiveness date due to a challenging
   fragility, conflict, and violence (FCV) context; and adoption of legislation supported by the project (ICR, p.
   14). The second set of delays was related to implementation. For example, the PFM Academy became
   operational only in February 2020 (ICR, p. 20). It notes that the ITAS contract negotiation was started in

                                                                                                                              Page 16 of 24
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Modernization of Public Finance Mgmt (P144952)



November 2020 by IRD and the successful bidder. However, given the current situation in Myanmar, the
signing stage of ITAS was on hold. The policy will guide the task team in determining further steps relative to
the program (ICR, p. 41) and the CBS contract was finalized by MEB and the successful bidder. WB and
Government approved the CBS contract. However, given the current situation in Myanmar, the signing stage of
CBS was on hold according to the applicable policies (OP/BP 7.30). The policy will guide the task team
in determining further steps relative to the program (ICR, p. 43). Furthermore, and according to the project team,
the project faced some procurement challenges (e.g., capacity of vendors) which also contributed to the delays
in procuring the IT systems.

The institutional arrangements were complex and fragmented which decreased efficiency. The ICR
recognizes that there was a need for appropriate delegation of administrative and financial powers to
functionaries at the appropriate levels, to streamline decision-making in order to achieve greater efficiencies
during project implementation (ICR, p. 27). Furthermore, eight units were involved in project implementation
which resulted in weak coordination and operating in silos (ICR, p. 33). The departmental approach to
implementation resulted in a fragmented project with duplication of roles and resources serving each individual
department rather than the project as a whole (e.g., eight separate Annual Work Plans (AWPs) were prepared
and submitted to the World Bank for ‘no objection’ instead of one consolidated AWP covering the entire project)
(ICR, p.33).

Limited capacity of Project Management Units (PMUs) staff. The projects had two PMUs: the Budget
Department of MoPF and the OAG of the Union. Each PMU had its own Designated Accounts. Initially, both
PMUs had limited staff capacity and knowledge in managing donor-funded projects coupled with an unclear
understanding of the responsibility for maintaining the assets register and conducting physical asset
inventory. Furthermore, it proved to be challenging for the project to hire a qualified FM consultant. In order to
mitigate this lack of capacity, the World Bank FM specialist assisted the PMU staff and supported them until they
were (a) familiar with the World Bank practices and procedures; and (b) able to prepare the necessary reporting
documents independently (ICR, p. 31).

The ICR does not discuss the effect of COVID-19 on its efficiency. With the exception of a mention that the
results indicator, “Timeliness of Submission of Audit Report to Parliament was partially achieved due to the
COVID-19”, the ICR does not discuss any other effect of COVID-19 on project implementation. For example,
while the ICR mentions that as of 31 March 2021, a total of 1,428 staff benefited from the PFM Academy (ICR,
p. 20) – which was established in February 2020 – it does not explain this substantial overachieving of the
target. In other projects, the greater numbers of person trained during the COVID-19 pandemic was due to the
shift from face-to-face training to online training which allowed a greater number of persons to participate in
training sessions.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)


                                                                                                    Page 17 of 24
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Modernization of Public Finance Mgmt (P144952)



                                                                                     0
Appraisal                                                   0
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     0
ICR Estimate                                                0
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The project was highly relevant and aligned to both the Government’s as well as development partners’ -
including the World Bank – priorities (Relevance rating is High). Even though, it was a highly ambitious project,
given the FCV context, it succeeded in achieving a substantial number of its key objectives and interim results
(Efficacy rating is Substantial). However, there was one outcome (citizen engagement) which was not
achieved and other outcomes which were not monitored at the outcome-level. Finally, notwithstanding
procurement challenges and institutional inefficiencies which led to a rating of Modest, the project overall was
able to over-achieve several of its planned targets.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The ICR (p. 34) states that “the project was disrupted toward the end by the military takeover on 1 February
2021. Considering the fluid situation in the country, it is not possible to foresee how the project achievements
and activities may be sustained.” This is particularly true when it comes to the outcomes related to increased
budget transparency and citizens’ engagement as well as to the support to institutions at the State/Region
levels. However, according to the project team, the fact that the Minister and his senior management teams
have remained unchanged and have “internalized” some of the project’s objectives has allowed a greater
sustainability of some of the results. For example, even though activities that were envisaged under Phase 2
of the project have been halted, the Government has continued financing from its own resources some of the
activities related to improving the banking system.

According to the World Bank (Myanmar Economic Monitor, July 2022) “there are ongoing risks that conflict
could become even more disruptive and spread to other parts of the country” (p. 10) and that “tax revenue
has declined due to the shrinking economic base and increased non-compliance” (p. 38).

According to another study, the military coup has allowed authorities greater control over the allocation of
resources in the economy raising risks of misallocation of resources to connected firms and individuals at the
expense of more development spending. The same study noted that there is a “broader shift away from a
stable market-based system that is governed by the rule of law towards a system of policy making and
governance that is less predictable, less clearly communicated, and characterized by more discretion in the
enforcement of rules and regulations” (Economic Research Hub, 2022. Myanmar’s Economic Governance




                                                                                                    Page 18 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Modernization of Public Finance Mgmt (P144952)



after the Coup: Changes in Policy and Practice). All these changes will have an impact on sustaining the
outcomes that were achieved by the project.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project’s design benefitted from several analytical assessments. These included the following (i) the
  first comprehensive assessment of Myanmar’s PFM system - the 2012 Public Expenditure and Financial
  Accountability (PEFA) assessment (ICR, p. 9); (ii) the IMF Review of Public Financial Management,
  Treasury and Debt management; (iii) a Government Financial Statistics review, and (iv) additional
  analytical work on tax policy and administration by development partners. These assessments were
  crucial in ensuring that the project’s design took into consideration the strengths and weaknesses of the
  system and identified reform priorities.

  The project design included a Theory of Change (ToC) (PAD, p. 15). However, the ToC did not discuss
  the assumptions related to the achievement of the PDO, such as government capacity to implement the
  activities and the importance of sequencing of activities to achieve the desired results (ICR, p. 7). This
  was reflected in the framing of the PDO and the causal chain linking the outputs to outcomes to
  objectives with some objectives. As the ICR notes (p. 33), this also affected the adequacy in the choice of
  indicators in the Results Framework, some of which were not sufficiently relevant to the PDO and had to
  be changed at the midterm review. Notwithstanding the introduction of new indicators, there were still
  some outcomes (e.g., increasing accountability and citizen engagement) that had no associated outcome
  indicator and which made self-evaluation and validation challenging.

  The project implementation arrangements were complex, especially when the low capacity and FCV
  context were considered. Eight units were involved in project implementation, which resulted in weak
  coordination, operational inefficiencies, duplication of roles/resources, and operating in silos. For
  example, operationally, each department had its own mini data centers, servers, and IT staff and
  developed the same government accounting system software under discrete arrangements without
  obtaining the source code. Similarly, instead of preparing one consolidated AWP to be submitted to the
  World Bank for “no objection” for the entire project, eight AWPs were submitted to the World Bank,
  increasing the workload of both the MoPF as well as the World Bank (ICR, p. 33).



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The quality of the supervision was satisfactory based on the following factors:

      i. A strong World Bank team, made up of three Co-Team Leaders – one, international, and two, who
         provided the in-depth country knowledge and language fluency, essential for policy dialogue;

                                                                                                  Page 19 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Modernization of Public Finance Mgmt (P144952)



     ii. World Bank technical staff providing high-level expertise on FM, taxation, procurement, etc;
    iii. Regular implementation support and supervision missions, on average every six months, which
        were documented by ISRs, Aide Memoires, and debriefings with senior government officials;
    iv. A timely mid-term review which led to a restructuring of the project;
     v. Implementation support and technical assistance provided by other partners (e.g., Furthermore, the
        IRD received technical support from the IMF and the Office of Technical Assistance of the US
        Treasury (USOTA) resident advisors); and

 Advisory and analytical work co-financed by Bank-Executed Trust Fund (BETF), which contributed to
 implementation support.

 While the quality of supervision was highly satisfactory, there were weaknesses related to the quality at
 entry, including the ToC, formulation of the PDO and related outcome indicators, and complex
 implementation arrangements. The quality at entry is rated ‘Moderately Satisfactory’



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The M&E design followed a clear line of sight from inputs (consultancies and IT infrastructure and
 equipment, and training) to outputs . However, the M&E design did not consistently include KOIs and/or
 activities associated with the stated outcomes and as such not all the project’s key planned outcomes could
 be measured. For example, one of the project’s outcomes (e.g., Improved citizen engagement in budget
 processes, see ToC in PAD, p. 15) had no inputs/activities/indicators associated with it. Similarly, two
 outcomes (Enhanced fiscal transparency and Fostering External Oversight and Accountability), had three
 IRIs associated with each one of these outcomes but no specific KOI. As a result, the Transparency,
 Accountability, and Participation which are necessary to ensure the good governance of Financial
 Management, were not clearly defined and lacked appropriate indicators in the original design of the
 project. Finally, though the ICR mentions the drafting of several legislative documents (e.g., on financial
 management, procurement, and asset disposal) which can contribute to both improved effectiveness
 and the sustainability of PFM interventions, these policy-level outputs are not captured in the Results
 Framework.

 Finally, the Results Framework did not require the reporting of the number of persons trained
 disaggregated by sex.




                                                                                                   Page 20 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Modernization of Public Finance Mgmt (P144952)



b. M&E Implementation
  The project had a complex, four-tiered structure for implementation, with clearly stated roles and
  responsibilities for M&E. The M&E implementation structure consisted of the following:

  Tier 1: PFM Executive Reform Team (ERT) supervised overall PFM reform activities and provided
  guidance on project implementation. The ERT was led by the Deputy Minister (MoPF) and included the
  Director Generals (DGs) from eight Implementing Agencies (IAs). It was responsible for ensuring that
  targeted outcomes were achieved and that they were aligned with the Government PFM reform program.

  Tier 2: Implementing agencies that appointed a technical focal point to the PFM Secretariat and were
  responsible for monitoring the progress of its respective component.

  Tier 3: PFM Reform Secretariat which was formed by Deputy DGs of the IAs and who supported their
  respective DGs in coordinating the projects and reporting progress.

  Tier 4: Support services which included the following: (i) the Project Coordination Unit (PCU) consisted of
  a full-time project coordinator reporting directly to the Project Director and supported by specialists in
  accounting, procurement, FM, and ICT; (ii) the Procurement Coordination Advisory Unit; (iii) the Financial
  Management Unit; and (iv) the PFM IT staff from the IAs.

  Notwithstanding this complex structure, starting from 2017, the progress reports were submitted on time.

  In addition to the above, the World Bank team conducted a total of 12 implementation
  support/supervision missions which helped monitor progress which was recorded in 11 ISRs and 12 AMs
  (ICR, p. 30).



c. M&E Utilization
  The M&E findings of this project shaped the project’s restructuring after the MTR, including a revision of
  its results framework. The original seven IRIs that were included in the project’s results framework (PAD,
  pp. 25-27) were further refined and expanded following the MTR with six new IRIs introduced and four
  IRIs revised. This improved the results framework by including results-oriented indicators and allowing for
  proper project performance tracking. Furthermore, the ambition of the indicators was increased in line
  with the additional time (extensions) and resource reallocation (ICR, p. 15).

  According to the ICR, modifications were made in annual work/procurement plans whenever required to
  consider better the data and evidence provided (ICR, p. 31).

  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   No environmental or social safeguards policies were triggered by the project.



                                                                                                   Page 21 of 24
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Modernization of Public Finance Mgmt (P144952)




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Given the limited staff capacity of the two Project Management Units (PMUs), i.e., the Budget Department
  of MoPF and the OAG of the Union, and the difficulty of hiring a qualified FM consultant, the World Bank
  provided technical support through the World Bank FM specialist as well as series of semi-annual training
  to the PMU staff. As a result, the interim financial reports and annual project audit reports were submitted
  on a timely basis and were found to be of acceptable standards. Internal controls, accounting, reporting,
  audit, and disbursement arrangements were acceptable. Nevertheless, the FM assessment of the
  proposed Phase 2 project, which proposed to use the same FM arrangements rated the FM residual risk
  as ‘Moderate’. This assessment identified two main risks: (i) the use of manual processes to capture and
  record data and transactions; and (ii) the fragmented implementation set up which renders coordination
  challenging and increases the risk of delays in receiving financial information (ICR, p. 32).

  Procurement adhered to the World Bank Procurement Regulations for IPF Borrowers; used the World
  Bank standard procurement documents; and used a web-based Systematic Tracking of Exchanges in
  Procurement to communicate procurement review requests with the World Bank. However, the ICR noted
  two challenges that affected procurement performance; (i) delays in procuring the two large IT packages—
  ITAS and CBS; and (ii) one possible case of collusion among bidders, which was raised by the PMU and
  the World Bank (according to the FY 20 PPR findings). The subsequent procurement post-review report
  (February 2021) concluded that the procurement process followed the respective method being used and
  that no major irregularities were found. However, some weaknesses remained. The ICR assigned it an
  overall rating of ‘Moderate’ (ICR, p. 32).




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  The ICR (p. 25) highlights three unintended outcomes, one of which the ICRR argues was an intended
  impact of the project activities. The outcome “overcoming/improving some PFM bottlenecks in budget
  formulation and execution” was a result of the various interventions which the project supported. As such,
  the ICRR would not consider it as as an “unintended outcome.”

  However, the two others were unplanned. “Enhancing macro-fiscal stability” was an intended result of the
  project’s activities aimed at increasing revenue collection, improving spending to fund priorities, and
  managing risks . Similarly, the replication at the subnational level of several transparency tools (e.g.,
  citizens’ budget) and oversight tools (e.g., PAC function) revealed that good practices supported by the
  project were replicated by other public institutions at the decentralized level not directly supported by the
  project (ICR, p. 26).




d. Other
   ---


                                                                                                   Page 22 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Modernization of Public Finance Mgmt (P144952)



11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
                                Moderately
Outcome                                               Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
                                Moderately
Bank Performance                                      Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
                                                                                 Though the M&E implementation
                                                                                 and use of data were
                                                                                 substantial, there were several
Quality of M&E                  Substantial           Modest
                                                                                 significant shortcomings in the
                                                                                 M&E design which led to the
                                                                                 modest rating.
Quality of ICR                  ---                   Modest


12. Lessons

The ICR presents a series of lessons and recommendations emerging from the project’s
experience. IEG summarizes the most persuasive lessons below:

High-level political commitment and policy dialogue is critical throughout the project
cycle. In the case of this operation, leadership and ownership were necessary to ensure the
implementation of the main PEFA findings and to support the planning of the subsequent phases
and the continuity of the project. The project was led by a single ministry (MoPF) and was placed
under the Deputy Minister. The project’s Steering Committee was his management team which
ensured full ownership as well as high-level commitment. Furthermore, the retreats that were
organized with the government, the World Bank, and development partners helped build and foster
trust which is necessary for sustained policy reforms.

It is important to strike a balance between an ambitious scope, existing capacity, and FCV
context. In the case of this operation, while it was important to align the project’s design with the
Government’s comprehensive and ambitious PFM reform strategy, the technical and management
capacity of the staff of the eight IAs was a limiting factor, along with the FCV context. There is a
need to better address these limitations with simpler and more streamlined implementation
arrangements to ensure greater efficiencies and decrease the risk of duplication.

There are benefits of anchoring the technical design and activities on strong analytical
work. In this case, the first PEFA assessment (2012) helped in establishing a baseline measure of
PFM strengths and weaknesses, which guided the design of activities. The 2020 PEFA assessment
helped to determine the extent of progress made.



13. Assessment Recommended?



                                                                                                   Page 23 of 24
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Modernization of Public Finance Mgmt (P144952)



  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR was based on a desk review of reports prepared prior to the military takeover on 1 February 2021. As
a result of the military takeover, neither interviewing authorities was possible nor was a Borrower ICR
prepared. Notwithstanding these limitations, the ICR is generally well-written and provides a detailed overview
of the project, and available evidence supports the ratings. The report generally follows the guidelines and is
focused on results with one exception: it is sparse on the discussion of efficiency. It mixes the efficiency
analysis of the project’s efficiency with the improvement in the efficiency of government performance (which
should be analyzed under efficacy). While the ICR presents the ToC framework and notes that there were no
associated assumptions, it does not propose nor analyze some of the assumptions that would have been
necessary to consider when formulating the ToC. Finally, the ICR does not discuss the limitations in the
Results Framework regarding the weakness in the logical/causal flow from outputs to outcomes to objectives
and PDO.

Finally, the ICR could have provided a comparison of how this project’s management costs as a share of the
total project cost compare with similar projects in other countries in the region. It could have also provided an
analysis as to why the project over-achieved several of its indicators with a lower-than-planned budget and
whether this was due to unambitious targets and/or to an overly generous allocation of financial resources.




  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Modest




                                                                                                     Page 24 of 24
