     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Strengthening Social Protection Project (P162646)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0023086

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P162646                                     Strengthening Social Protection Project

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Rwanda                                      Social Protection & Jobs


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)              Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-61690,TF-A7192,TF-A7408                 30-Jun-2021                                       102,340,787.33

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 18-Dec-2017                                 31-Dec-2021

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                    Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                             80,000,000.00                                  23,000,000.00

 Revised Commitment                             103,000,000.00                                  23,000,000.00

 Actual                                         102,343,986.62                                  23,000,000.00




 Prepared by                  Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator        Group
 Santiago Ramirez             Salim J. Habayeb             Eduardo Fernandez             IEGHC (Unit 2)
 Rodriguez                                                 Maldonado




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   As stated in page 5 of the Financing Agreement (signed on December 21, 2017), under Schedule 1, Project
   Description: “The objective of the Project is to improve the effectiveness of Rwanda's social protection
   system, notably the flagship Vision 2020 Umurenge Program (VUP), for targeted vulnerable groups.” This
   original objective statement remained unchanged throughout the project, including after Additional Financing
   and restructuring. The wording is identical across the Financing Agreement, PAD, and ICR. Amendment 1 to
   the Financing Agreement (signed on April 18, 2018) changed the wording slightly by replacing “Rwanda” with


                                                                                                  Page 1 of 27
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Strengthening Social Protection Project (P162646)



   “Recipient”. Amendment 2 to the Financing Agreement (signed on March 29, 2021) did not introduce changes
   to the objective statement.

   Explanatory note on the PDO statement: The PAD (p. 5) and ICR (p. 7) explained the term “effectiveness” as
   follows:

    “Effectiveness will be improved by (a) increasing the overall number of beneficiary households (coverage),
   thereby increasing the number of households receiving income protection; (b) increasing the guaranteed
   minimum number of days work for PW, thereby effectively increasing the size of transfers households receive;
   (c) expanding eligibility criteria for Direct Support (DS) to include more labor‐constrained households under
   DS; (d) introducing Expanded Public Works (ePW) to provide more accessible jobs to those ineligible for DS
   but still with labor constraints, which will allow more households with limited labor capacity to access benefits;
   and (e) increasing the frequency and timeliness of payments, which will increase the reliability of income
   support. Efforts will also be made to ensure increased access to complementary services to improve the
   human capital contribution of the VUP. Targeted vulnerable groups include those defined as such by the
   GoR’s Ubudehe community‐based household classification system, with attention to reaching and serving
   women and children better.”



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Through Additional Financing (P166720), a subcomponent was added to the original component 1 of the
   project, and funds were added to the original component 3. Otherwise, original components remained the
   same.

   ORIGINAL COMPONENTS

   Component 1: Improving coverage, adequacy and effectiveness of the Vision 2020 Umurenge
   Program (VUP) cash transfers (Appraisal: US$68.5 million; Additional Financing: US$16.8 million;
   Actual: US$84.7 million) This component sought to cover, through IDA funds, 40 percent of the costs of
   the VUP safety nets transfers; Public Works’ (PW) wage and non‐wage costs including capital costs of
   Classic Public Works (cPW); and associated administrative costs. This would contribute to the following:

   (i) Continuation of DS grants to all eligible populations nationwide and expansion of eligibility
   criteria to include households with persons with a disability. Continuation of support to approximately
   95,846 Ubudehe 1 households without labor capacity and expansion to approximately 11,000 Ubudehe 1
   single‐worker households caring for a person with a disability.

   (ii) Continuation of cPW from 128,000 households (in 240 sectors) currently to approximately
   141,361 (in 270 sectors) by the end of the operation, with progressive improvements in (i) the




                                                                                                     Page 2 of 27
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  Strengthening Social Protection Project (P162646)



percentage of eligible households that are covered; (ii) timeliness of payments; and (iii) the average number
of days of work offered, to increase the adequacy of total annual transfers.

(iii) Major extension of gender and child‐sensitive ePW model to reach 75,000 households (in 300
sectors) by the end of the operation (up from 2,757 in 30 sectors in FY2016/17, Q4). ePW offers
year‐round, multiyear, flexible, part‐time work opportunities to moderately labor‐constrained households,
often single‐headed households with caring responsibilities. ePW subprojects are primarily flexible road
maintenance, an established model with developed norms and regulations. However, the project would
launch community‐ and home‐based childcare as a new type of ePW scheme in FY2018/19: ePW
participants would be employed as childcare givers and trained and supervised by appropriate Cell‐ and
sector‐level staff, with resultant synergies to nutrition and early childhood development (ECD) objectives.
Other new ePW subproject types may also be explored. The coverage of ePW would be deepened in each
sector to support at least 250 households; geographical coverage would be expanded from the current 30
sectors to 300 sectors (covering all 270 cPW sectors) by the end of the project period. These 300 sectors
had been selected based on a poverty map, which included the concentration of extremely poor households
within the district using the Integrated Household Living Conditions Survey (EICV) data, coupled with data
on the number of vulnerable Ubudehe 1 households across sectors. In addition to wages of eligible
households employed on ePW, the project would cover direct non‐wage costs of ePW, which would not
exceed 30 percent of total direct costs and would consist mainly of goods, including tools for road
maintenance, food, and equipment. Minor refurbishments essential to the provision of quality community‐
and home‐based childcare (such as latrine construction and minor infrastructure improvement required
according MIGEPROF’s guidelines) would also be funded but not counted as part of the 30 percent cap.

Component 2: Enhancing access to human capital and economic inclusion services (Appraisal:
US$6.5 million; Actual: US$6.4 million). This component sought to improve the contribution of the social
protection sector to boost human capital creation and economic inclusion services, with a focus on
combating chronic malnutrition and improving child development goals, as well as improving livelihoods by
promoting skills development, resilience, and access to services. This component would adopt a ‘learning
by doing’ approach to evaluate early-stage interventions, then scale up successful innovative interventions
to improve resilience in poor households. It would do this through a three‐step process of designing the
intervention, including detailed implementation guidance, carrying out a process evaluation of the
intervention (supported under Component 3 or through other Development Partners) and scaling-up based
on decisions informed by the evaluations. The delivery of these components would make use of innovative
public‐private partnerships, including the contracting out of service delivery and linkages with and referral to
other programs, leveraging Ministry of Local Government (MINALOC) and Local Administrative Entities
Development Agency (LODA)’s cross‐sectoral mandate. This would both test new models and provide
support through quality enhancements and accompanying measures to the cash transfers under
Component 1. Activities to be supported by this component would include the following:

(i) Nationwide sensitization and community mobilization. This subcomponent had three main
objectives: (a) build awareness and understanding of issues which affect potential for human capital
development and resilience to extreme poverty (for example, health and hygiene; nutrition; basic animal
husbandry; water, sanitation, and hygiene); (b) ensure households understand their rights and
responsibilities and empower communities to hold duty bearers to account for the delivery of high‐quality
services and the appropriate use of social protection resources; and (c) build public understanding and
awareness of VUP objectives, modalities, and impacts. Sensitization and community mobilization was a
longstanding element of the VUP, but its implementation had been hitherto limited by capacity gaps at the
local level. This component would revitalize the community mobilization elements of LODA and the VUP

                                                                                                   Page 3 of 27
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  Strengthening Social Protection Project (P162646)



and would scale up selected behavior change communication through channels such as radio, notably in
coordination with the nutrition project and the sensitization campaigns developed by the Rwanda
Biomedical Center.

(ii) Improving parenting and childcare services for vulnerable families in targeted communities. The
project would provide the following: (a) Community‐level support to households on parenting, including
cognitive stimulation of young children, appropriate feeding, and incentivizing the use of maternal and child
health and nutrition services. This support would be provided as a package in conjunction with the new
ePW childcare model and potential nutrition support grants. Cooking demonstration sessions would also be
rolled out in coordination with community kitchen gardens. (b) Quality enhancement and supervision to
community‐ and home‐based ePW childcare subprojects. Substantial capacity building would be needed for
this activity. Because home‐based childcare was a new area for the VUP and capacities within the GoR
district and sector offices were limited, specific training and supervision needs would not be easily absorbed
within existing budgets. Therefore, in coordination with the Ministry of Gender and Family Promotion
(MIGEPROF), the project would finance contracting of service providers at the national or district level to
develop a parenting and community/home‐based care training curriculum and carry out training of trainers;
contracting and training of part‐time trainers in parenting and community/homebased care in participating
sectors to train and oversee Cell‐level supervisors and build capacity of subnational GoR staff; and
contracting and training of Cell‐level supervisors to provide DS and supervision of caregivers in community
and home‐based care settings and to deliver community‐based parenting capacity‐building sessions.

(iii) Enhancing livelihoods. The support to sustainable livelihoods and eventual graduation from extreme
poverty was a major policy priority of the GoR. Interventions included a combination of asset transfer grants
with caseworker support as well as other services for beneficiaries. The design of the asset transfer and
caseworkers’ management system was under way by appraisal, and the operation would support the
strengthening and rollout of these interventions that would support sustainable livelihoods and access to
economic opportunities. Caseworkers’ guidelines would be developed detailing how caseworkers would
operate, including how referrals should be made to a range of productive and social services appropriate to
their needs as households. During FY2017/18, before the start of the operation, the GoR would finalize and
the World Bank would review the design documents of these interventions, including a comprehensive
package of asset transfers, caseworkers’ management system, and training. As part of the caseworkers’
management system, tools were to be strengthened, including training materials for caseworkers and
supervisors and for establishing decentralized cadres of caseworker trainers. A process evaluation would
also be carried out in FY2017/18, and the results of the evaluation would inform the improvement and
scaling up of this initiative, notably the asset transfer and caseworker mechanisms.

Component 3: Delivery Systems, Policy and Program Management (Appraisal: US$5 million;
Additional Financing: US$6.2 million; Actual: US$11.2 million). This component sought to build local
and national government’s capacity to implement Components 1 and 2, as well as to improve the larger
social protection system in Rwanda. MINALOC and LODA would lead their respective subcomponents,
which included the following areas: (a) evidence‐based policy and program development, (b) delivery
systems, and (c) institutional strengthening for improved service delivery.

(i) Ministry of Local Government (MINALOC )

(a) Evidence‐based policy and program development to support new and innovative policy and program
design changes for the sector. The new National Social Protection Strategy (NSPS) would begin
implementation in July 2018. The proposed project sought to support assessments to monitor and evaluate


                                                                                                 Page 4 of 27
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  Strengthening Social Protection Project (P162646)



progress of these new strategies and programs and propose design changes. The project would also
support training and capacity building of policy makers and civil servants on M&E methodologies for the
social protection sector.

(b) Delivery systems. Substantial efforts have gone into designing and putting into place Rwanda’s social
protection systems. Notably, the Government developed a comprehensive integrated social protection
management information system (iSP‐MIS), which serves as a registry for populations eligible for social
protection services and a link to the Ubudehe database (social registry) and other program specific
registries as well as the national identification database. Further support is required to operationalize and
upgrade these systems for use across the social protection system and build in further functionality,
including to ensure the coordination with nutrition and early childhood development work.

(c) Institutional strengthening. The project would finance additional posts in the MINALOC Single Project
Implementation Unit (SPIU) and technical assistance to the National Early Childhood Development
Coordination Program (NECDCP) , to strengthen technical, financial, and procurement capacities for
implementation of this project. Social protection training would be provided to mid‐ and senior‐level staff,
and technical support would be provided to improve program coordination through training and expertise to
develop guidance and systems. Project management costs, including MINALOC incremental operating
costs and additional Project Implementation Unit (PIU) staff, would also be supported through this
component.

(ii) Local Administrative Entities Development Agency (LODA)

(a) Evidence‐based policy and program development, including a focus on the VUP design changes,
notably adding complementary child development and nutrition support services and a focus on promoting
livelihoods. These new programs would require significant design and implementation support, as well as
high‐quality M&E. Analytical work would be supported and expert technical advice and training would be
provided to improve the VUP M&E mechanisms, impact evaluation design, and implementation.

(b) Delivery systems. LODA had various new, promising social protection service delivery systems that
needed strengthening. LODA had developed an updated Monitoring and Evaluation Information System
(MEIS) and had newly introduced a grievance and redress system (the citizen monitoring system [CMS]).
Full operationalization of these systems had not yet occurred, for instance, payments issues had not been
fully resolved. Thus, further support was required to operationalize and upgrade these systems for use
across the social protection system and to build in further functionality, such as citizen monitoring and
payments. Finally, support was required around cross‐program coordination and harmonization, which
would be provided through this component.

(c) Institutional strengthening for improved service delivery. Support would be provided to build human
resource capacity at all levels—central, district, sector, and cell. At the central level, the proposed project
would finance additional posts in the LODA SPIU to strengthen technical, financial, and procurement
capacities for an effective implementation of the project. Social protection training would be provided to mid‐
and senior‐level staff, and technical support would be provided to improve program coordination through
training and expertise to develop guidance and systems. Staff in districts and sectors with key
responsibilities for the VUP implementation would be trained on the revised VUPs policy, procedures, and
systems and social protection in general. To sustainably build capacity for frontline delivery at the cell level,
frontline staff would be trained by LODA, either directly or through the contracting of service providers.



                                                                                                   Page 5 of 27
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  Strengthening Social Protection Project (P162646)



Project management costs, including LODA incremental operating costs and additional PIU staff, would also
be supported through this component.

REVISED COMPONENTS

(i) Nutrition-Sensitive Direct Support (NSDS) – New subcomponent to component 1 through
Additional Financing P166720. The NSDS subcomponent was added to the project after Grant funding
from the Multi-Donor Trust Fund for Achieving Nutrition Impact at Scale “The Power of Nutrition” (MDTF-
PoN) (US$15 million), and the Global Financing Facility (GFF) (US$8 million), was jointly approved through
Additional Financing (P166720), on April 12, 2018. The NSDS subcomponent had a dual objective: to
provide income support to vulnerable families with pregnant women and young children, allowing for
adequate consumption; and to increase investments in families’ human capital, notably through incentivizing
demand for key health and nutrition services as provided in the parent project and in the Stunting
Prevention and Reduction Project (SPRP - P164845). NSDS sought to finance the introduction of a new
nutrition support grant targeting the poor (Ubudehe 1) over three years. It was a co-responsibility cash
transfer (CCT) scheme under the VUP, targeted to the poorest households with pregnant women and/or
children under 2 years, aimed at incentivizing intake of essential health and nutrition services during the
early years of life. Its requirements included attendance by beneficiary groups (pregnant women, mothers
and newborn children ages 0–6 weeks, and children 7 weeks–24 months) to parenting sessions and the
use of maternal and child health services (including ante and post‐natal care, as well as following
established protocols for monitoring growth of young children). The grant would be coupled with behavioral
support for parenting, as provided in Component 2 of the project, and twinned with supply‐side interventions
provided by the SPRP, as a complement to the overall Government of Rwanda (GoR) program for
combating chronic malnutrition.

(ii) Additional resources from grant funding to component 3 – through Additional Financing
P166720. These additional funds aimed at supporting implementation and M&E of the NSDS. The specific
activities included hiring of three additional contractual staff in LODA (a project manager, financial
management specialist, and an M&E specialist) dedicated to operationalization of the NSDS; a Civil
Registration and Vital Statistics (CRVS) specialist in MINALOC for capacity building of staff at district,
sector, and cell levels (including health center staff and Community Health Workers – CHWs) on the NSDS
operational procedures; financing of reasonable transaction fees for NSDS payments; upgrades to the
Social Protection Monitoring and Evaluation Information System and establishment of links with the Health
Management Information System (MIS), and the Rapid SMS system; strengthening fiduciary controls; and
contributions to the envisioned process and Impact Evaluations (IEs).

In addition, support would be provided to the design of an action plan derived from the CRVS strategic plan
and roll out of selected activities relevant to the project’s development objectives. This support was
considered important by the GoR given the need to register and store data and information on life events
and its contribution to the M&E of the overall project objectives and the medium-term vision to develop a
CRVS system and link it with the backbone MIS. The main activities to be implemented under this
component included:

      Consistent with the CRVS National Strategic Plan (2017/18–2021/22), elaborating and adopting an
       action plan for operationalizing priority activities related to birth registration, birth certification, and
       the assignment of a unique national identifier at birth which will support implementation of NSDS and
       other programs.



                                                                                                     Page 6 of 27
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Strengthening Social Protection Project (P162646)



         Strengthening functionality of the CRVS information system which allows timely sharing of birth
          registration and certification information with the VUP/NSDS program and promoting its
          interoperability with other relevant databases.
         Designing and rolling out social and Behavior Change Communications campaigns to improve the
          registration of vital life events (for example, births, deaths, and so on) and on the importance of vital
          statistics for informed policy planning and effective service delivery.
         Training and sensitization of the government officials at different levels (including the CHWs) on their
          roles and responsibilities and the importance of the CRVS, including links to the NSDS and other
          programs.

   Through Additional Financing (P166720), a new PDO indicator was introduced together with 4 Intermediate
   outcome indicators. Otherwise, original PDO indicators remained the same.

   Original PDO indicators:

   PDO 1: % of all eligible households covered by the VUP (ePW, cPW and DS) in targeted sectors.

   PDO 2: % of eligible households covered by the VUP PW in targeted sectors.

   PDO 3: % of eligible Ubudehe 1 households covered by the VUP DS.

   PDO 4: % of cPW households reaching the minimum number of workdays of cPW employment (in the
   reporting period).

   PDO 5: % of eligible ePW households that receive their full ePW entitlement (in the reporting

   period).

   PDO 6: % of eligible DS households that receive their full DS entitlement (in the reporting period).

   PDO 7: % of VUP cPW beneficiary payments delivered on time.

   Revised PDO indicators:

   PDO 8: % of beneficiaries who received their NSDS benefit payments on time.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
       Costs and Financing: The PAD estimated the total project cost at US$ 86 million, US$80 million to
          be financed by IDA and US$6 million to be financed by the GoR. In addition, the PAD anticipated
          (but did not account for) Grant financing from the Multi Donor Trust Fund (MDTF) for Improving
          Nutrition Impact at Scale of approximately US$10 million, for the introduction of a new nutrition
          support grant over three years. The PAD stated that specific targeting criteria between the nutrition
          support grants and the project’s support to Expanded Public Works were still being determined at
          the time, proposing that MDTF financing came as additional financing to the operation, to be
          processed once administrative and financial arrangements with the MDTF had been concluded.
          Accordingly, Grant financing was provided through the Nutrition-Sensitive Direct Support revised

                                                                                                     Page 7 of 27
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
Strengthening Social Protection Project (P162646)



     subcomponent, based on funding from the Multi-Donor Trust Fund for Achieving Nutrition Impact at
     Scale “The Power of Nutrition” (MDTF-PoN) (US$15 million), and the Global Financing Facility
     (GFF) (US$8 million), jointly approved through Additional Financing (P166720), on April 12, 2018.
     Total original project costs of the project were US$109 million (US$80 million IDA, US$15 million
     MDTF-PoN, US$8 million GFF, and US$6 million GoR). This original project cost is the same to the
     one reported in the ICR. The revised project cost reported in the ICR was US$103 million after
     removing the US$6 million contribution from the GoR, which did not materialize. Actual project cost
     was US$102.344 million.
    Dates: The project was approved on December 18, 2017 and became effective on March 21, 2018.
     The Mid-Term Review date was June 26, 2020. Grant funding was approved on April 12, 2018
     through Additional Financing P166720. The project was restructured on March 29, 2021 to extend
     the project closing date by 6 months. Accordingly, the original project closing date was extended
     from June 30, 2021 to December 31, 2021, when the project closed.
    Restructurings and Rationale for Extensions: Through one formal restructuring (dated March 29,
     2021, as per Amendment 2 to the Financing Agreement) there was one 6-month extension to the
     original project closing date, from June 30, 2021, to December 31, 2021. The request for extension
     resulted from some key and strategic interventions for social protection supported by the project
     progressing slower than originally planned, with the Bank wanting to ensure that greater impact was
     achieved by the end of the project. These interventions included Home-Based Early Childhood
     Development (HB-ECD) (its expansion was affected by COVID-19 containment measures);
     Sustainable Livelihoods Enhancement (SLE) scheme and corresponding Caseworkers/Para-social
     workers scheme (requiring accelerated efforts and more time for implementation); Digitization of
     VUP payments (which experienced delays due to suspension of field activities as a response to
     COVID-19); and full interoperability of information system to allow seamless enrolment of NSDS
     beneficiaries and verification of their compliance with co-responsibilities. Without the extension, the
     project would not have been able to meet coverage targets related with these activities. The
     extension aimed at allowing the implementing agencies to utilize the projected undisbursed balance
     of around US$10 million as of June 30, 2021, for completion of these critical and strategic activities,
     fully achieve the project development objective, and cement the innovations and delivery systems
     for potential follow-up on projects not only by the Bank but also by other development partners.
     (Restructuring Paper -- Report No. RES45196, pp. 5-6)
    Reallocations: The same project restructuring sought to:
           o Reallocate funds between specific disbursement categories and component costs to ensure
             critical activities such as the HB-ECD and SLE scheme could be adequately rolled out. The
             Ministry of Financing and Economic Planning (MINECOFIN) requested reallocating a total of
             US$1,189,884 between different disbursement categories. Without changing anything on
             components architecture, the reallocation would allow more funding for actual transfers
             under the conditional cash transfer component, the NSDS. The reallocation would as well
             allow for improvement, specifically on evidence-based policy, led by MINALOC.
           o Adjust the counterpart financing account set-up to comply with national law and subsequently
             adjust financing percentages per source. MINECOFIN requested waiving off the requirement
             for transferring counterpart funding through a project separate account and its replacement
             with the modality used to fulfil this obligation, by transferring required funds for activities
             under Component 3 directly to implementing entities, MINALOC and LODA. As per
             MINECOFIN, transferring the counterpart fund to a project separate account would be
             contrary to the standard operating procedures and public financial management regulations.
             In compliance to the latter, the government made available, through direct transfers to


                                                                                               Page 8 of 27
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Strengthening Social Protection Project (P162646)



                  Implementing Agencies, adequate funds required for executing activities under Component 3
                  of the project. (Restructuring Paper -- Report No. RES45196, p.6)




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Alignment with Strategy. The project development objective was well aligned with the current Country
Partnership Framework (CPF FY21-FY26) between the World Bank Group and Rwanda. The CPF FY21-
FY26 had five objectives, the first of which was to improve human capital, aiming at deepening Rwanda’s
human capital base while supporting poor and vulnerable groups. (CPF FY21-FY26: Report No.148876-
RW, p. 32) This objective was in turn based on Rwanda’s 2019 Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD:
Report No. 138100-RW) which identified human capital as a priority area/pathway through which the
higher-level objective of increasing the growth-elasticity of poverty (improving human capital, private
entrepreneurship, and addressing vulnerability through social protection) was sought to be achieved. The
CPF FY21-FY26 identified at least three development challenges behind its focus on human capital and
vulnerable groups that were well aligned with the project’s development objective:

    1. That the coverage of Rwanda’s flagship social safety net, the VUP, remained low with only 4.4
       percent of the population benefitting from the program, requiring consolidation of gains attained so
       far and introducing human capital-centered innovations. The CPF FY21-FY26 explicitly mentioned
       the present ICRR’s Strengthening Social Protection Project (SSPP, P162646) and its Additional
       Financing (P166720) as the World Bank’s approved project-level approach to continue
       strengthening the VUP (CPF FY21-FY26: Report No.148876-RW, p. 36). In addition, according to
       the CPF FY21-FY26, urgent reforms to the VUP were needed to improve the targeting mechanism
       by operationalizing a social registry that would serve social sectors beyond safety nets; expanding
       coverage of human capital focused social safety nets; and improving delivery systems, particularly
       digitized government-to-person (G2P) payments. (CPF FY21-FY26: Report No.148876-RW, p. 19)
    2. That “stunting remains a major challenge, especially among the poor” with a 38 percent stunting rate
       (presumably referring to the stunting rate offered by the Joint Malnutrition Estimates for the year
       2015), which together with low quality of education, “places the country in the lowest performing
       quintile in the Human Capital Index” (CPF FY21-FY26: Report No.148876-RW, p. 18). With an HCI
       of 0.37 in 2020, children born today in Rwanda would be just 37 percent as productive as adults
       compared with what they could have achieved with complete education and full health, as defined in
       the HCI. According to the CPF FY21-FY26, stunting was particularly high among the poorest
       households and those living in rural areas (50 percent), and less than 4 percent of Rwandan
       children had access to critical dimensions of child welfare: adequate care, environmental health, and
       access to a minimally accepted diet. The CPF FY21-FY26 also stated that “as the burden of stunting
       falls disproportionately on poor households, targeting these groups will also be critical to reducing
       inequality of outcomes and contributing to shared prosperity” (CPF FY21-FY26: Report No.148876-
       RW, p. 34).
    3. That gender equality needs to be further promoted despite Rwanda’s strong policy, legal, and
       institutional framework in this area. Particularly in terms of strengthening women’s participation in
       tertiary and technical-vocational education; promoting women’s economic participation through
       entrepreneurship, especially access to finance; building up women’s participation in subnational


                                                                                                  Page 9 of 27
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Strengthening Social Protection Project (P162646)



       democratic bodies; and expanding response and prevention services to address Gender-based
       Violence (GBV) in all districts and sectors and support for awareness and behavior change. (CPF
       FY21-FY26: Report No.148876-RW, pp. 19-20).

These three development challenges were addressed to at least some extent in the project’s development
objective: challenge 1 through direct support to the VUP, and challenges 2 and 3 through focus on
vulnerable groups. The project addressed these three development problems by expanding coverage of
VUP’s DS, cPW, a major expansion of gender and child-sensitive ePW, and by addressing demand-side
elements for improving access to social protection by introducing the NSDS subcomponent, which sought,
inter alia, incentivizing demand for key health and nutrition services. This complemented component 2’s
behavior change interventions, and the SPRP’s supply-side support to reducing stunting, reflecting
adequate coordination of Bank interventions in social protection when addressing development challenges
articulated in the country strategies. Theme 2 of the previous country strategy also addressed social
protection as a guiding theme for World Bank Group engagement. It sought “Improving the productivity and
incomes of the poor through rural development and social protection”, including investments in national
safety nets (Country Partnership Strategy FY14-FY18 (CPS FY14-FY18: Report No. 87025-RW), p. 20). In
addition, the project objective’s emphasis on vulnerable groups was aligned with World Bank Group’s core
institutional areas of focus including Gender and Development, and Disability. In terms of the project
objective’s scope, by project appraisal the VUP had national coverage in terms of DS, benefitting vulnerable
households primarily in Ubudehe Category 1 in the country’s 416 geographical sectors, thus seeking to
cover vulnerable groups at the national level. This reflected substantive advancement in the development of
the social protection system in Rwanda which was in turn supported extensively by the Bank (see country
context and previous sector experience, below), suggesting a level of ambition of the project’s objective
commensurate with the extent of World Bank engagement in the sector, more so with the project being the
first IPF in support of the VUP and social protection.

Country context and previous sector experience. The GoR had shown firm commitment to social
protection by providing continuous support to strengthening social protection systems with strong
collaboration from Development Partners, including the World Bank through over a decade of engagement
in the sector through Development Policy Financing (DPF) and a body of analytical and technical work
(PAD, p. 19). By project appraisal, this collaboration was reflected in a safety net with well-established
foundations in terms of policy, institutions, and operations, including key service delivery instruments like
targeting mechanisms, a Management Information System for social protection, an update of the Ubudehe
registry linked to national identification, and a grievance and redress system accessible by phone, web, and
SMS. This benefitted from the World Bank’s previous and/or ongoing support to social protection, largely
based on DPF, including three important DPF series: Support to Social Protection System (SSPS –
P126877-FY12, P131666-FY13, and P146452-FY14); Social Protection System Support (SPS – P151279-
FY15, P155024-FY16, and P158698-FY17); and Human Capital for Inclusive Growth (HCIG – P171554-
FY21, P173680-FY22, and P178113-FY23).

The project adequately internalized lessons from the Bank’s previous support. The SSPS and SPS series
provided, inter alia, assessments of program design and staff capacity, arguably the main constraint to
achieving the project’s development objective. According to the PAD, such assessments showed that
LODA and MINALOC had played central roles in the establishment and implementation of the social
protection sector but needed continued investments in reviewing design elements, and in staffing and
capacity building including at the local level given growing decentralization in Rwanda (PAD, p. 13). The
project adequately internalized this constraint by directly addressing it in component 3, which sought to
build local and national government’s capacity to implement components 1 and 2, as well as to improve the

                                                                                                  Page 10 of 27
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Strengthening Social Protection Project (P162646)



               larger social protection system in Rwanda. This suggests that the project development objective was fine-
               tuned to constraints in the sector and operational contexts. In addition, support to reducing capacity
               constraints was complemented by the ongoing HCIG DPF series, which inter alia, supports strengthening
               decentralized capacity and accountability in Rwanda for accelerated human capital development.

               The project objective was well aligned with Rwanda’s National Social Protection Strategy (NSPS 2013-
               2018), specifically with one of its five key priorities: addressing child poverty and vulnerability in the poorest
               households; with the Economic Development and Poverty Reduction Strategy (EDPRS-2) 2013-2018; and
               with two of three pillars from the GoR’s seven-year National Strategy for Transformation (NST1 2017-2024),
               namely Economic Transformation and Social Transformation, in addition to its cross-cutting areas of
               capacity development and gender, and its COVID-19 response plan (CPF FY21-FY26: Report No.148876-
               RW, p. 26). The pandemic response implied increasing combined budgetary financing needs to address
               public health and mitigate social impact, by an estimated 4 percent of GDP according to the CPF FY21-
               FY26, translating into substantive projected increases in fiscal deficit and public and publicly guaranteed
               debt as shares of GDP in 2020 and 2021, which was nevertheless expected to be sustainable given
               Rwanda’s strong debt-carrying capacity and reliance on concessional borrowing (CPF FY21-FY26: Report
               No.148876-RW, p. 10). Therefore, while the reallocation and restructuring of project funds were approved
               to, inter alia, support the project to catch up with time loss due to COVID-19 restrictions (see section 2e
               above), Rwanda’s response to the pandemic was not expected to create a fiscal constraint to advancing the
               project’s objective.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Improve the effectiveness of the social protection system for targeted vulnerable groups.

                             Rationale
                             The project’s logical framework is reasonably clear and so is the Bank’s contribution to improving the
                             effectiveness of the VUP, especially in terms of coverage. However, it is difficult to separate the
                             overall individual effect of the project from the contributions of past and parallel World Bank
                             engagement, as well as from contributions from other DPs, among which, nonetheless, the Bank
                             plays a prominent role. The Results Framework (RF) in the PAD and ICR showed a logical flow of activities
                             leading to achieving the objective, and the ICR provided a retrofitted theory of change that illustrated this flow
                             (as per OPCS guidelines, including the ToC became mandatory for PADs as of May 2018, yet the project’s
                             financing was approved by the World Bank’s Board of Directors on November 27, 2017, so no ToC was
                             included in the PAD.) The ToC showed logical reasoning as summarized in the following points related to the
                             project’s definition of effectiveness:


                                                                                                                                Page 11 of 27
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Strengthening Social Protection Project (P162646)




     i. It was reasonable to expect that by financing 40 percent of the costs of the VUP safety nets, timely
          delivery of DS, continuation of cPW, expansion of ePW, and introduction of nutrition-sensitive DS,
          would lead to increased DS, cPW and ePW coverage, which would in turn contribute to effective
          coverage of the poor and vulnerable, and thus to a more effective VUP targeted to vulnerable groups.
          However, this benefitted from a strong safety net system including a pre-existing MEIS that already
          identified eligible households and to which past Bank support had contributed to. This suggests that
          the project’s contribution was incremental, building on past Bank support to the VUP. The MEIS,
          alongside an advanced stage of decentralization and a strong enough payment system (which
          nevertheless needed improvements through digitalization) not only allowed increasing VUP coverage
          but also using the project to effectively respond to COVID-19.
    ii.   Increasing the guaranteed number of days for PW would also increase the size of transfers
          households receive, because continuing cPW with an improved design and delivery system would be
          expected to increase the number of workdays offered and enhance adequacy of annual transfers.
   iii.   The activity of expanding eligibility criteria to include Ubudehe-1 single-worker households caring for a
          person with a disability would reasonably lead to expanded coverage of the poor and vulnerable.
    iv.   Since ePW were new and built from scratch by the project, the Bank’s contribution to expanding
          coverage through ePW was plausible. Moreover, the retrofitted ToC in the ICR showed the activity
          of expanding coverage of gender and child-sensitive ePW would lead to expanded coverage of
          vulnerable groups, which was logical. On the other hand, there was also parallel support from other
          DPs in this area which is not reflected in the ToC. UNICEF supports work to improve the gender and
          child sensitivity of the labor-intensive PW programs and strengthen social protection support to ECD
          (ICR, p. 27)
    v.    It was reasonable to expect that strengthening capacity at the national and local levels would improve
          delivery systems including the frequency and timeliness of payments (i.e., supporting the development
          and integration of a new payment module into the MEIS, upgrading the system to report on payment
          timelines for cPW and ePW, training local staff on the CMS, and piloting the e-payments and workflow
          system, would plausibly contribute to addressing grievances and increasing the frequency and
          timeliness of DS, cPW and ePW payments.) However, other DPs also played a role in strengthening
          capacity such as the United Kingdom’s Foreign Commonwealth and Development Office (FCDO,
          formerly DFID) strong support to LODA and MINALOC (ICR, p. 27) yet this is not explicit in the ToC.
    vi.   Through the NSDS, support to the CRVS, SLE, and HB-ECD under the ePW, all of which were new
          interventions within the social protection system in Rwanda linking benefits to human capital
          development, it was plausible that the project contributed to improving human capital through the
          VUP.

The long-standing engagement of the Bank in improving the VUP alongside strong complementarity between
Bank operations (e.g., the project’s NSDS complementarity with the SPRP), suggest that while the project
contributed to increase VUP coverage, it is difficult to separate its overall individual effect on VUP
effectiveness from all other Bank projects, making more sense to talk about Bank contribution as opposed to
a single project’s contribution. Similarly, it may also be difficult to separate this overall effect from other DP
support like the FCDO and UNICEF, given their complementarity in supporting MINALOC and LODA, and
ECD, respectively, and FCDO being the lead donor agency for Social Protection (ICR, p.27). It may make
more sense to recognize that, while the project and the Bank’s contribution to VUP coverage is clear (i.e., in
the absence of the project the VUP’s coverage would be less than it currently is), achievements in improving
the social protection system and the overall effectiveness of the VUP are probably the result of a long-




                                                                                                    Page 12 of 27
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Strengthening Social Protection Project (P162646)



standing successful concerted effort between the GoR, the Bank, and other DPs, in which the Bank was a
key contributing actor.

Outcomes

Outcome 1: Increasing the overall number of beneficiary households (coverage), thereby increasing the
number of households receiving income protection.

All of Rwanda’s 416 sectors were covered by DS at project completion as were all 270 sectors targeted for
cPW and 300 sectors targeted for ePW. Together, the VUP’s three components (DS, ePW and cPW) reached
a cumulative number of 1,937,555 beneficiaries, exceeding the end target of 1,452,500. Of these, 1,008,994
were female beneficiaries, exceeding a target of 726,250 and a baseline of 506,250. Similarly, beneficiaries of
unconditional cash transfers reached 328,527 surpassing a target of 211,000 and a baseline of 189,000; and
combined beneficiaries of cash-for-work, food-for-work and public works reached 1,609,028 above a target of
925,000 and a baseline of 540,000. This led to an overall increase in the number of beneficiary households
covered by the VUP. Of all eligible households, VUP coverage increased to 92 percent in targeted sectors
(including ePW, cPW and DS), exceeding the target of 70 percent and a baseline of 67 percent. Similarly, of
all eligible households, VUP Public Works coverage increased to 90 percent, exceeding the target of 70
percent; and VUP Direct Support coverage continued to cover 100 percent of eligible Ubudehe 1
households.

The project was a vehicle designed to increase VUP safety net coverage, suggesting that the project’s
contribution to this effect was plausible. By financing a significant portion of VUP safety nets directly related to
the expected outputs, intermediate outcomes and outcomes -- 40 percent of the costs of the VUP safety nets,
including cash transfers, PW wage and non-wage costs (including capital costs of cPW), and associated
administrative costs, the project can reasonably be expected to have contributed to increasing coverage in
the three components of the VUP (DS, cPW and ePW).

Outcome 2: Increasing the guaranteed minimum number of days work for PW, thereby effectively increasing
the size of transfers households receive.

The project achieved the minimum number of workdays of cPW employment for 68 percent of cPW
households, exceeding its target of 50 percent and well above a baseline of 32 percent. However, the
average annual number of days of work for cPW beneficiaries (63 days) declined marginally from a baseline
of 64 percent due to the pandemic and related containment measures, which led to work requirements being
waived off for more than 50,000 beneficiaries as well as to some Districts increasing their number, which in
turn led to a decrease in the number of workdays per household. It was expected, nonetheless, that with
COVID-related constraints lifted, the average number of workdays would increase.

Outcome 3: Expanding eligibility criteria for Direct Support (DS) to include more labor‐constrained households
under DS.

The percent of eligible DS households that received their full DS entitlement increased from 0 at baseline to
100 percent at completion. This was achieved thanks to an increase in frequency and timeliness of payments
such that beneficiaries were paid on time during the reporting period. The project also increased coverage of
the poor and vulnerable by expanding eligibility to about 11,000 Ubudehe 1 single-worker households caring



                                                                                                     Page 13 of 27
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Strengthening Social Protection Project (P162646)



for a person with a disability. After the expansion, VUP Direct Support coverage continued to cover 100
percent of eligible Ubudehe 1 households.

Outcome 4: Introducing ePW to provide more accessible jobs to those ineligible for DS but still with labor
constraints, which would allow more households with limited labor capacity to access benefits.

The project designed and introduced HB-ECD as a new modality under ePW to contribute to nutrition and
early stimulation outcomes by providing poorer households with knowledge and income support for
investments in the early years of life. It enabled families with child-caring responsibilities to get paid while
learning, and delivered nutrition, early stimulation and better parenting knowledge and practices in specific
childcare centers. However, HB-ECD implementation was halted by COVID-19 in March 2020 which
interrupted trainings, phased implementation, and rollout of the program. HB-ECD centers reopened
alongside schools in February 2021 after which the coverage target of 300 sectors was achieved. By project
completion, there were 4,993 HB-ECD centers established and operating (3,620 had been refurbished or
renovated, and 4,395 had been equipped with basic start up kit), providing services to 73,181 children. A total
of 3,854 community/home-based childcare ePW supervisors were trained compared to a target of 2,500 and
a baseline of 0; similarly, 3,174 community meetings were held where behavior change parenting sessions
were delivered compared with a target of 1,300; and the coverage of ePW exceeded that of cPW, reaching
99,144 households compared to 81,169 households, respectively. And the share of ePW households that
received their full ePW entitlement in the reporting period was 75 percent, exceeding a target of 60 percent.

The project, however, did not track behavior change results related to the HB-ECD innovation added to the
ePW. HB-ECD supported poorer households with parenting knowledge and income support for investments
in early years of life including nutrition and early stimulation. Its activities promoted behavior change in
parenting practices (and were exceeded), but actual behavior change was not tracked in the RF. It thus
remained uncertain in the ICR as to whether ePW worked to improve human capital creation, as proposed in
the retrofitted ToC. This was reflected in the associated PDO outcome which focused on reception of full ePW
entitlement but did not cover behavior change results (PDO 5).

Outcome 5: Increasing the frequency and timeliness of payments, which will increase the reliability of income
support.

The project successfully contributed to improvements in timeliness of payments through the development and
integration of a new payment module into the MEIS, as well as by upgrading the system to report on payment
timelines for both PWs. The project completed automation of the VUP MEIS’ e-payment module, covering the
payroll generations of DS, cPW, ePW and NSDS. The e-payments and workflow system was subsequently
piloted in six districts and since then has been rolled out across all districts but two. Through this digitization
of safety net payments, clear data sharing protocols, and new modules and improved operational procedures
for interoperability, the project strengthened the underlying institutional mechanisms of social protection
service delivery. Outputs leading to this result include a strengthened functionality of CRVS system to allow
timely sharing of vital information with other relevant databases; diverse media CRVS campaigns carried out
to improve registration of vital life events (births/deaths) and importance of vital statistics for policy planning
and service delivery; and addressing all registered grievances. By completion, the project successfully
contributed to improving the timeliness of payments: the share of VUP cPW beneficiary payments delivered
on time was 97 percent, surpassing a target of 50 percent from a baseline of 0. In addition, the shares of
eligible DS and ePW households receiving full entitlements exceeded their own targets of 60 percent,
achieving 100 percent and 75 percent, respectively.


                                                                                                    Page 14 of 27
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Strengthening Social Protection Project (P162646)



The project, however, fell short of the target share of beneficiaries who received their NSDS benefit payments
on time (60 percent), achieving only 54 percent, and in the number of local government staff trained on the
grievance and redress system (i.e., Citizen’s Monitoring System) (892 staff), training only 567. The ICR
explained that the underachievement of beneficiary payments under the NSDS was the result of the latter
being a new program introduced by the project, and that the enrollment of beneficiaries and processing of
payments required multiple time-consuming steps to interlink government systems (Health MIS, ID System,
and LODA MEIS) that took longer than expected (in addition to difficulties with beneficiaries’ inactive mobile
numbers who could not receive payments), but that the NSDS was expected to solidify and thus payment
timeliness was expected to continue improving soon after project closure. Given the Bank’s experience and
deep knowledge of the sector, the NSDS being new doesn’t seem sufficient to explain why the Bank didn’t
anticipate difficulties in making information systems interoperable for ensuring timeliness in beneficiary
payments. That said, the Bank’s longstanding and continued support to social protection after the ICR did
suggest that the expectation that the NSDS would solidify soon after project closure was reasonable (e.g., a
follow-up IPF supporting social protection, the “Social Protection Transformation Project” – FY23 (P177492)
was in the pipeline at the time the ICR was finished, aiming at strengthening the social protection programs
and delivery systems and to improve access of poor and vulnerable households to human capital and
economic inclusion services). On the other hand, the ICR offered no explanation for the underachievement of
the CMS target.

Outcome 6: Improving the Human Capital Contribution of the VUP.

Through the NSDS, support to the CRVS, SLE, and HB-ECD under the ePW, all of which were new
interventions within the social protection system in Rwanda linking benefits to human capital
development, the project contributed to improving the human capital contribution of the VUP. In contrast to
the ePW HB-EDC, NSDS behavior change was in fact tracked: the project incentivized the uptake of health
and nutrition services including maternal and childcare services, achieving behavior change in some areas as
evidenced by the exceeded targets in the percent of 0-6 week old children attending 2 PNC visits and the
percent of enrolled children 7 weeks to 24 months attending 6 height for age measurement; and progress
made in the percent of pregnant women attending 4 antenatal care visits (despite the target of this
intervention being underachieved). There was, however, no indicator in the RF related to improvements in
parenting practices on cognitive stimulation of young children and appropriate feeding, which were part of
component 2 activities complementing NSDS. Nonetheless, given the national scope of the VUP, the project’s
weight in expanding the VUP, and the Bank’s long-term engagement in social protection in Rwanda, this
behavior change makes it plausible that NSDS interventions contributed to at least part of the reduction in
stunting between 2014/15 and 2019/20 (38 to 33 percent). Moreover, the project also strengthened NSDS
delivery systems and enabled NSDS’ rapid growth by facilitating the interoperability of LODA MEIS with an
upgraded Health MIS and incorporating modules for the NSDS. According to the ICR, by December 2021 the
NSDS’ coverage reached 202,738 beneficiaries (56,641 from Ubudehe category 1 and 146,097 from
Ubudehe category 2), exceeding the planned 60,000 households; and at project completion 90.5 percent of
eligible households in Ubudehe 1 and 2 with children under the age of 2 years were receiving child sensitive
cash transfers, greatly exceeding the target of 60 percent. The problem of attribution to the project persists,
however, because of the complementarity between Bank engagements which confounds their individual
effects, for example that supply‐side interventions provided by the SPRP complemented demand side
interventions by the project’s NSDS. Attribution is more plausible to overall Bank support as opposed to single
projects. In terms of the CRVS, the ICR clearly stated that its function of improving birth registration by issuing
unique identifiers at birth and birth registration was critical for timely enrollment into the NSDS and HB-ECD,
thus making project support to the CRVS key in advancing the human capital contribution of the VUP.
Through the project, a CRVS Action Plan was completed and operationalized for priority activities related to

                                                                                                    Page 15 of 27
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Strengthening Social Protection Project (P162646)



                            birth registration, certification and the assignment of unique identifiers at birth, achieving 94 percent of birth
                            registrations; support to CRVS also facilitated issuance of birth certificates at a health facility or at the Cell
                            level rather than just the Sector level. Finally, the project conducted preparatory work for the rollout of the
                            SLE and para-social workers approved by the government to provide regular hand-holding, mentoring, and
                            coaching of the poorest households as well as to link them to livelihoods enhancement opportunities. By
                            project completion, 14,752 para-social workers (including 9,997 in 20 districts supported by the project) were
                            recruited nationwide, trained and are operational. This intervention complemented support through the NSDS
                            and CRVS to improve the human capital contribution of the VUP, yet it had no follow-up in terms of outcomes
                            in the RF.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The project, together with other well-coordinated World Bank and DP interventions, contributed to
                            increasing the effectiveness of the social protection system in Rwanda, notably the VUP, for targeted
                            vulnerable groups. The project’s contribution to this effect was notable given its sheer magnitude
                            especially in relation to VUP coverage, and given that it exceeded by far most of its expected results
                            and targets. With that said, the project did not fully achieve all intended development outcomes. All
                            aspects of effectiveness of the VUP as defined at entry were addressed by the project, and most outcomes
                            were fully achieved except for the target share of beneficiaries who received their NSDS benefit payments.
                            The retrofitted ToC offered by the ICR had good logic and was overall consistent with the RF. In addition, the
                            contribution of the project to achieving the PDOs was plausible considering the substantive weight of the
                            project in directly financing the VUP and in responding to COVID-19 in the social protection sphere; the
                            strong government coordination of DP work in social protection through the SWG; and the Bank’s long-term
                            and continued engagement in the sector; all of which created a strong case that in the absence of the project
                            the increase in effectiveness of the VUP would have been at least not as high as with the project, especially
                            in terms of coverage. On the other hand, the long-standing engagement of the Bank in improving the VUP
                            alongside strong complementarity between Bank operations (e.g., the project’s NSDS complementarity with
                            the SPRP), suggest that while different projects likely contributed to achieving their own objectives, it is
                            difficult to separate their individual effects, making more sense to talk about Bank contribution as opposed to
                            a single project’s contribution.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



          5. Efficiency

                                                                                                                               Page 16 of 27
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Strengthening Social Protection Project (P162646)



The PAD assessed the project’s economic impact through different approaches depending on the project
component. Assessment of component 1 was done through simulations of fully implementing coverage
expansion of DS, cPW, and ePW and its impact on poverty reduction and cost-effectiveness. Survey data from
the EICV4 (from 2012/2013) was used to conduct the microsimulations that estimated the project’s poverty
impact. Simulations involved all three of the expected improvements (coverage, timeliness of payments, and
adequacy of PW transfers) and resulted in an estimated reduction in the extreme poverty rate by 4 percentage
points, from 16 percent to 12 percent, and overall poverty by 5 percentage points from 38.5 percent to 31.3
percent. Among beneficiaries, extreme poverty was expected to decline to 1.3 percent and total poverty to 6.6
percent. In turn, simplified benefit‐cost ratios for the VUP and each of its components, where the benefit was the
reduction in the poverty gap due to the transfer and the cost was the total amount spent on the program,
showed that the VUP was cost‐effective: in Rwanda, for every Rwandan franc spent in the VUP, the poverty gap
was expected to drop by RWF 0.7, which was well above regional averages of 0.2 (PAD, p. 18). This constitutes
evidence in favor of high value-for money in the project’s investments in the VUP. Assessment of component 2
was based on secondary evidence on the economic returns from investing in young children’s health, nutrition,
and cognitive development. The PAD stated that “international evidence clearly suggests that social protection
programs can be designed and implemented to make significant contributions to accessing services and
addressing core child development areas.” (PAD, p. 18) It highlighted consistent evidence on the positive impact
of behavior change communication interventions on improving nutrition outcomes by changing nutrition practices
through education, counseling, and social media; and was upfront on the somewhat positive but overall mixed
evidence of the impact of livelihood interventions on measures of economic returns, like increased household
consumption.

The ICR applied the same methodology as the PAD, with updated microdata, although did not explicitly present
results by project component. It assessed the project’s impact on poverty reduction and its levels of cost-
effectiveness based on microsimulations conducted for the forthcoming Rwanda Social Protection Public
Expenditure Review (PER). Since the GoR could not conduct EICV6 in 2020 due to COVID-19, World Bank-
updated microdata from EICV5 (collected in 2016-2017) that adequately reflected the situation for Rwanda’s
households in 2020/2021, was the basis for the analysis. The Bank’s EICV5 update was conducted in the
Rwanda Economic Update 2021 (https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/35111). Overall, the ICR’s
analysis showed that the project’s significant expansion of social protection benefits had a positive impact on
poverty reduction in Rwanda, thereby ensuring inclusive growth and boosting human capital. The interventions
led to a simulated reduction in poverty of 2 percentage points (lower than the 5 percentage points estimated at
appraisal), led by DS with a poverty reduction impact of 0.8 percentage points and followed by NSDS (0.5
percentage points), ePW (0.4 percentage points), and cPW (0.4 percentage points) (extreme poverty impact
was also assessed, with a similar ranking order). In terms of cost-effectiveness, there was variation across VUP
components: DS showed low levels of cost-effectiveness due to its broad targeting criteria, while PWs showed
high cost-effectiveness due to their high targeting accuracy (cost-effectiveness was 66% for cPW, 51% for
NSDS, 47% for ePW, and 34% for DS). Thus, the ICR concluded that DS’ higher impact on poverty reduction
was due to high coverage and high benefit adequacy rather than it being narrowly targeted to poor households,
while PW’s lower poverty reduction impact was the result of their comparatively small program size, even with
higher targeting effectiveness. Simulations also showed, however, that overall targeting by the project was
adequate with PW’s beneficiaries covering 40% of the lowest quintile and DS and NSDS covering about a
quarter. Regarding the project’s contribution to human capital, like the PAD, the ICR argued through secondary
evidence that through the project’s innovative approaches that sought contributing to reducing chronic
malnutrition (NSDS, HB-ECD and CRVS), the project was expected to reduce stunting rates and contribute to
the broader agenda of building human capital. It backed this expectation with the “extensive evidence from




                                                                                                    Page 17 of 27
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Strengthening Social Protection Project (P162646)



numerous impact evaluations on the human capital-related impact of cash transfers to poor households in both
low and middle-income countries”, which included evidence found in Latin America and Africa. (ICR, pp. 54-55).

Implementation and administrative efficiency was high, considering that there were only moderate
implementation shortcomings affecting NSDS benefit payment delays. The project had one 6-month extension
to the original project closing date, from June 30, 2021, to December 31, 2021, which was used effectively to
meet coverage targets related with HB-ECD and SLE, and NSDS, towards which progress had been slow until
restructuring (see section 2e. above), and to implement COVID-19 response elements of the VUP. Thus,
despite big challenges including COVID-19 and the project being the first IPF supporting the VUP, all project
objectives related to coverage were achieved or exceeded within the project’s expected timeframe, involving
only a short extension. However, the delayed NSDS benefit payments reflected the need to improve within Bank
coordination between sectors which would have accelerated achievement of interoperability between the HMIS,
ID System and LODA MEIS, which took longer than expected. The value added from the HMIS to the NSDS
was identified during implementation but the Bank was slow to capitalize on it given little coordination in this
respect at appraisal between the Social Protection and Health Global Practices (Task Team Comments,
February 2, 2023).

Finally, high administrative efficiency was reflected in low administrative and operating costs, equivalent to about
5.2 percent of the total project costs (the project management costs of the SPIUs in LODA and MINALOC
totaled US$5.3 million over the project’s four years), comparatively lower than all social safety net programs in
Rwanda as a share of total social safety net expenditures, which the forthcoming PER reports as 9 percent of
total social safety net expenditures (and 17 percent of total spending for social safety net programs in Sub-
Saharan Africa) (ICR, pp. 21-22).

Overall efficiency is rated Substantial given high value-for-money as measured by the significant return (in terms
of poverty reduction) to the project’s contribution to expanding social protection benefits, and only
moderate shortcomings in implementation and administrative efficiency related to slow coordination between
Bank sectors.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      0
 Appraisal                                                   0
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      0
 ICR Estimate                                                0
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.




                                                                                                     Page 18 of 27
         Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
         Strengthening Social Protection Project (P162646)



6. Outcome

The overall Outcome rating is Satisfactory. The project objective was highly relevant vis a vis the Bank Group’s
CPF FY21-26 and SCD-FY19’s human capital priorities, Rwanda’s country context of low growth elasticity of
poverty (requiring inter alia, high investments in human capital), and was commensurate with the Bank’s long
history of engagement in support of the VUP. Moreover, the relevance of objectives was further enhanced by
the instrumentality of the project to respond to COVID-19. The project objective was supported by a shock-
flexible and logical RF reflecting the Government’s policy priorities and local capacity constraints, also generally
consistent with a retrofitted ToC offered by the ICR. However, it is difficult to separate the project’s individual
impact on increasing the effectiveness of the VUP given the World Bank’s history of strong engagement in the
sector, its parallel complementary interventions, and complementary efforts from DPs. In addition, the project
did not achieve all of its intended development outcomes. Efficiency was Substantial in view of its high value-
for-money as measured by the significant return (in terms of poverty reduction) to the project’s contribution to
expanding social protection benefits, but moderate shortcomings in implementation and administrative efficiency
related to insufficient coordination between Bank sectors at appraisal.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

---


8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
      Based on the information provided, the Bank adequately identified, facilitated preparation, and appraised
      the project so that it was most likely to improve the effectiveness of the VUP for targeted vulnerable
      groups. However, the Bank could have ensured better coordination at appraisal between Social
      Protection and Health sectors to avoid implementation delays related to the NSDS. (Task Team
      comments, February 2, 2023).

      First, the project’s choice of IPF instrument was adequate because its timing effectively internalized long-
      standing DPF support to the VUP by the Bank. Through three DPF series (of which the oldest one started
      in 2009), the Bank supported policy actions to improve the effectiveness and efficiency of the VUP,
      helping it reach a level of maturity that justified the use of IPF as a new instrument for building capacity at
      the delivery level, which was the appropriate next step for strengthening the VUP and had not been done
      until then. To this end and based on lessons from the SPS series, the project carried out an institutional
      capacity assessment during preparation that identified specific needs-based capacity-building activities to
      be integrated in project implementation plans. Capacity challenges identified and addressed included,
      inter alia, financial management and procurement capacity required at the central and local levels for




                                                                                                          Page 19 of 27
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Strengthening Social Protection Project (P162646)



effective IPF implementation, for which the project also created new positions within the MINALOC and
LODA SPIUs.

Second, the project incorporated findings from key analytical work in its design, thereby improving it.
Some important findings came from a 2014 impact evaluation of the VUP which found that stronger VUP
DS and cPW impacts on household wellbeing could be improved if, inter alia, the timeliness of and
predictability of DS and PW payments were improved, PW were extended to more eligible households
and better adapted to the needs of labor-constrained households, and DS targeting criteria was
expanded to include more vulnerable households. These aspects were all incorporated in project design.

Third, the project ensured complementarity and consistency with other related Bank operations,
especially regarding the Bank’s overall assistance package to help reducing undernutrition. The NSDS
and the SPRP were designed as a joint program for supporting demand and supply side elements of
combating chronic malnutrition, respectively, with the NSDS being deliberately focused on the 13 priority
districts of the SPRP to ensure delivery of a comprehensive package to the same targeted populations.
The NSDS was part of the project’s additional financing which also added behavior change
communication and strengthening CRVS information system interventions, both of which would help the
NSDS achieve its objectives. On the other hand, underachievement of timely NSDS payments reflected
insufficient coordination between the Bank’s Social Protection and Health Global Practices at appraisal.
More coordination would have likely accelerated achievement of interoperability between the HMIS, ID
System and LODA MEIS, which took longer than expected in practice and affected timely payments. The
importance of the HMIS to the NSDS was identified during implementation but the Bank was unable to
quickly take advantage of it (Task Team comments, February 2, 2023).

Fourth, the project launched important innovations through its ePW and NSDS interventions that helped
make social protection more focused on human capital by focusing on nutrition, early childhood
development, and gender.

Finally, the project’s interventions were fine-tuned to meet the needs of the COVID-19 pandemic,
reflecting high adaptability of project design to changing demands from unforeseen shocks. This high
adaptation capacity was reflected in adjustments across project interventions including the expansion of
NSDS eligibility criteria, coverage of DS and ePWs, waiving off work requirements for PW beneficiaries,
and the digitization of VUP payments, all of which became even more relevant for responding to the
pandemic. (Aide Memoire, Last Implementation Mission, October 4-12, 2021, p. 6) High adaptability was
also the result of a strong pre-existing MEIS that already categorized eligible households, an advanced
stage of decentralization in the country and a strong enough payment system. (Task Team comments,
February 2, 2023)

Such capacity-building support, analytical inputs to the design, well-crafted complementarity across
operations, and high project adaptation capacity to shocks, reflected strong Bank performance in
ensuring quality at entry. However, more sector coordination at appraisal within Bank sectors could have
avoided implementation delays.



Quality-at-Entry Rating
Satisfactory


                                                                                               Page 20 of 27
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Strengthening Social Protection Project (P162646)




b. Quality of supervision
 According to the ICR (p. 32) “the World Bank continued to provide strong, timely, results-focused
 supervision that was aligned with the Government’s priorities and that of its donor partners.” Throughout
 implementation the Bank effectively coordinated supervision missions with DPs through engagement
 sessions to ensure alignment between their support to social protection and the project’s, especially
 alignment with FCDO’s support through its recent £64 million Social Protection program. The Bank’s
 supervision was also proactive in building the required capacity in MINALOC and LODA to successfully
 implement the first IPF in support of the VUP and social protection. According to the ICR, the
 implementation support team faced the challenge of providing hands on support and assistance to these
 two entities for fiduciary and safeguard issues and for helping address routine issues, including monitoring,
 required to keep implementation on track, none of which had taken center stage in earlier DPF support.
 Finally, the Bank was successful in working with the GoR to adapt the project quickly and appropriately to
 the GoR’s COVID-19 response by expanding VUP coverage to the most vulnerable households and by
 effectively restructuring the project to meet new demands brough about by the pandemic, while ensuring
 continued progress toward achieving the project’s development objectives. The Bank adequately identified
 and addressed fiduciary risks at entry related to FM and procurement (due to low capacity) and applied
 appropriate mitigating measures during implementation.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Highly Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 By appraisal, the project’s M&E design was grounded on an already developed social protection-specific
 M&E framework that existed outside of it. According to the PAD (p. 15), the project’s RF was based on
 selected results indicators that were closely monitored within the GoR and that were drawn from the
 national Social Protection Sector-wide M&E Framework, in turn monitored by the government-led SWG
 (the SWG oversaw sector-wide M&E through bi-annual joint social protection sector reviews to assess
 performance on policy, outputs, outcomes and to make recommendations for the future). The PAD also
 clearly defined the agencies in charge of the project’s M&E, stipulating that the LODA M&E Unit and the
 NECDCP were to monitor and report on the project’s results indicators.

 The project’s M&E design also accounted for the client’s inexperience with the IPF as well as for existing
 capacity constraints related to social protection delivery systems and local government. According to the
 ICR (p. 28), the PDO outcome and intermediate results’ indicator targets were defined cautiously to
 account for possible fiduciary and other project management-type delays that could occur while the
 implementing agencies acquired experience with the IPF. Additionally, component 3 of the project would
 support MINALOC and LODA with staffing, training, and technical advice to improve VUP monitoring
 mechanisms, and impact evaluation design and implementation. The design would also support further

                                                                                                   Page 21 of 27
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Strengthening Social Protection Project (P162646)



 operationalization of the integrated Social Protection Management Information System (iSP-MEIS),
 including LODA-MEIS and its interoperability with an upgraded Health MIS to incorporate modules for the
 NSDS.

 The RF was designed or planned to track PDO and intermediate-level results indicators, but no outputs.
 However, the ICR included outputs in a separate section called “Key Outputs by Component” and in
 a retrofitted ToC. While there was clear logic between activities, intermediate results and PDO outcomes in
 the RF, the outputs seemed to add little value to the monitoring function to the extent they were often
 intermediate or PDO results simply restated as outputs, and otherwise not actually tracked by the project.
 The outputs were thus superfluous.



b. M&E Implementation
  Project monitoring was implemented regularly and timely, but there were notable challenges in linking
  different information systems with each other that could have probably been anticipated, with the
  implication of implementation delays for the NSDS. According to the ICR (pp. 28-29), M&E
  implementation was adequate to the extent the different reporting mechanisms operated well throughout
  the project, including the bi-annual SWG mission reviews and narrative reports; field visits by MINALOC,
  LODA, MoH/Rwanda Biomedical Center-RBC; monitoring tools through field officers and volunteers; and
  operational reviews/studies for ePWs and NSDS. The project also supported the establishment of
  systems for real time data collection and feedback from beneficiaries; and designed, developed, finalized
  and rolled-out the iSP-MEIS, also strengthening the LODA-MEIS. Through Additional Financing for
  component 3, it also supported M&E for NSDS and issuance of unique IDs at birth at the health facility or
  Cell level (through support for the CRVS), which enabled NSDS beneficiary administration. On the other
  hand, the project did not anticipate difficulties in fully achieving information systems’ interoperability within
  the project’s timeframe, resulting in challenges to systematically collect information from health facilities
  for monitoring and reporting NSDS co-responsibility results.



c. M&E Utilization
  According to the ICR, project monitoring accomplished real-time feedback on implementation, providing
  key input for the bi-annual SWG meetings and allowing for government-led retrospective evaluations on
  progress, and prospective M&E planning. More generally, the M&E systems strengthening was an
  important achievement of the project that facilitated the interoperability of the various systems related
  directly to the VUP’s beneficiaries (despite delays related to NSDS). This in turn enabled operational
  reviews to be carried out, one of them by LODA on home/community-based childcare scheme and
  NSDS with a substantial citizen feedback component, which provided evidence for course correction
  during project implementation and design of the follow-on IPF (P177492). In addition, according to the
  follow-on IPF’s PAD (P177492 PAD, p.29), the project’s ICR provided a valuable M&E lesson,
  specifically that information systems showed to be dynamic instruments that are continuously adapted to
  new activities, programs, and processes in real time, and respective financing should be secured. The
  new IPF’s support to the Social Registry (SR) reflected this consideration, seeking to make the SR
  system more dynamic to enable real-time policy and program responses to various shocks.




                                                                                                        Page 22 of 27
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Strengthening Social Protection Project (P162646)




  M&E Quality Rating
  High

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Applicable safeguard policies

   Social

   The only social safeguard policy triggered by the project was Involuntary Resettlement (policy OP/BP
   4.12). The PAD (pp.22-23) anticipated the following social risks in relation to proposed project activities:
   loss of land, loss of assets, loss of crops and trees, loss of economic business or means of livelihood, child
   labor, gender-based violence, sexual abuse, and escalation of STD/HIV, especially during ePW.

   Environment

   According to the PAD (p.24), the project was assigned Environmental Assessment Category B since it was
   to finance subprojects involving the execution of various PW activities in numerous sites that would
   potentially affect the environment. The types of subprojects to be implemented under the VUP PW were
   characterized by their labor intensity and included access road construction and rehabilitation, urban
   drainage, marshland reclamation, terraces’ construction, schools’ and organized settlements’ construction,
   and rehabilitation and construction of water and sanitation networks. In addition, while physical cultural
   resources were not fully known at appraisal, some PW could be carried out in the influence area of some
   sites, such as graves that could be in the right‐of‐way. The project thus triggered Environmental
   Assessment (policy OP/BP 4.01), Natural Habitats (policy OP/BP 4.04), and Physical Cultural
   Resources (policy OP/BP 4.11).

   Assessment instrument and mitigation plan

   To ensure proper assessment and mitigation of the potential adverse environmental and social impacts of
   activities under the project, and because the exact subproject implementation areas were not known in
   advance at appraisal, an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and Resettlement
   Policy Framework (RPF) were prepared for guiding the implementing agency on how to address any
   environmental and social impacts of project investments. Each PW subproject would be screened, and if
   Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) were found to be necessary, they would be prepared, cleared, disclosed,
   and implemented before the commencement of civil works, in accordance with World Bank OP 4.12.The
   ESMF included a review and approval process that would screen the subprojects for site‐specific
   environmental impacts and propose the appropriate mitigation actions and policy instruments. (PAD, p. 23;
   ICR, p. 30) The subprojects safeguards instrument (RAPs, Environmental and Social Management Plan
   [ESMP]) would be prepared and implemented by the implementing agency, LODA.

   Compliance

   According to the ICR, the project began with a shortage of capacity to prepare safeguard instruments and
   ensure social and environmental safeguards compliance, which was adequately addressed by providing
   hands-on capacity building to LODA for improving quality and timeliness in the preparation and clearance of

                                                                                                    Page 23 of 27
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Strengthening Social Protection Project (P162646)



  resettlement instruments and environmental screening of subprojects. Through this support, the project
  contributed to improving the capacity of social protection implementing agencies on social and
  environmental aspects, which was recognized and highly appreciated by implementing agencies after the
  project closed (Task Team comments, February 2, 2023)—there were notable improvements in the quality
  and timeliness of safeguard instruments, reflected in an increase of a previously persistent safeguards
  rating of Moderately Satisfactory to Satisfactory by project completion. Accordingly, planned mitigation
  activities were successfully carried out throughout the project’s lifespan. According to the ICR (p. 30), over
  the implementation period 579 subprojects submitted were classified as environmental category C, for
  which simplified ESMPs were prepared, and 25 radial terraces subproject were classified as category B and
  ESMPs and resettlement plans were prepared since they were expected to cause temporary restriction on
  land during the establishment of activities.

  In addition, a Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) was put in place in all districts. The project
  established, trained, and operationalized Grievance Redress Committees in all sectors before beginning the
  implementation of cPW and ePW subprojects, with all 1,153 grievances that were registered being resolved.
  Grievances received were mainly related to beneficiaries that were missing on the payroll list and those
  whose crops were still growing on land where radical terracing was to be established.

  Finally, according to the AF’s Project Paper (p. 21), The AF did not change the project’s original social
  safeguards arrangements. The AF, which primarily supported the NSDS cash transfers, resulted in
  increased expected generation of medical waste, but no additional environmental safeguards policies were
  triggered. The parent project’s ESMF was revised to incorporate measures for the adequate arrangement of
  anticipated incremental medical waste. The ICR, however, does not mention this.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial management

  According to the PAD (p. 21), a financial management assessment of LODA, MINALOC, and participating
  districts was conducted at appraisal. It identified, inter alia, risk areas related to delayed funds flow to the
  beneficiaries, and a staffing gap to absorb workload generated by the project. Mitigating measures
  included the recruitment of additional FM staff, the preparation of detailed FM and disbursement
  guidelines, and capacity building on FM and internal audit. These measures worked as reflected in the
  project’s satisfactory financial management performance throughout the project’s lifespan. According to the
  (ICR, p. 31) such performance was audited three times by the Office of the Auditor General, and the audit
  reports were submitted in a timely fashion with no material abnormalities identified. The ICR recognized a
  Substantial fiduciary risk for the project “given the complexity of delivering low-value, high-volume
  transactions at decentralized levels with variable and mixed public FM capacities, together with the lack of
  adequate human resource capacity effectively to absorb workload generated by the Project and meet FM
  standards and avoid delayed funds flows. The lack of experience with World Bank requirements for IPF
  operations increased the risk.” (ICR, p. 31)

  Procurement

  According to the PAD (p. 26), a procurement capacity and risk assessment carried out for MINALOC and
  LODA at appraisal identified the lack of experience in Bank procurement regulations as the main risk

                                                                                                    Page 24 of 27
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Strengthening Social Protection Project (P162646)



   behind potential noncompliance, lack of adequate procurement staff in LODA, weak contract management
   capacity, and limited supply markets. Accordingly, the PAD proposed mitigation measures including
   recruitment of one additional Procurement Specialist under the LODA SPIU, project procurement
   guidelines, a series of trainings conducted jointly by LODA and the World Bank, and engagement with
   market providers. Despite such measures, the project’s procurement rating was downgraded from
   Satisfactory to Moderately Satisfactory according to ISR sequence 5 of November 20, 2019, and never
   recovered. The ISR (p. 2) stated that the procurement performance rating was downgraded due to delays
   in processing of critical procurement of services as well as lack of timely status updates in the STEP
   including uploading of relevant documents. In the ICR the procurement rating was kept at MS only to
   ensure sustainability of improvement since during project implementation LODA was able to catch up and
   improve as reflected in achieved or exceeded result indicators (Task Team comments, February 2, 2023).
   Overall, the project’s procurement capacity and performance had improved over time, and both LODA and
   MINALOC gained adequate experience with procurement under World Bank-financed projects, including in
   oversight of the procurement function. (ICR, p. 31)




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   According to the ICR (pp. 23-24), the main unintended positive effects of the project were related to the
   adjustments to the VUP as part of the Government’s response to the COVID-19 pandemic. Namely, the
   expansion of NSDS eligibility criteria, expanded coverage of DS and ePWs, and waiving off work
   requirements for PW beneficiaries. In addition, the success with implementation of the ePW HB-ECD
   program motivated the Government to extend the program to other non-targeted beneficiaries. The ICR
   stated that an additional 29,313 ECDs (including community- and home-based ECDs) had been
   established across all of Rwanda’s 30 districts, reaching almost 910,000 children aged 3 to 6. Based on
   the Project’s experience, the Government adopted a policy change through a strategy to establish three
   ECDs in each village, for a total of over 44,000 new ECD Centers. More generally, the GoR’s COVID-19
   response through the project translated into a larger pool of VUP beneficiaries.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                   Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                     IEG
                                                                                   Disagreements/Comment
                                                                                   The objective was almost fully
Outcome                          Highly Satisfactory     Satisfactory              achieved and with mixed
                                                                                   attribution.
                                                                                   Insufficient coordination between
                                                                                   sectors at appraisal, including
                                                                                   for facilitating interoperability
Bank Performance                 Highly Satisfactory     Satisfactory
                                                                                   between systems, contributing to
                                                                                   delays in implementation and
                                                                                   NSDS payments.


                                                                                                     Page 25 of 27
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Strengthening Social Protection Project (P162646)



Quality of M&E                   High                   High

Quality of ICR                   ---                    Substantial


12. Lessons

    1. Focusing a project component on capacity building activities is an important design feature in
         the context of (i) implementing an IPF for the first time, which requires fundamental capacity
         improvements in M&E and fiduciary issues that align with Bank policy; and (ii) the need to
         strengthen delivery systems at the central and especially local levels in a country where
         decentralization continues to increase.
    2.   Strong coordination between Bank sectors is important at appraisal to ensure that
         opportunities during implementation can be quickly acted upon and delays can be avoided.
         Higher coordination between Social Protection and Health sectors at the Bank could have
         allowed achieving interoperability of the HMIS, ID system, and LODA MEIS much faster that
         it occurred and could have helped preventing delays in NSDS payments.
    3.   Analytical work is a key input for accurate intervention design such that it aligns with the
         evidence of what works. Some important findings informing project design came from a 2014
         impact evaluation of the VUP which found that stronger VUP DS and cPW impacts on
         household wellbeing could be improved if, inter alia, the timeliness of and predictability of DS
         and PW payments were improved, PW were extended to more eligible households and
         better adapted to the needs of labor-constrained households, and DS targeting criteria was
         expanded to include more vulnerable households.
    4.   Well-designed complementarity between projects is a key element of World Bank support to
         social protection in Rwanda, as reflected in (i) the strong sequencing between the project as
         a new IPF and three previous DPF series (and analytical work), and between the project and
         the follow-on social protection IPF; and (ii) the strong synchronicity between the project and
         the SPRP in addressing chronic malnutrition; the SSPP’s activities aimed at Strengthening
         the CRVS and the Digital Acceleration Project (P173373) that supports indexing of civil
         registration records, among others. This further highlights the importance of high
         coordination for maximizing results.
    5.   The project’s interventions were fine-tuned to meet the needs of the COVID-19 pandemic,
         reflecting high adaptability of project design to changing demands from unforeseen shocks,
         which was possible given a strong pre-existing MEIS that already categorized eligible
         households, an advanced stage of decentralization in the country, and a strong enough
         payment system by the start of the project. This high adaptation capacity was reflected in
         successful adjustments across project interventions including the expansion of NSDS
         eligibility criteria, coverage of DS and ePWs, waiving off work requirements for PW
         beneficiaries, and the digitization of VUP payments, all of which became even more relevant
         for responding to the pandemic.
    6.   Gradual implementation (or phased implementation) was an effective way of introducing the
         project’s innovations, especially when the experience under the small-scale implementation
         is reviewed before program expansion. Under the Project, the GoR adopted a phased
         implementation approach for the home-based ECD and for the new electronic payments
         system. Small scale implementation of home-based ECD informed early updates in the
         implementation guidelines and guided the eventual roll-out of the program in 300 sectors and
         provided important input into the prioritization and sequencing of activities. Further, the

                                                                                                     Page 26 of 27
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Strengthening Social Protection Project (P162646)



         experience from small-scale implementation provided a staggered implementation, which
         helped with capacity building of the staff responsible for the program and the government in
         rolling out ECDs countrywide. The digitization of payments systems also started on a small
         scale with ten districts and is currently being rolled out countrywide. (ICR, pp. 34-35)



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR was clear and parsimonious in presenting key information and based reported achievements on well-
supported evidence. While some presentations of the RF and associated achievements confounded outputs
with intermediate outcomes and outcomes, the RF and related annexes were consistent with each other and
reflected a results-oriented theory of change linked to development objectives. Lessons were clearly based on
evidence and analysis presented in the ICR. Both narrative and evidence supported the ICR's main
conclusions.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                   Page 27 of 27
