     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Sri Lanka Strategic Cities Dev Project (P130548)



                                                                                    Report Number: ICRR0023203

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                   Project Name
 P130548                                      Sri Lanka Strategic Cities Dev Project

 Country                                      Practice Area(Lead)
 Sri Lanka                                    Urban, Resilience and Land


 L/C/TF Number(s)                             Closing Date (Original)                  Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-54280,IDA-58000                          31-Dec-2019                                           87,953,459.93

 Bank Approval Date                           Closing Date (Actual)
 05-May-2014                                  31-Dec-2021

                                              IBRD/IDA (USD)                                       Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                             147,000,000.00                                                0.00

 Revised Commitment                              100,880,333.14                                                0.00

 Actual                                           87,953,459.93                                                0.00




 Prepared by                  Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator            Group
 Cynthia Nunez-Ollero         Vibecke Dixon                 Kavita Mathur                     IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Financing Agreement (FA, p. 5) and the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, paragraph 12),
   the Project Development Objective (PDO) of this Strategic Cities Development Project was "to improve
   selected urban services and public urban spaces in participating city regions."

   This review will assess the performance of this project against this singular objective.



                                                                                                      Page 1 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Sri Lanka Strategic Cities Dev Project (P130548)




b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   1. Kandy City-Region Urban Interventions: (US$94 million at appraisal, increased to US$118.5 at
   restructuring, reduced to US$53.5 million, US$59.8 million actual as confirmed by the Bank team).This
   component was to finance improvements in urban services, such as augmenting and rehabilitating the
   Kandy municipal water supply system and rehabilitating major drains. Also to be financed
   were improvements in transport services, such as rehabilitating by-pass roads, and adopting traffic
   management measures. This component was also to finance enhancements to the public urban space,
   such as improving streetscapes, and restoring and reusing historic landmarks. Furthermore, the
   development of an integrated urban master plan and capacity building activities for Project Partner
   Agencies (PPAs), first to plan, design, and maintain urban infrastructure, and second, to provide municipal
   services were also included. In 2018, US$24.5 million was added to this component, from Galle
   (US$16.5 million), and Jaffna (US$8 million), to finance the construction of the Kandy Multimodal
   Transport Terminal (KMTT). In 2020, this component was reduced by US$65 million (from US$118.5
   million) to drop the KMTT sub-component. The original KMTT cost estimate had increased by 40 percent
   and could not be completed within the project period. This sub-component was then to be separately
   financed as a standalone project (P172342).

   2. Galle City-Region Urban Interventions: (US$43 million at appraisal, reduced to US$26.5 million at
   restructuring, US$26.1 million actual as confirmed by the Bank team).This component was to finance urban
   services improvements, by adopting flood and coastal erosion reduction measures, such as the
   rehabilitation of canals and constructing surface drainage infrastructure. Included was
   also the enhancement of public urban space with streetscapes, and the restoration and reuse of historic
   landmarks. In addition, strategic plans and studies of public transport and traffic management, drainage,
   and spatial development, as well as capacity building activities for PPAs, first to plan, design, and maintain
   urban infrastructure, and second, to provide municipal services was financed under this component.
   In 2018, this component was reduced by US$16.5 million to support the Kandy KMTT project (P172342).

   3. Implementation Support: (US$10 million at appraisal, US$8.6 million actual, as confirmed by the Bank
   team). This component was to finance activities to strengthen project management. These included support
   for monitoring and evaluation (M&E), procurement, financial management, and compliance with
   environmental and social safeguards. In addition, this component was to finance public awareness
   campaigns and communications; construction supervision; other preparatory studies and planning for other
   cities and other management tools.

   4: Jaffna City Region Urban Interventions: (Additional Financing (AF) provided US$55 million, reduced to
   US$47 at restructuring; cancelled US$27 million, US$16.1 million actual as clarified by the Bank team). The
   2016 AF added this component to finance activities in Jaffna similar to those in Kandy and Galle. In 2018,
   US$8 million from this component was reallocated to finance the KMTT (P172342). In 2021, this component
   was further reduced by cancelling US$27 million from the AF to be allocated to a new component,
   Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC, see below).


                                                                                                    Page 2 of 23
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Sri Lanka Strategic Cities Dev Project (P130548)



  5: Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC): (US$0 million, increased to US$27 million at
  restructuring, US$0 million actual). In 2020, this component was added with a zero allocation to allow rapid
  reallocation of uncommitted project funds from other components to support immediate response and
  recovery needs, in the event of a natural or man-made disaster or crisis. In 2021, this component was
  allocated US$27 million sourced from the AF to Jaffna. The allocation was then cancelled to finance AF for
  the government's separate Bank-financed response to COVID-19. The canceled amount was used to
  finance the AF to the Sri Lanka COVID-19 Emergency Response and Health System Preparedness Project
  Additional Financing (P174291).



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost: The original total project cost was US$247 million. The revised total project cost was US$101
  million. The credit disbursed US$88 million. The remaining credit balance of US$13 million was cancelled.

  Financing: The International Development Association (IDA) financed this project with an original US$147
  million. AF provided US$55 million for a total credit of US$202 million. The credit had two partial
  cancellations for a total of US$92 million. The first was for US$65 million (to finance KMTT). The second
  was for US$27 million (to finance the AF for CERC). The actual amount disbursed was US$87.9 million.

  Borrower Contribution: The government committed US$45 million and disbursed US$23 million. The
  balance was undisbursed. The reduced project scope led to a reduced need for further government
  contribution to finance resettlement, or land acquisition.

  Dates: The project was approved on May 5, 2014 and made effective on October 16, 2014. The Mid Term
  Review (MTR) was conducted on May 7, 2018. The original closing date was on December 31, 2019 but
  was extended for an additional 24 months to close on December 31, 2021. There was one AF and five level
  2 restructurings:

        On May 3, 2016, to add US$55 million in AF and include the city region of Jaffna to the project. This
         added component 4 and revised the results framework to include indicators for activities in Jaffna.
         The implementing agency was changed. The credit closing date was extended by 24 months.
        On June 19, 2018, to reallocate funds from Galle (US$16.47 million) and Jaffna (US$8 million) to
         Kandy for the KMTT; introduce changes to the indicators and targets in the results framework and
         revise the cost allocations.
        On June 7, 2019, to make Force Account as an eligible procurement method to be used for the
         emergency reconstruction of the Galle Morogoda Ela Canal (see Section 10 Other Issues,
         Procurement below).
        On April 5, 2020 to cancel US$65 million to drop KMTT as a sub-component and finance KMTT as a
         new, standalone Bank-financed project. Major delay in KMTT design, and a 4-5-year implementation
         period justified this cancellation. The cancellation led to reduced target values of the outcome and
         output indicators for the Kandy component. Other changes included the change in implementation
         agency from the Ministry of Megapolis and Western Development to the Ministry of Urban
         Development, Water Supply, and Housing Facilities. The cost benefit analysis was updated
         to exclude KMTT and the addition of a Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC) in
         response to the COVID19 pandemic. CERC did not change the PDO, intermediate indicators,
         fiduciary, and safeguards requirements.


                                                                                                  Page 3 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Sri Lanka Strategic Cities Dev Project (P130548)



         On March 1, 2021 to partially cancel US$27 million from the AF to finance the AF (P174291) of the
          separate Sri Lanka COVID-19 Emergency Response and Health System Preparedness Project
          (P173867). This restructuring reduced the original scope for activities in Jaffna and adjusted
          the target values of the associated indicators to what has been achieved.

   Split Rating: A split rating of the outcome will be undertaken (see Section 6 Outcome).The PDO remained
   unchanged but the scope changed during implementation (ICR, paragraph 9). The PDO ambition initially
   increased because of the AF to add activities in Jaffa. Subsequent cancellation of the credit due to
   increased costs, and implementation delays reduced this ambition. In addition, unutilized funds for
   Jaffna that could not be used within the project period were instead used by the government to address the
   COVID-19 pandemic response (ICR, paragraph 19).




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country Context: Sri Lanka became a lower middle-income country in 2013 with GDP per capita reaching
US$3,194. The Colombo Metropolitan Region (CMR), Kandy, and Galle formed a functional urban
agglomeration. The Jaffna agglomeration with Trincomalee and Batticaloa-Akkaraipattu was smaller,
and not well connected to the rest of the country. In Kandy, the project was to support improvements in
urban services. In Galle, the project was to support flood reduction measures. Both cities were to enhance
streetscapes and public spaces, restore and reuse historic landmarks, and prepare masterplans. In Jaffna,
the project was to rehabilitate two major roads (AB 21 and AB 31), improve community parks and ponds,
and develop transport and drainage master plan to improve connectivity, public services, and public
spaces.

Country Plans: The country embarked on a ten-year national development framework (2010-20) with an
aim to achieve at least an 8 per cent annual, private-sector-led economic growth, universal secondary
education, and an increase access in clean water in urban areas. The government also adopted a
nationwide Strategic Cities Program (SCP). This was to provide a coherent approach to develop the
economic potential of cities. The PDO was relevant to the development goals in the SCP. This project was
to initiate the strategy by addressing two obstacles. The first was inadequate basic urban infrastructure and
services to match growing demand. The second was deteriorating assets due to a lack of maintenance.
Lack of appropriate planning resulted in ad hoc development patterns and fragmented provision and
delivery of urban services.

World Bank Partnership Strategy: The PDO remained relevant to the World Bank's Country Partnership
Framework (CPF) FY17-FY20 for Sri Lanka. The validity of this CPF was extended to FY21 because of the
impact of the COVID19 pandemic. The Bank team clarified that the next CPF was under preparation. The
PDO contributed to the CPF's Objective 3.1. Greening Urban Development, to develop urban areas in a
more environmentally friendly manner. For example, this project supported the government in improving
urban public spaces by promoting greening development such as 131,198 m2 of new or rehabilitated urban
public spaces in the participating target city regions of Kandy, Galle, and Jaffna. In its October 2022
Country Update, the Bank reported a three-fold increase in Sri Lanka's urban poverty. In its System Country
Diagnostics (SCD) report, the Bank also reported that the highest numbers of people living in poverty and
the bottom 40 percent were in multicity agglomeration areas. The PDO remained relevant to the Bank's and

                                                                                                   Page 4 of 23
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                       Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Sri Lanka Strategic Cities Dev Project (P130548)



               the government's efforts to streamline urban management structures, improve capacity to delivery urban
               services, and conduct strategic planning (land use and transport planning). These plans would allow local
               authorities to respond to present and future needs. Improved connectivity would raise the economic
               potential outside the Kandy-Colombo-Galle agglomeration and improve growth drivers within those districts
               (SCD, paragraph 20).

               World Bank Experience in the Country and in the Sector: The Bank has recently completed the Metro
               Colombo Urban Development Project (MCUDP) that aimed to reduce flooding in the metro area, and
               strengthen the Colombo Metropolitan Area (CMA) capacity to rehabilitate, improve and maintain selected
               local infrastructure and services. Prior Bank-financed activities included the three-phased Climate
               Resilience Multi-Phased Programmatic Approach (CRIP) program designed to improve weather and climate
               forecasting and early warning capacity, and reduce flood risks in the lower Kelani basin (between Hanwella
               and Kaduwela). This program benefited 11.5 million people in 22 out of the 25 districts in Sri Lanka. The
               Water Supply and Sanitation Improvement project provided over US$200 million to increase access to
               piped water services and improved sanitation to underserved households in urban, rural, and plantation
               areas. The Integrated Watershed and Water Resources Management project provided over US$65 million
               to improve the safety of dams and irrigation function and improve Sri Lankas's water management
               institutions. The Bank is also providing US$69 million to finance the Kandy Multimodal Transport Terminal
               (KMTT) project to enhance accessibility, efficiency, and public safety (P172342). The KMTT was
               originally part of this project but later became a standalone project.

               The PDO was relevant to the country's urbanization development strategy but was not pitched at an
               outcome level. The urbanization development problem was not a substantial component of the Bank's
               strategy for the country. However, in the October 2022 country update and diagnostic, designed to inform
               the next country partnership framework currently under preparation, the PDO appeared to be substantially
               relevant.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To improve selected urban services and public urban spaces in participating city regions.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change (TOC): A TOC was not prepared at appraisal, but one was prepared for the ICR. Original
                             outputs were specific for each city of Kandy and Galle (see below). Both cities formed part of the Colombo
                             Metropolitan Region (CMR).



                                                                                                                             Page 5 of 23
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Sri Lanka Strategic Cities Dev Project (P130548)




      in Kandy, the original outputs were to be the rehabilitated roads, improved transport and public
       transport facilities, rehabilitated water supply systems, major drains, and an integrated master plan. In
       addition, urban upgrading was to be made through the installation of silt traps and rehabilitation of
       parks. Additionally, an integrated master plan that included an asset management system with a
       maintenance program for the infrastructure assets was to be developed.
      In Galle, the original outputs were to be an integrated master plan, and restored historic buildings,
       improved canals and drains, rehabilitated bridges and streets, constructed ocean pathways, restored
       historic landmarks, and an integrated plan that included an asset management system with a
       maintenance program for the infrastructure assets that were developed.

The original outcomes were to be the improved urban basic services in both cities, improved transport
connectivity and improved drainage. These outcomes could be reasonably attributed to the project outputs.
The longer-term outcomes would result in livable and sustainable cities. However, the outcome indicators
only measured the number of beneficiaries, the share of female beneficiaries, and the number of new or
rehabilitated urban public spaces. While number of beneficiaries (and the share of female beneficiaries) are
required outcome indicators in the World Bank's corporate scorecard, it is not sufficient to measure only the
number of beneficiaries and the share of female beneficiaries to determine the project's achievements. The
number of new and rehabilitated urban public spaces is an output indicator. Hence, the project results
framework lacked adequate and sufficient indicators to properly measure the project's achievements at
outcome level.

The TOC offered the following critical assumptions to increase the likelihood of achieving these outcomes:
(i) consultations with respective municipal councils revealed needs and informed the activities (inputs); (ii)
contractors and supervision consultants had sufficient capacity and resources; (iii) both the project
management and project implementation units had adequate contract management capacity and resources;
(iv) the capacity of the Project Partner Agencies (PPAs) and the municipal councils have been mainstreamed
and retained; and (v) stakeholders responsible for operations and maintenance (O&M) were involved
throughout the project cycle and had sufficient resources. The first assumption did occur, but the rest did not
and influenced the subsequent project restructurings. The TOC did not include assumptions that would
establish a stronger causality between the inputs and outputs to achieve outcomes such as the sufficiency in
available resources, using multiple implementing entities across multiple sectors simultaneously, and design
timelines. These were borne out at implementation and resulted in delays, numerous restructurings, and
substantial funds cancelled (see Section 8 Assessment of Bank Performance below).

OUTPUTS:

In Kandy:

      The following outputs achieved its targets:
            o 3 bus terminals were constructed or rehabilitated - the Bogambara station, the Clock Tower
               station, and the Bandaranayake Mawatha. The original target was three bus terminals.
            o An integrated asset management plan was prepared. An asset management system was
               developed and adopted as targeted.
      The following outputs did not achieve its targets:
            o 5 silt traps were installed around Kandy Lake. The original target was six.
            o 13.7 km of water transmission and distribution pipes were replaced. The original target was 30
               km. Another 17 km was implemented outside the project.


                                                                                                   Page 6 of 23
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Sri Lanka Strategic Cities Dev Project (P130548)



             o 9 km of roads along Dharmashoka Mawatha and Katugastota-Madiwela were rehabilitated.
               The original target was 20 km. The remaining 11 km were implemented either by other
               projects or directly by the Road Development Authority outside of the project.
             o 4.4 km of underground storm water drainage was rehabilitated. The original target was seven
               km. This included the Bandaranayake Mawatha utility diversion around the KMTT area,
               and the Kandy Municipal Council main water drain.

In Galle:

      The following outputs exceeded or achieved its targets:
            o Eight bridges were rehabilitated. The original target was seven.
            o An asset management system with a maintenance program for municipal infrastructure was
                developed and adopted as targeted.
      The following outputs almost achieved its targets:
            o 13.7 km of major canals and local drains rehabilitated along Morogoda Ela and Meda Ela.
                The original target was 16 km.
             o 2 km of new or rehabilitated streets with sidewalks. The original target was 2.5 km.
      1.5 km of new or rehabilitated ocean pathways were constructed. The original target of 2.5 km was
         not achieved.

OUTCOMES:

      575,924 people benefited from the improved urban services. The original target of 320,000 persons
         was exceeded.
        223,326 square meter of new or rehabilitated urban public space. The original target of 75,000
         sq. meter was exceeded.
        301,153 female beneficiaries benefited from the improved urban services. The original target of
         301,500 was substantially achieved.
        The ICR claimed that 30,000 m2 of land in Kandy adjacent to the rehabilitated roads increased in
         value but this was not measured. There was no evidence to support this claim.
        The original outcome indicator was "reduced area at risk of flood inundation in Galle.” The original
         target of a 10-year return period for major canals and a 5-year return period for local canals and cross
         drains proved difficult to measure, hence there was no evidence to show that this was achieved. The
         indicator was later dropped.
        The ICR claimed that the rehabilitated and improved bridges along Morogoda Ela reduced congestion
         around the Kahaduwatta area, that it led to better access, fewer accidents, and reduced costs for
         routine maintenance. However, no data supported these claims as none of these were measured. The
         Bank team clarified that in the beneficiary survey of residents near the bridge, respondents noted that
         at least three vehicles used to wait for around 30 seconds for oncoming vehicles before crossing. The
         improvement resulted in no crossing delays at the bridge in both directions but without supporting
         data. The Bank team also added that the widening of the Morogoda canal removed bottlenecks and
         reduced traffic delays, but the road authority did not keep records. Neither were records kept for
         reduced incidence of accidents. Anecdotally, the bridge improvement eliminated accidents.
        The ICR also reported that the project benefitted commuters in Galle by improving access to the
         Karapitiya Hospital by reducing travel time during peak hours by 56 percent and during off-peak hours
         by 67 percent. The ICR also noted that bridges reduced congestion around the Kahaduwatta area that


                                                                                                   Page 7 of 23
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Sri Lanka Strategic Cities Dev Project (P130548)



       it led to better access, fewer accidents, and reduced costs for routine maintenance (ICR, paragraph
       22). However, no data supported these claims as none of these were measured.

Overall, the efficacy of the project to achieve this objective is rated Modest due to both low achievement and
lack of evidence. The outcome target indicators mostly covered number of beneficiaries, which discussed
above under TOC is not a good indicator to measure the achievement of the PDO. The more important
outcome indicators that would have reflected the development outcome resulting from the improved basic
urban services, connectivity, and drainage were not reported or if reported, they were not supported by data.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
To improve selected urban services and public urban spaces in participating city regions.

Revised Rationale
There was no change in the objective. The 2016 AF expanded the scope and ambition of the project by
adding Jaffna (the capital of the Northern Province) as a target city. This revised the original TOC.

Revised TOC: The government envisioned a balanced regional development by promoting urban
agglomeration in Jaffna and the Northern Province. The revised TOC was to lead to new outputs and
increase the ambition of the outcomes by increasing the target values of the PDO outcome indicators. Jaffna
had faced challenges related to poor connectivity, poor public services, and insufficient public spaces, so the
project focused its investments on the rehabilitation of two major roads (AB 21 and AB 31), improvement of
community parks and ponds, and development of transport and drainage masterplan (ICR, paragraph 2).

The revised inputs focused on investments in Jaffna and included the construction of roads, rehabilitation of
drainage, urban upgrading and cultural heritage, and capacity building and implementation support to the
Jaffna PIU.

The revised outputs included rehabilitated roads, reinstated storm water drains, public conveniences (toilets)
and rehabilitated public parks (Kacheri building and surroundings), cycle lanes, and rehabilitated
community ponds. Ponds, about 47 throughout Jaffna, were a unique community feature that absorbed
rainwater while offering community recreation space (ICR, footnote 8). In addition, community consultation
ponds were to be created and strategic plans and studies in public transport, drainage, and spatial
development were to be completed.

The revised outcomes included an increase in the target values of the number of beneficiaries because of
the added investments in Jaffna. The target share of female beneficiaries was added. One outcome indicator
was dropped because it was found difficult to measure. This was the reduced area (in square km) at risk of
flood inundation in Galle (using a 10-year return period for major canals and 5-year return period for local
canals and cross drains). The revised outcomes did not measure the development problem addressed by the
activities in enhancing the public urban space, the parks, and preservation of historic places nor did the


                                                                                                  Page 8 of 23
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Sri Lanka Strategic Cities Dev Project (P130548)



revised outcome indicators measure the development problem addressed by the improvements in roads and
drainage.

REVISED OUTPUTS:

In Kandy, and in Galle, there were no changes in the target values or achieved output indicators.

In Jaffna - the added funds resulted in achieving the following outputs against original targets:

      The following outputs achieved or almost achieved its targets:
            o 23.56 km of non-rural roads were rehabilitated. The original target was 25 km.
            o 223,326 square meter of new or rehabilitated urban public space. The revised target was
               250,000 sq. meter to include Jaffna
      The following outputs were not achieved:
            o 3 strategic plans or studies in public transport and traffic management, drainage, and spatial
               development were completed. The original target was five.
            o 6 public conveniences (toilets) were constructed or rehabilitated. The original target was 10
            o 1.6 km of storm water drainage was reinstated. The original target was 30 km.
            o 3 community pilot ponds were installed to improve city functions. The original target was five.
            o 2 community consultative committees for pond related activities with at least 1/3 of women
               represented were established. The original target was five.
            o 100,498 square meters of new or rehabilitated urban public space. The revised target was
               250,000 square meters to include Jaffna.

REVISED OUTCOMES:

      574,878 people benefited from the improved urban services. The revised target of 650,000 persons
       was not achieved.
      301,153 female beneficiaries benefited from the improved urban services. The revised target of 51
       percent (or 290,700 female beneficiaries) was achieved.
      The ICR claimed that in Jaffna, the improved AB 31 road contributed to a 71 percent reduction in
       travel time and the AB 21 road reduced travel time by 56 percent based on a survey that was not
       noted in the ICR but clarified by the Bank team. They confirmed that there was no data on cost of
       maintenance prior to improvement, but the Road Development Authority estimated reduced annual
       routine maintenance cost around LKR1.56 million.
      5,000 people benefited from the public conveniences constructed, and another 9.250 persons
       benefited from the improvement in storm water micro drainage improvements (ICR, paragraph 23, no
       description of how this outcome was measured).

Overall, the efficacy of the project to achieve this PDO is rated Modest due to both low achievement and lack
of evidence. While number of beneficiaries is a required outcome indicator, it is not sufficient in itself to
demonstrate project achievement. The rating is set due to a combination of low achievement of output targets
and lack of relevant outcome indicators to demonstrate achievement at outcome level.



Revised Rating

                                                                                                    Page 9 of 23
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Sri Lanka Strategic Cities Dev Project (P130548)



Modest


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 2
Revised Objective
To improve selected urban services and public urban spaces in participating city regions.

Revised Rationale
There was no change in the objective, but target values of outcome indicators were revised.

Revised TOC: The reallocation of funds did not change the TOC.

REVISED OUTPUTS:

In Kandy: The following outputs achieved its targets:

      5 silt traps were installed around Kandy Lake. The revised target was five.
      13.7 km of water transmission and distribution pipes were replaced. The revised target was 13 km.
      9 km of roads along Dharmashoka Mawatha and Katugastota-Madiwela were rehabilitated. The
       revised target was nine km.
      4.4 km of underground storm water drainage was rehabilitated. The revised target was four km.
      In Kandy four parks were improved as targeted, including the walkability around Kandy Lake, the
       rehabilitation of the car park rooftop, the George De Silva Park, viewing decks at Tomlin Park, and
       Arthur Seat.
      In Kandy, the improved parks benefited around 5,000 visitors to the Tooth Relic temple, including
       1,500 visitors a day, and 21 vendors selling food and souvenirs to visitors (ICR, paragraph 24). The
       ICR did not report any data to support the claim of increase in small business income.

In Galle: The following outputs achieved or almost achieved its targets:

      2 km of new or rehabilitated streets with sidewalks. The revised target was two km.
      13.7 km of major canals and local drains rehabilitated along Morogoda Ela and Meda Ela. The revised
       target was 14 km.
      1.5 km of new or rehabilitated ocean pathways were constructed. The revised target was 1.2 km.
      In Galle, the Galle Fort area was restored and conserved, attracting 1,200 visitors on weekends
       since March 2022. The Bank team clarified that no targets were set for the number of visitors.

In Jaffna, the following outputs achieved its targets:

      An integrated asset management plan was prepared, with an asset management system developed
       and adopted as targeted.
      1.63 km of storm water drainage was reinstated. The revised target was1.6 km.
      6 public conveniences were constructed or rehabilitated. The revised target was six.




                                                                                               Page 10 of 23
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Sri Lanka Strategic Cities Dev Project (P130548)



In Jaffna, most of the effort to enhance the old Kachcheri building, the Old Park attached to it, and the
community ponds, which absorbed rainwater and provided recreational space to the community were
cancelled. Overall, outcome in Jaffna to enhance urban public space was negligible (ICR, paragraph 26).

REVISED OUTCOME: The following outcomes were partially or not achieved:

      575,924 people benefited from the improved urban services. The revised target was 650,000
       persons.
      The objective of enhancing the public urban spaces was partially achieved. According to the Bank
       team, there were no targets established for the urban spaces.

Overall, the efficacy of the project to achieve this objective is rated Modest.



Revised Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 3
Revised Objective
To improve selected urban services and public urban spaces in participating city regions.

Revised Rationale
Revised TOC: The PDO was unchanged. The TOC was revised because the partial cancelation of funds that
were originally transferred for the KMTT was now to be a new standalone Bank project. The delay in KMTT
design and insufficient time for construction of KMTT within the project period led to this restructuring and
revised TOC.

Revised inputs: The KMTT input was cancelled. Other changes included a change in implementation
agency from the Ministry of Megapolis and Western Development to the Ministry of Urban Development,
Water Supply, and Housing Facilities. The economic analysis was adjusted to reflect the exclusion of KMTT
from the list of sub-projects in Kandy. Another revised input was the addition of Contingent Emergency
Response Component (CERC).

Revised Outputs: The revised output excluded KMTT. Other changes include revisions to end target of
outcome indicators in Kandy. CERC did not include any added outputs.

In Kandy and in Galle, there were no changes to the target output indicators or to the outputs achieved.

In Jaffna, the following achieved its revised targets:

      6 public conveniences (toilets) were constructed or rehabilitated. The revised target was six.
      The following targets were not achieved, and the corresponding indicators were dropped:
            o 10,000.00 square meters of urban walkability enhancements was not achieved.
            o Designated cycle lanes with a target of 16 km was also not achieved.



                                                                                                 Page 11 of 23
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Sri Lanka Strategic Cities Dev Project (P130548)



CERC was not triggered, had no allocation, no target outputs, and no achievements.

Revised Outcomes: The revised outcome indicators achieved its targets:

      575,924 people benefited from the improved urban services. The revised target was 570,000
       persons.
      51 percent of the beneficiaries were female as targeted.
      100,498 square meters of new or rehabilitated urban public spaces in Kandy, Galle, and Jaffna were
       completed. The revised target was 100,000 square meters.
      The outcome indicator associated with reduced area at risk of flooding in Galle was dropped because
       of the difficulties in measuring this indicator.

Overall, the efficacy of the project to achieve this objective is rated Substantial. Funds were cancelled and
target values were reduced to match what has already been achieved. These outcomes were reasonable to
indicate that achievement in improving selected urban services and enhancing public urban spaces in Kandy,
Galle, and Jaffna.



Revised Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 4
Revised Objective
To improve selected urban services and public urban spaces in participating city regions.

Revised Rationale
Revised TOC: The TOC reflected cancelled activities in Jaffna that were still at the design and/or
procurement stage and hence could not be completed by the closing date. The uncommitted balance in
Jaffna financed the AF to finance the government's other ongoing COVID-19 pandemic response. No
revised outputs or outcomes were added in the results framework. CERC was not added to the TOC because
the COVID-19 response was a separate standalone project, like the KMTT. In Jaffna, the target of 16 km of
designated cycle lanes was dropped.

Revised OUTPUTS:

In Kandy and in Galle, no further changes in the target values of target indicators or in the outputs as
previously achieved.

In Jaffna the following outputs achieved its revised targets:

      1.6 km of storm water drains in Yamnua Road and Grusoult Veethy to Matthews road drainage was
       completed. The revised target was 1.6 km.
      2 pilot community ponds to improve city functions was constructed. The revised target was two.
      3 strategic plans and studies were completed. The revised target was three.


                                                                                                  Page 12 of 23
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Sri Lanka Strategic Cities Dev Project (P130548)




                                  2 Community consultation for ponds were organized with at least 1/3 women participants. The revised
                                     target was two.

                            Revised Outcomes: The outcomes from the prior revisions remained unchanged. The outputs achieved its
                            revised targets and only revised the number of beneficiaries to 574,878 to achieve the target under the above
                            restructuring.

                            Overall, the efficacy of the project to achieve this objective is unchanged from above and is rated Substantial
                            for this revision. The outputs achieved all its revised targets, and the one outcome indicator met its revised
                            target. The activities led to outputs that improved selected urban services and public urban spaces in
                            participating city regions.



                            Revised Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Overall, the efficacy of the project to achieve the singular original objective is rated Modest. The level of
                            achievement of outcome is rated Modest due to both low achievement and insufficient evidence. A split rating
                            of the outcome is undertaken (see Section 6 below).



                            Overall Efficacy Rating                                  Primary Reason
                            Modest                                                   Insufficient evidence


    5. Efficiency
   Economic Efficiency: At appraisal, a cost benefit analysis was undertaken for the first-year investments, that
   have been identified in Kandy and Galle. The analysis used a 10 percent discount rate. The economic internal
   rate of return (EIRR) for the Kandy investments including KMTT, was 12.37 percent with a Net Present Value
   (NPV) of US$41.4 million. The estimated EIRR without KMTT was 14.46 percent, with NPV at US$31.4 million.
   The EIRR to upgrade three by-pass roads was 22.7 percent. The EIRR for the Galle investments to
   rehabilitate the Morogoda Ela (canal) used the avoided losses method and was estimated at 14.2 percent.
   Following the framework design, investments to be undertaken at implementation were to meet a minimum
   EIRR of 11 percent. Smaller investments would meet minimum service standards under a cost effectiveness
   analysis (PAD, paragraph 30).

   At closing, the cost benefit analysis used the same 10 percent discount rate (ICR, Annex 4, paragraph 4).
   The EIRRs ranged from 23 to 42 percent when using the "with" and "without" scenarios. The EIRRs ranged from
   18 to 34 percent when sensitivity analysis was applied (a 20 percent increase in costs and 20 percent reduction
   in benefits). The investment costs applied to the roads in Kandy, Galle, and Jaffna. Benefits were the savings in

                                                                                                                             Page 13 of 23
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Sri Lanka Strategic Cities Dev Project (P130548)



vehicle operating costs and in travel time. The National Planning Department publication, "Assessing Public
Investments in the Transport Sector" supplied the data. The Road Development Authority (RDA) collected
provincial data in 2016. Econometric analysis forecasted growth over time. Values were updated for inflation
using the Consumer Price Index. Traffic data at completion was not representative because of COVID mobility
restrictions and fuel shortages in 2022. Benefits from rehabilitating the canal in Galle could not be quantified.
The PMU collected data on land values in the areas adjacent to the canal to quantify the benefits. The
investments for Morogoda Canal included two bridges with quantifiable traffic benefits. The team ensured that
costs were not duplicated in analyzing land values. The cost benefit analysis at entry was not comparable at
closing because of the framework approach to design, which identified investments during implementation.

Administrative and Operational Efficiency: The project had an original commitment of US$147 million. An
additional US$55 million expanded the project ambition and scope by adding Jaffna to balance regional urban
agglomeration (ICR, paragraph 8). However, implementation delays led to the cancellation of US$65 million
previously allocated for KMTT to finance a standalone KMTT project. Another US$27 million was cancelled and
financed an AF to the ongoing COVID-19 project (P173867 and P174291). These implementation delays
cancelled uncommitted activities in Jaffna and raised questions on the readiness to implement the AF (see
Section 8 Assessment of Bank Performance at Entry below). A total of US$92 million or 46 percent of all
credit was cancelled. Implementation revealed the difficulties of preparing and simultaneously executing over
100 civil works and capacity building contracts, in three different locations. Weak project and contract
management and works supervision led to significant delays in procurement and implementation, incomplete
works, and cancelled sub-projects. Contractors faced labor shortages and a lack of available equipment
because of the COVID-19 lockdowns.

Overall, the reasonable economic efficiency of the project was overshadowed by the administrative and
operational inefficiencies of the project. Efficiency is rated Modest.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      0
 Appraisal                                                   0
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      0
 ICR Estimate                                                0
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The relevance of objective is rated Substantial with moderate shortcomings because of the limited relevance to
the Bank's strategy. However, with the SCD and updated country report in October 2022 designed to inform the

                                                                                                     Page 14 of 23
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Sri Lanka Strategic Cities Dev Project (P130548)



forthcoming CPF, the PDOs appeared to be substantially relevant to both the country and the Bank's plans in
urbanization. The efficacy of the project to achieve its objective is rated overall Modest. Revisions to the results
indicators that supported the TOC showed that the rating of the efficacy of the project to achieve its unchanged
objective reached a Substantial rating after funds to support the KMTT and the additional funds for activities in
Jaffna could not be completed in time and were cancelled.

The scope/target value of indicators changed, as reflected in the following restructurings: the first (R1) when AF
was added; the second (R2) target values of outcome indicators were revised; the third (R3) cancelled
the KMTT input and revised the end targets of outcome indicators, the fourth (R4) was to cancel funds and
reduce targets for Jaffna. Efficiency is rated Modest. A split rating was applied to the overall outcome presented
in the table below and reached an overall rating of Moderately Unsatisfactory.

                                                          Original AF R1       R2
               Factors \ Restructurings                                              R3 2020          R4 2021
                                                          2014     2016        2018
Relevance of Objective                                                         Substantial
Efficacy
Objective 1 - improve urban services/urban space          Modest
Revised scope to add Jaffna.                                         Modest
Revised scope to move $ to KMTT.                                               Modest
Revised scope to cancel $                                                               Substantial
Revised scope to reuse Jaffna $ for COVID-19                                                   Substantial
Overall Rating of Efficacy                                Modest     Modest Modest Substantial Substantial
Efficiency                                                                    Modest
Overall Outcome                                           MU         MU     MU     MS          MS
Disbursements (US$ millions, cumulative)                             9.8    46.25 62.55        79.1
Net Disbursements (US$ millions)                          9.8        36.45  16.3   16.55       8.8
Share of Disbursements as a percentage of total
                                                          11.15      41.47     18.54    18.83         10.01
disbursements (US$87.9 million)
Numerical Value of Outcome                                0.33        1.24    0.56   0.75        0.40
Numerical Value of Outcome and Overall Outcome                    0.33+1.24+0.56+0.75+0.40 = 3.29 = MU




a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Unsatisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The following pose risks to the development outcomes of the project:




                                                                                                       Page 15 of 23
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Sri Lanka Strategic Cities Dev Project (P130548)



Economic risk: This is a substantial risk. The macroeconomic condition of the country is affected by the
resource requirements to meet its substantial debt. The current macro-economic crisis in Sri Lanka will likely
affect the availability of the required level of funding to sustain project outcomes in the near term.

Political risk. This is a substantial risk. Change in government leadership in response to the economic crisis
may signal reduced commitment to the changes introduced by the project.

Institutional risk. This is a substantial risk. In this project, high vacancies and staff turnover marked project
management. These staffing gaps pose a substantial risk because staff trained may not remain with the
implementation agency or with other entities tasked with O&M functions. The political risk noted above
exacerbates this risk. In addition, the institutional mechanisms were not reported to ensure that collaboration
among the various agencies was in place to address staffing needs.

Operations and Maintenance (O&M) risk. This is a substantial risk. In this project, completed
infrastructure and services depend on available resources for its O&M. For example, the Galle Heritage
Foundation, the Archaeology Department, and the Galle Municipal Council were to collaborate for adequate
O&M financing of the completed Galle Fort Rampart. In improved delivery of basic services, the municipal
council would also need to collaborate with agencies such as the Road Development Authority and the
Provincial irrigation department to sustain the services delivered. The report did not indicate how the various
collaborations would be reflected in each agency's financial commitments.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The Bank team identified, prepared, and appraised the project consistent with the Bank’s fiduciary role.
  The Bank team identified and prepared this project as the initial step to implement the country's Strategic
  Cities Development Program and was relevant to the Bank's complementary strategy for the country (see
  Section 3 Relevance of Objective above). The following lessons informed design based on the
  experience with the country's Metro Colombo Urban Development Project (MUCDP) and other similar
  Bank-financed projects worldwide. These were: (i) avoiding a piece-meal approach to investing in
  city priorities; (ii) adopting a long-term vision in urban regeneration by integrating all sectors
  (e.g., Singapore, Seoul, and Cape Town); and (iii) including the preservation of the historic landscape in
  urban design. This last lesson was evident in the design of sub-projects in historic Kandy and Galle.
  Details such as urban furnishing, signage, provision of sidewalks, location and design of bus stops, safety
  features (e.g., bollards, raised pedestrian pavements) (PAD, paragraph 11).

  The Bank team conducted the technical, financial and safeguards appraisal of this multi-sector
  project using a framework approach where Year 1 investments were identified, and detailed designs
  prepared. Subsequent sub-project investments were to be finalized during implementation. EIRR
  thresholds were established. Risks were adequately assessed but the mitigation measures proved
  incomplete.

  The implementation arrangements were too complex, and its requirements underestimated.
  The implementing agency was to be the same agency MCUDP used, the Ministry of Defense and Urban
  Development. This agency was to collaborate with the municipal councils in Kandy and Galle, and other

                                                                                                      Page 16 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Sri Lanka Strategic Cities Dev Project (P130548)



  agencies managing specific sectors, such as the Road Development Authority (RDA), the Provincial
  Irrigation Department (PID) in Galle, the Urban Development Authority, the Archaeology Department, and
  the Sri Lanka Land and Development Corporation (SLLDC). Implementation risks at the city level were
  correctly assessed as substantial but the mitigating measures proved inadequate, as the implementing
  agency did not have the capacity or resources to manage several simultaneous projects.

  The Bank team underestimated the time required to improve the capacity of the PMU and the PIUs. In
  addition, most of the Year 1 investments were not ready for implementation and the readiness to
  implement the AF was inadequately assessed as well (see below). The M&E system did not
  include indicators in the results framework that were specific, measurable, achievable, relevant, and time
  bound (SMART) (see Section 9 M&E Design and Implementation below) and several relevant indicators
  at outcome level were missing. This weakness affected the project reporting and remained unaddressed
  at supervision (see below). The Bank team clarified that substantial counterpart funding was available for
  land acquisition, resettlement, taxes, and salaries.

  Overall, the Bank team performance at entry is rated Moderately Unsatisfactory. There were significant
  shortcomings in assessing the implementation risks. The mitigating measures in appraising the AF
  proved insufficient to overcome the lack of readiness to implement.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The Bank team conducted 17 supervision missions, including virtual ones, during the seven-year
 implementation period. Three Task Team Leaders (TTLs), all based in Colombo, supported the
 project. Experts in urban development, municipal engineering, urban upgrading, environmental and social
 safeguards, procurement, and financial management provided technical support, as needed. The Bank
 safeguards and fiduciary specialists ensured compliance with Bank policies.

 The design of the investments using the framework approach proved problematic. Four years into
 implementation and by the time of the 2018 MTR in (i.e., in Kandy and Galle), only a few of the investments
 identified at Year 1 and Year 2 sub-projects in Kandy and Galle were under implementation. Others were
 under design or procurement stage. The Bank team worked with the government to address
 implementation delays. AF was secured to rehabilitate two Jaffna roads that the Road Development
 Authority cost US$15 million and extend the closing date by 24 months.

 The unexpected COVID-19 pandemic further delayed implementation. The costs of the KMTT sub-
 component in Kandy substantially increased. The Bank team restructured the project to transfer funds from
 Galle and Jaffna to finance KMTT and added CERC. Another restructuring cancelled funds to finance
 KMTT because KMTT could not be completed in time. The Bank team worked with Jaffna to address the
 implementation delays. This resulted in another restructuring to cancel funds and finance the AF of an
 ongoing COVID-19 related project. In all these restructurings, additional financing, and partial
 cancellations, the Bank team did not address weaknesses of the results indicators.



                                                                                                  Page 17 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Sri Lanka Strategic Cities Dev Project (P130548)



 Overall, the Bank team performance at supervision is rated Moderately Unsatisfactory. There were
 significant shortcomings in the proactively taking advantage of the opportunities to resolve the
 weaknesses of the results indicators.

 With the Bank performance at entry and at supervision both rated Moderately Unsatisfactory, the overall
 Bank performance is rated Moderately Unsatisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The M&E design was developed based on the “framework” approach. This meant that sub-project activities
 were to be identified and designed at implementation following a general framework of interventions. The
 outcome indicators lacked focus on impact on beneficiaries. Project indicators did not capture the benefits
 for the population (ICR, paragraph 53). The outcome indicators were more at an output or intermediate
 level at best, and there were few other outcome indicators in addition to the number of beneficiaries. The
 PDO outcome indicator for reduced flood risk did not use a hydraulic model. This indicator was dropped as
 part of the AF, as it was deemed difficult to measure. No measure for the flood reduction system was
 developed in Galle. Indicators were not specific, monitorable, achievable, relevant, or time bound. The
 M&E design was to be embedded in the Project Implementing Unit of the implementing agency and those
 of the participating cities. The M&E design for data collection, analysis, and reporting was complex and
 proved inadequate.



b. M&E Implementation
  M&E was implemented by the PMU, supported by the city level PIUs, and the Project Partner Agencies
  (PPAs). A dedicated full time senior M&E officer was hired only after the 2018 MTR. The PIUs lacked the
  expertise needed to supervise multi-sectoral activities and lacked understanding of data sources
  or methods for progress reporting. The project baseline was only done after the MTR and the
  project database only maintained after the MTR. At AF, the project added seven intermediate results
  indicators to capture the outcome achievements in Jaffna. Indicators were revised to accompany the
  reduced level of project ambition as funds were cancelled at restructurings. Weaknesses in M&E design,
  including the lack of relevant indicators, were not corrected during implementation. Travel restrictions due
  to COVID-19 lockdowns affected data collection (ICR, paragraph 56) towards the end of the project
  period. Evidence of project outcomes were collected after the restrictions were eased. Beneficiaries were
  not reported to have been involved in defining target indicators or assessing their achievement. There
  was no indication that M&E functions and processes were likely to be sustained after project closing.


                                                                                                   Page 18 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Sri Lanka Strategic Cities Dev Project (P130548)




c. M&E Utilization
  The M&E data informed discussions during missions, the MTR, and restructurings. The M&E data
  informed all stakeholders of status but with no evidence provided. Data at MTR justified the partial
  reallocation of AF to KMTT because of implementation delays in Jaffna. These delays also pointed to
  the weak capacity of the Jaffna PIU and poor performance of consultancy firms that both the PMU and
  the Bank addressed. The M&E system had inadequate indicators and negatively affected project
  reporting.

  The overall quality of M&E is rated Modest. A strengthened M&E system and staffing in the Kandy and
  Galle PIUs was undertaken after the MTR. As a result, a functional M&E system was in place after the
  MTR.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Environmental Safeguards. The project was assigned an Environmental Category "A." The following
   safeguards policies were triggered: Environmental Assessment (OP /BP 4.01); Natural Habitats (OP/BP
   4.04); Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11); Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12), and Forests
   (OP/BP 4.36). The government disclosed the Environmental Assessment and Management Framework
   (EAMF) in country and through the Bank InfoShop on November 15, 2013. Sub-project site-specific
   safeguard instruments were prepared during implementation following the framework approach of the
   project.

   Several subprojects faced compliance challenges. The contractor did not use the approved dump sites for
   dredged sediment. Some were dumped at construction sites along the canal banks with potential runoff to
   waterways and flooding. Incomplete construction in a number of sections posed safety issues to the public
   using the roads and residing along the banks. On the gabion construction, coffer dams on the canal were
   not removed at completion, culverts and cross drains were partially completed in several locations and left
   with inadequate safety measures. Technical assistance and corrective measures addressed negligence and
   inadequate site supervision by the contractor and the supervision consultant of construction sites, waste
   disposal, occupational and public health, and safety. Compliance improved over time.

   A fatal accident occurred in Jaffna on November 2020. The Project Management Unit (PMU) prepared
   a fatality report, root cause analysis, implemented corrective measures to avoid recurrence, and gave the
   victim’s family the required compensation. The PMU conducted training programs on Environmental Health
   and Safety (EHS) implementation, compliance monitoring, and public awareness on waste management,
   hygienic aspects. The PMU assessed and documented the environmental risks related to the reduced




                                                                                                Page 19 of 23
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Sri Lanka Strategic Cities Dev Project (P130548)



  scope of Jaffna AB-21 Road rehabilitation and the Galle Morogoda Ela cross-drain Package B. The project
  complied with environmental and social safeguards (ICR, paragraph 58).

  Social Safeguards: Social assessment at appraisal found that some historical and cultural sites in the two
  cities may be affected and triggered Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) and Involuntary
  Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12). Both Kandy and Galle were UNESCO World heritage sites with Physical
  Cultural Resources (PCRs) that have been inventoried and mapped by the Department of Archaeology
  (DOA) and the Central Environmental Authority (CEA). According to the EAMF, prior permits were to be
  secured and Archaeological Impact Assessments (AIAs) were to be conducted, as needed. The PMU
  prepared a Social Management Framework (SMF) that included a Resettlement Policy Framework
  (RPF) and completed social surveys and Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs). An audit of the RAP was
  carried out on November 30, 2019. The original RAP identified 841 Affected Peoples (APs). 769 of the 841
  APs equaling 91 percent participated in the meetings of the Entitlement Assessment Committee (EAC). 735
  of the 769 APs equaling 95 percent received the agreed compensation. 492 APs were eligible for livelihood
  support, 417 of these 492 APs equaling 85 percent prepared business plans, and 184 of these 492 APs
  equaling 37 percent started their businesses. The government spent US$2.8 million of its co-financing (out
  of a total US$7.8 million) to implement the RAP.

  Acquisition of private land, the recovery of state land required for the project, and compensation to affected
  parties were completed prior to civil works following the national legal and regulatory framework, and in
  compliance with the World Bank safeguard instruments. The project completed compensation payments to
  2,141 landowners for 2,889 plots of land acquired in the participating cities. The project avoided or
  minimized involuntary resettlements. When this was not feasible, the project assisted displaced persons to
  improve or restore their livelihoods and standards of living in real terms relative to the pre-displacement
  levels.

  The project contributed to the conservation of cultural heritage properties in UNESCO World Heritage sites
  in Kandy and Galle. However, the Jaffna Old Kachcheri restoration could not be implemented due to the
  poor performance of the design firm. The design was eventually completed and turned over to the Urban
  Development Authority (UDA). This was the first urban project in Sri Lanka to implement a Physical Cultural
  Resources (PCR) screening and management tool, PCR and culture-specific screenings, and Heritage
  Impact Assessments (HIAs) per the EAMF for all sub-projects within or in the immediate vicinity of these
  heritage assets. The Galle Fort Ramparts restoration demonstrated good practices under the PCR policy.
  The PMU developed a communication piece on the PCR planning and management processes and
  highlighted the treatment of chance finds. The Ministry of Tourism reports that the Galle Fort Rampart
  was one of the most visited places in Sri Lanka.

  A four-tier Grievances Redress Mechanism (GRM) was implemented at the site, sub-project, project, and
  national levels led respectively by a dedicated social development officer, a Grievance Redress Committee
  (GRC); the Project Director; and an Independent Grievance Panel (IGP) Under the 2013 Land Acquisition
  Regulations, the project established a Land Acquisition and Resettlement Committee (LARC) to serve as an
  appeal mechanism for project affected persons if they were dissatisfied with the statutory compensation
  offered. All GRM cases received by the PMU were addressed.




b. Fiduciary Compliance

                                                                                                   Page 20 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Sri Lanka Strategic Cities Dev Project (P130548)



   Financial Management: The project complied with the Bank financial management policies. Accurate
   Interim Unaudited Financial Reports and audit reports were submitted on time. Several annual audit
   reports indicated "qualified audit opinions", but without major financial management shortcomings or
   accountability issues. According to the Bank team, the "qualified opinion" referred to the presentation or
   classification in the annual financial statements. The Bank team reviewed the reasons for the qualified
   opinion and determined that these had no impact on the eligibility of incurred expenditures documented by
   the project. These were not deemed as financial management or accountability issues. Initial accounting,
   bookkeeping, and weak internal audit deficiencies were noted but improved over time, evident in the
   Satisfactory rating of Financial Management in all supervision mission reports.

   Procurement: The PMU started with both a Deputy Project Director for Procurement and a Procurement
   Officer. An engineer was added. More than 100 activities were initially planned. Procurement staffing was
   initially inadequate. Initial procurement delays occurred. Procurement Post Reviews found no significant
   deviations in Bank procurement requirements. Procurement performance was rated Satisfactory during the
   first two years of implementation. Ineffective contract administration marked the latter stages of the project.

   A Deputy Project Director managed contract administration separately from procurement, but
   inadequate contract management capacity resulted in delays and contractual issues. Several contracts
   were terminated due to poor contractor performance, poor construction quality, and non-compliance with
   safeguards requirements. Restructuring allowed the use of Force Account to complete the Morogoda Ela
   (Canal) contract in Galle. The Force Account was to be implemented by the government-owned Sri Lanka
   Land Reclamation and Development Corporation (SLLRDC), known in the field of canal dredging, river
   embankment works, and with Bank-financed Force Account experience. The use of Force Account allowed
   the completion of the urgently needed works, avoided further adverse environmental and social impacts,
   such as flooding, displacement of people, public safety, and financial losses to affected people.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)




d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                    Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                    IEG
                                                                                    Disagreements/Comment
                                 Moderately             Moderately
Outcome
                                 Unsatisfactory         Unsatisfactory
                                 Moderately             Moderately
Bank Performance
                                 Unsatisfactory         Unsatisfactory
Quality of M&E                   Modest                 Modest

                                                                                                      Page 21 of 23
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Sri Lanka Strategic Cities Dev Project (P130548)



Quality of ICR                  ---                    Modest


12. Lessons

Three lessons were derived from the operations, with one added from the result of the experience in
procurement. These are presented below with slight modification (ICR, paragraphs 76-78):

      When implementation capacity is not carefully assessed, it may affect the effective
       use of Additional Financing (AF). In this project, AF was to be used for activities in Jaffna
       to achieve regional balance. The proposed activities in Jaffna were appraised using a
       framework approach. A framework approach in design calls for a general agreement of the
       major sectors to be financed under the project with specific studies, detailed designs, and
       implementation planning to be carried out after the Board approval (ICR, paragraph 44). This
       meant that Jaffna's implementation capacity was not adequately assessed beforehand. As a
       result, almost 50 percent of the US$55 million AF credit to finance additional activities in
       Jaffna was cancelled because it lacked implementation capacity. Design was delayed and
       the activities would not be completed during the project period. The AF is a useful
       instrument for activities that can be realistically implemented within the AF credit/loan
       timeline.
      A complex implementation design involving multi-city and multi-sectoral projects may
       jeopardize the project's achievements. In this project, design called for urban upgrading,
       preserving cultural heritage, reducing the risk from floods, and city-wide transport reform
       across three different cities. This design proved difficult to implement. The limited resources
       in multi-disciplinary sector expertise in Galle, Kandy and Jaffna, limited its project
       management and implementation capacity. Multiple agencies at central and local levels were
       needed to collaborate closely. This newly introduced arrangement led to
       further implementation delays. A simpler design, such as multi-city but focusing on a specific
       sector, or a pilot multi-sector project in a single city with sufficient capacity may have been a
       more useful sequence to address city-wide challenges. AF would then be used as an
       instrument to expand the project based on the evidence.
      Ensuring flexibility in construction contracts may facilitate accommodation of external
       shocks. In this project, external shocks included the Easter Sunday bombing, the COVID-19
       pandemic, and the country’s deteriorating economic condition. These shocks led to lack of
       materials that caused delays and price escalation of materials and works. Future projects
       may design construction contracts to include a cost escalation methodology to account for
       rapid escalation of commodity and building materials prices, exchange rates fluctuations, or
       war elsewhere in the world that may affect supply chains.
      A joint procurement and contract administration unit within the PMU may benefit
       implementation. In this project, the procurement unit was separate from contract
       administration. Contract administration operated independently under the supervision of a
       Deputy Project Director but without adequate capacity for contract management. This
       resulted in delays in contract management and environmental compliance issues. The
       project could have benefitted from a single unit for contract administration and management,
       with adequate qualified staff (ICR, paragraph 65).




                                                                                                    Page 22 of 23
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Sri Lanka Strategic Cities Dev Project (P130548)




13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR was consistent with the guidelines and provided an overview of the operation with some shortcomings.
The quality of evidence became reliable after the MTR when the M&E system was strengthened. A baseline
was established. The indicators as defined were reported and monitored. However, the report claimed
achievement of some outcomes that were not supported by data. Annex 7 provided additional evidence, such
as photos, to further support the project outcome. The same annex provided useful analysis of the split rating of
the outcome although the lack of relevant indicators remained unaddressed. Annex 4 provided useful
information on project efficiency. The report candidly pointed out that the M&E design lacked SMART indicators
that would have strengthened the quality of evidence to support project outcomes. There were some
inconsistencies with figures, including the cancelled funds, the restructuring associated with CERC, and its
allocation used as AF to another ongoing COVID-19 related project in Sri Lanka.

The restructuring papers from the Bank's Operations Portal clarified the data although the ICR briefly
mentioned it (ICR, paragraph 15). The report could have made more explicit references with the transfers made
and its impact on the Theory of Change and the results framework indicators to help clarify the sources and
uses of funds among the different components. Annex 3 for example, did not show the original and revised
allocations. Actual disbursements at closing of the project components were missing with no reference to
cancelled funds. The Bank team added clarifications. Lessons were based on project experience, particularly in
simplifying design to come up with evidence to help justify AF to expand project ambition.




  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Modest




                                                                                                   Page 23 of 23
