     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BI-Strengthening Institutional Capacity (P149176)



                                                                                    Report Number: ICRR0023178

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                   Project Name
 P149176                                      BI-Strengthening Institutional Capacity

 Country                                      Practice Area(Lead)
 Burundi                                      Governance


 L/C/TF Number(s)                             Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-D0490                                    31-Dec-2020                                          20,450,698.27

 Bank Approval Date                           Closing Date (Actual)
 22-Apr-2015                                  31-Dec-2021

                                              IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                              22,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                               20,726,018.08                                               0.00

 Actual                                           20,450,698.27                                               0.00




 Prepared by                  Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Jorge Garcia-Garcia          Clay Wescott                  Jennifer L. Keller              IEGEC (Unit 1)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The financing agreement says that "The objective of the Project is to strengthen the Recipient's institutional
   capacity to improve fiscal management" (Schedule 1, p. 5). The project appraisal document (PAD) defines the
   objective as : "To strengthen Government institutional capacity to improve fiscal management" (par. 28), and
   adds: "This objective will be achieved by supporting Government efforts to mobilize domestic revenue,
   improve public expenditure management and controls, produce timely statistics for policy making, and
   improve mining sector regulatory capacity and practices" (PAD, par. 29).


                                                                                                     Page 1 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BI-Strengthening Institutional Capacity (P149176)



   The objectives remained unchanged during the three restructurings of the project. For this review, the project
   objectives are defined as:

   PDO1: Mobilize domestic revenue and improve the predictability of domestic revenue. The elements of
   Component 1 suggest that revenue predictability was an implicit objective of the operation. The PAD’s Theory
   of Change defines this objective (outcome in its terminology) as “Improved predictability of tax policy and
   increased revenues to fund delivery of public services and improve the business environment” (p. 35)

   PDO2: Improve public expenditure management and controls;

   PDO3: Produce timely statistics for policymaking; and

   PDO4: Improve mining sector regulatory capacity and practices.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Component 1: Modernizing Revenue Policy and Administration

   The component supported modernizing revenue policy and administration (original cost, US$11.4 million;
   actual cost, US$3.5 million) through: (a) strengthening tax policy functions at the Ministry of Finance,
   Planning and Economic Development (MFPDE), (b) macroeconomic modeling, (c) modernizing the tax
   administration via an integrated tax administration system and a risk-based management system, and (d)
   improving revenue collection practices from the mining sector. Its subcomponents were:

   1.1: Strengthening Tax Policy Functions at the MFPDE (original cost, US$700,000)

   1.2: Support to Macroeconomic Modelling (original cost, US$800,000)

   1.3: Modernization of the Tax Administration via an Integrated Tax Administration System and Risk-Based
   Audit Management System (original cost, US$9 million)

   1.4: Improve Revenue Collection Practices from the Mining Sector (original cost, US$900,000)

   The Belgian government's decision to cancel its US$5.2 million grant led to the first restructuring of the
   project, which took place entirely on subcomponent 1.3. All other components and subcomponents
   remained unchanged. With fewer funds, the government decided not to purchase the ITAS (Integrated Tax
   Administration System) solution and the technical assistance services needed to operate it. The planned



                                                                                                   Page 2 of 19
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  BI-Strengthening Institutional Capacity (P149176)



cost of the module fell from US$11.4 million to US$3.8 million, allocated among the other original activities
and three new activities aimed at expanding the tax base.

Component 2: Strengthening Public Expenditure Management and Control; Project Management

The component supported strengthening public expenditure management and control and project
management (original cost, US$8.9 million; actual cost US$6.4 million) through: (a) strengthening the
capacity to plan, coordinate, and build consensus on the implementation of the government's public finance
reforms; (b) enhancing the functionality and use of the new integrated public financial management
systems; (c) establishing the building blocks for implementing a program-based budget; and (d)
strengthening external audit and control functions. Its subcomponents were:

2.1: Strengthening Capacity to Plan, Coordinate, and Build Consensus on the Implementation of the
Government's Public Finance Reforms (original cost, US$5.2 million)

2.2: Enhanced Functionality and Use of the New Integrated Public Financial Management Systems (original
cost, US$1.2 million)

2.3: Establishing the Building Blocks for the Implementation of a Program based Budget (original cost,
US$1 million)

2.4: Strengthening External Audit and Control Functions (original cost, US$1.5 million)

Component 3: Improving ISTEEBU's Institutional Capacity

The component supported improving the institutional capacity of the Burundi Institute of Statistics and
Economic Studies -ISTEEBU, acronym of Institut de Statistiques et d'Etudes Economiques du Burundi
(original cost: US$3.3 million; actual cost US$7.4 million) through (a) promoting a results-based
management system to strengthen ISSTEEBU's performance; (b) strengthening ISTEEBU's human
resource management system; (c) improving the quality of statistics and the production of timely data; and
(d) improving data access and dissemination of national statistics and microdata. Its subcomponents were:

3.1: Promote a Results-Based Management System to Strengthen ISTEEBU's performance (original cost,
US$500,000)

3.2: Strengthen ISTEEBU's Human Resource Management System (original cost, US$1 million)

3.3: Improve the Quality of Statistics and Support the Production of Timely Data (original cost, US$1.3
million)

3.4: Improve Data Access and Dissemination of National Statistics and Micro Data (original cost,
US$500,000)

During the second restructuring of the project, the Bank added a noteworthy activity: conducting the
Integrated Household Living Condition Survey (Enquête intégrée sur les conditions de vie des ménages,
EICVM). This was critical to inform policy design and decision-making based on more reliable and accurate
statistics. The last survey was from 2014, and updating the information about living conditions was
necessary.


                                                                                                  Page 3 of 19
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    BI-Strengthening Institutional Capacity (P149176)



  Component 4: Improving Mining Regulatory Capacity and Practices

  The component supported improving mining regulatory capacity and practices (original cost: US$3.6 million;
  actual cost, $1.7) through (a) organizational reforms at the Ministry of Energy and Mining; (b) establishing
  regulatory guidelines for artisanal and small-scale mining operations and ensuring their enforcement; and
  (c) improving mining data transparency. Its subcomponents were:

  4.1: Support Organizational Reforms at the Ministry of Energy and Mining (original cost, US$1.5 million)

  4.2: Establishing Regulatory Guidelines for ASM Operations and Ensuring their Enforcement (original cost,
  US$1 million)

  4.3: Improving Mining Data Transparency (original cost, US$1.1 million)

  The Bank officially dropped the component on March 5, 2020.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Costs and financing. The original project cost was US$27.2 million equivalent. IDA financed US$22 million
  equivalent (SDR 15.7 million), and a multi-donor trust fund from the Government of Belgium financed
  US$5.2 million equivalent. The actual project cost was US$20.66 million [value differs from the one in the
  table below], and IDA disbursed US$20.45 million. Belgium canceled its US$5.2 million co-financing after
  the first restructuring because bilateral donors withdrew their support in response to the incumbent
  President's decision to seek a third term.

  Dates. The project was approved on April 22, 2015, became effective on August 19, 2016, and closed on
  December 31, 2021. The Bank restructured the project three times (February 24, 2017, February 24, 2020,
  and December 17, 2021). All restructurings were approved at level 2 [i.e., by the Country Director]. The
  Bank changed the closing date during the first restructuring.

  Restructurings. The project underwent three restructurings that revised the closing date, components and
  subcomponents, allocations of resources among them, and intermediate results and outcome indicators and
  their targets. The PDO remained unchanged.

  First restructuring (February 24, 2017). The following changes took place:

        When Belgian co-financing terminated, the Bank and the government agreed to drop the following
         activities in Component 1 :
              o validation of the ICT readiness diagnostic elaborated by the information technology (IT)
                  advisor;
              o technical assistance to the Burundi Revenue Authority (OBR, Office Burundais des Recettes)
                  to update the strategy and skills development for the project management team of the ITAS;
              o training module to provide ITAS training to OBR staff.
        Extending the closing date by one year to December 31, 2021.
        Adjusting the results framework and disbursement schedule to reflect changes to activities and
         timelines.


                                                                                                 Page 4 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BI-Strengthening Institutional Capacity (P149176)



   Second restructuring (February 24, 2020). It addressed the findings and recommendations of the mid-term
   review agreed upon with the government. The Bank and the government agreed to make the following
   changes :

         Remove activities of low impact and low likelihood of being implemented (e.g., stop support for ITAS
            – integrated tax administration system, and removing sub-component 2.3);
           Include activities with strong links to the PDO and the outcome and intermediate results indicators
            (e.g., adding activities in sub-component 2.1 such as improving State assets management,
            enhancing capacity in the M&E office in the Ministry of Finance, and providing technical assistance
            to improve debt management; in component 3, such as TA for ISTEEBU aimed at improving the
            production of national accounts, quality and timeliness of statistics, and household survey; in
            component 4 -now under component 1-operationalizing the mining database as a management
            tool).
           Update the results framework;
           Relocate funds between disbursement categories and remaining project components.
            Integrate Component 4, "Improving Mining Regulatory Capacity and Practices," under sub-
            component 1.4 because it contributed to the mobilization of domestic revenue. Streamlined
            activities to be supported will be focused on the achievement of the remaining and revised IRIs
            under this sub-component: the operationalization of the mining database as a management tool with
            basic data inputted, and the continuous conduct of the inspections of the mining sites to reduce non-
            compliance. (from Restructuring Paper, Report No.36131, p. 12).

   The restructuring left the results framework with 10 intermediate results indicators (IRI), down from the
   original 16. Two of the 10 IRI were new (IRI 1.1 and IRI 3.4), and three had their text revised (RES36131,
   pp. 8-10).

   Third restructuring (December 17, 2021). It consisted of canceling the anticipated undisbursed balance and
   returning the funding for other International Development Association (IDA) projects in Burundi.

   The table below shows the evolution of costs over the project's life. The amounts are in millions of US$. The
   fall in costs in the first restructuring comes from the cancellation of the Belgian government financing.

   Component           Original          Restructuring 1 Restructuring 2 Restructuring 3 Actual
   One                 11.4              6.2                 6.3             5.75             5.75
   Two                 8.9               8.9                 6.8             7.70              7.7
   Three               3.3               3.3                 7.3             7.21             7.21
   Four                3.6               3.6                 1.6
   Cancellation                                                              (1.7)             (0.21)
   Total               27.2              22.0                22.0            20.66            20.45 +
   Source: ICR, Table 2, p. 13. Note: the actual (final) values were provided by the ICR’s author on 1/23/23 in
   response to IEG’s questions,

   + Project portal says that the total disbursed was 20.35, with a net commitment of 20.73 and undisbursed
   0.19

3. Relevance of Objectives

                                                                                                    Page 5 of 19
                       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                       BI-Strengthening Institutional Capacity (P149176)




Rationale
Country and sector context. The World Bank's Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD, 2018) concluded
that the main constraints to reducing poverty and boosting shared prosperity were the demographic burden,
political and climatic fragility, and the economic volatility that braked Burundi's growth prospects. The SCD
noted that Burundi ranked in the lowest tenth percentile on government effectiveness, the rule of law,
regulatory quality, and control of corruption in the 2012 World Governance Indicators and that by 2015 most
of the indicators had deteriorated. Low capacity in the public sector and the slow process of building it were
key sources of political fragility. One reason was patronage rather than meritocratic criteria to staff the
public sector. Low capacity had hampered the delivery of basic public services and contributed to the low
quality of services and the poor access to these services of significant population groups. The SCD
concluded that better quality and quantity of public services would help raise productivity overall and in the
public sector.

The PAD, like the SCD, noted that Burundi's modest economic performance reflected the legacy of conflict,
which undermined its institutions and limited fiscal space, making it vulnerable to shocks. The limited fiscal
space resulted from (a) low fiscal revenues; (b) a narrow export base which raises the risk of debt distress;
(c) declining grants and scarce external financing; (d) an almost nonexistent domestic financial market; and
(e) a large share of non-discretionary spending, with salaries representing 60 percent of the tax revenues.
Only with a larger fiscal space, achieved through better and higher revenue mobilization, can the
government deliver the development agenda outlined in its second Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper
(PRSP), and sustainable economic growth with shared prosperity over the medium term. Therefore,
strengthening public sector governance and public administration would help achieve these goals.

Government strategy. The PRSP (https://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/scr/2012/cr12224.pdf) focused on
growth and job creation as the basis of future poverty reduction programs. The paper identified six major
development challenges for the country (p. xi). Two of the challenges addressed issues that this operation
covered: weak public expenditure execution (#3 in the list) and lack of capacity to manage development (#6
in the list). For the first one, the PRSP recommended allocating resources to sectors with growth potential;
the second recommended building national capacities to close the gap in human resources, institutional
structures and performance, and the legal and institutional framework.

Bank strategy. The FY13-16 CAS aimed to help Burundi lay the foundation for faster and more inclusive
growth and mitigate the risk of renewed instability by building trust between the State and its citizens. The
CAS pointed out the need to address the different dimensions of fragility, noting that the increased
understanding of the inter-dependencies between the development and political and security agendas
made it essential to structure development interventions in a manner that contributed to building trust
between the state and citizens. With its focus on improving the government's institutional capacity, the
project supported governance, the foundation of the CAS, and the second strategic objective of the CAS of
increasing resilience by consolidating peace and social stability. This project was one of the interventions
that would help the Bank Group improve governance in areas such as public financial management, anti-
corruption, and access to quality health services.


Rating Relevance TBL




Rating
Substantial

                                                                                                         Page 6 of 19
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  BI-Strengthening Institutional Capacity (P149176)




   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               PDO1: Mobilize domestic revenue and improve the predictability of domestic revenue

               Rationale
               Theory of change

               The primary inputs driving the changes were training and technical assistance and modernizing the
               information technology infrastructure (Integrated Tax Administration System -ITAS-, and Integrated Financial
               Management Information System -IFMIS). The investments would help improve tax policy making, tax
               administration, taxpayer compliance, and tax collection outside Bujumbura, the capital. These improvements,
               in turn, should help increase revenues and improve the predictability of revenues, leading to a better business
               environment and having more money to fund the delivery of public services.

               Outputs–Intermediate results indicators (ICR, pages 18 and 55)

               The outputs derive from the activities carried out under component 1, modernizing revenue policy and
               administration. The table below shows the six intermediate results indicators, the baseline values, the values
               achieved at project closing, and IEG’s assessment of the achievement of the indicator target. Of the results
               reported, achievements were negligible for two, substantial for one, and high for three.



               Indicator                                                   Baseline Target     Actual   IEG rating
               New Fiscal Strategy and Medium-Term Action Plan, with       No       Yes        No
               credible revenue targets approved by the Ministry in charge                              Negligible
               of Finance and published
               Increased taxpayer compliance (percentage)
                                                                           99.0     99.5       97.6
               Large Operator
                                                                           83.0     97.0       97.2     Substantial
               Medium Operator
                                                                           60.0     96.0       110.4
               Small Operator
               Domestic tax revenue collected outside Bujumbura urban
               areas, out of the total domestic revenues collected in a    0.8      2.5        3.8      High
               given year (percentage)
               Audit completion ratio (percentage)                         46       80         84.7     High
               Percentage of ASM mines inspected annually that are non-
                                                                           Unknow
               compliant with the mining regulations and mine inspection            10         0        High
                                                                           n
               files (RES36131, p. 9)


                                                                                                                Page 7 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BI-Strengthening Institutional Capacity (P149176)



Basic mining data (total mine sites with permits, # of active
miners per site, # of cooperatives, production per mineral,
                                                              0         3         0         Negligible
and revenues exported) to be inputted to the national
database on a biannual basis.

Outcomes (ICR, page 17)

The outcome indicator was defined as improved predictability of tax policy, which is measured by the actual
aggregate revenue out-turn compared to the original approved budget (PAD, par. 32 (i)). The assessment of
the performance of the indicators is as follows:

                                                             BaselineTarget
Indicator                                                                         Actual IEG rating
                                                             (year) (year)
                                                             93.4
                                                                                  105.5
                                                                        95.0 Dec.
Improved predictability of tax policy (percent)                                   June 30, High
                                                             Jan. 1, 31 2020
                                                                                  2021 *
                                                             2013
* The gains in revenue came from strong VAT and non-tax revenue collections such as a new road
fee, strengthening tax collection from mining activities, and strict enforcement of dividend collection
from public enterprises. IMF Country Report No. 22/257, pages 8 and 13



Predictability of tax revenue. The actual result was 105.5 percent, which falls within the limits established by
PEFA to give a score of A in the dimension of aggregate revenue outturn, one of the two dimensions used to
score the performance indicator revenue outturn (PI3). The criteria to give that score is “actual revenue was
between 97% and 106% of budgeted revenue in at least two of the last three years” (PEFA Handbook
Volume II, 2018, p. 35). Data on budget execution for the period 2018-19/2020-2021 indicate that the
execution rate varied between 98.2 percent in 2018/19 and 104.1 percent in 2020/21, with an average for the
period 2018/19-2020/21 of 101, which turns it into a score of A in PEFA’s score system. The score is higher
than the B score for the dimension PI3.1 in 2012. The data used to calculate the revenue outturn come from
the budget laws in the Ministry of Finance. Budget and Economic Planning
(https://finances.gov.bi/index.php/budget/) and from its reports on budget execution
(https://finances.gov.bi/index.php/raports/) for the years assessed. The PEFA methodology for the revenue
outturn calculation for PI-3 was used to calculate the ratios. The achievement was high.

Revenue mobilization. The ratio of revenue outturn to budgeted revenue does not inform how much the
actions carried out increased revenue. The IMF’s Article IV Consultation Report of July 29, 2022, shows that
central government tax revenue increased from 16.1 percent of GDP in 2019/20 to an estimated 16.7 percent
of GDP in 2020/21 and 2021/22, suggesting that revenue mobilization improved as a result of gains from
strong VAT and non-tax revenue collections such as a new road fee and increasing tax collection from mining
activities. The achievement in this area was substantial.



Rating
Substantial


                                                                                                    Page 8 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BI-Strengthening Institutional Capacity (P149176)




OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
PDO2: Improve public expenditure management and controls

Rationale
Theory of change.

The primary inputs driving the changes were the investments in skills development through training and
technical assistance and modernizing the information technology infrastructure (ITAS and IFMIS). The
investments would help put in place a program-based budget in some pilot ministries initially, with the help of
a more functional IFMIS, to process payments and records faster, and develop skills for the external auditing
of the allocation and use of public funds. The advances in public expenditure management and control would
improve the effectiveness and accountability of public institutions in implementing policy and delivering
services to the people. The outcome indicator selected to assess the achievement of the objective was not
adequate to assess it.

Outputs–Intermediate results indicators (ICR, page 18; ISR#12, pages 6-7)

The table below shows the expected intermediate result indicator target, its baseline value, its value at project
closing, and IEG's assessment of the achievement of the target. The numbers refer to cumulative audit
reports and include five state accounts for the fiscal years 2016, 2017, the first six months of 2018 and FY18-
19 and FY19-20-2020, three municipalities annually -including Bujumbura-and at least one state-owned
enterprise annually. The ISR#12 of January 2, 2022 (p. 6) notes that 13 reports had been completed, but only
10 had been sent to Parliament by 12-20-2021. The reports included five State accounts, six municipalities,
including Bujumbura, and two State-owned enterprises.

                                                       Target
                                          Baseline
Intermediate Results Indicators                                  Actual      IEG rating
                                          (year)
                                                       (year)
                                                                 11
                                          0            13
Number of audit reports produced by
the Supreme Audit Institution that are                                       Substantial
                                          January 1, December
transmitted to Parliament (number)
                                          2015       31, 2021

Outcomes (ICR, page 17, ISR#12, p. 2)

The Second Restructuring Paper [No. RES 36131, p. 16, no date].defined the outcome indicator for this
objective was defined as improved financial accountability. The indicator refers to the production of State
financial accounts which had not been produced since 2016, and it aimed to address by December 2020 the
backlog of State financial accounts for 2016, 2017, and 2018 and the production of those of 2018-2019 and
2019-2020 by December 31, 2021. The financial accounts have been finally produced through SIGEFI (i.e.,
IFMIS) and transmitted to the Court of Auditors. Submitting reports to Parliament falls on the PEFA dimension
30.2, submission of audit reports to the legislature. five reports expected under this outcome are the same as
the five reports for state accounts listed above under intermediate results indicators; therefore, there is a
double counting of results achieved.


                                                                                                   Page 9 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                     Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BI-Strengthening Institutional Capacity (P149176)



                                          Baseline         Target
Indicator                                                             Actual         IEG rating
                                          (year)           (year)
Improved financial accountability
                                          0                5          5              Achieved
(number of reports to Parliament)

The result achieved shows that the reports were delivered to Parliament.

The intermediate result and outcome indicators are relevant to strengthening public expenditure management
and control. The PEFA performance indicator (PI) 29.2 is a closely related measure of the submission of
financial reports for an external audit. PI 30.2 measures the submission of audit reports to the legislature.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
PDO3: Produce timely statistics for policymaking

Rationale
Theory of change.

The primary inputs driving the changes were the investments in skills development and personnel
management systems to improve the institutional capacity of the statistical agency ISTEEBU. As a result of
the better institutional capacity, ISTEEBU would publish more timely reports with reliable statistics that should
help foster accountability and enable evidence-based policymaking. The outcome indicator selected to
assess the achievement of the objective was adequate for the task. The indicator is closer to an output than a
results indicator, but the way the objective was defined makes it adequate to assess its achievement.

Outputs–Intermediate results indicators (ICR, p. 18 and ISR#12, pp. 6-7)

The outputs derive from the activities carried out under component 3, improving ISTEEBU's institutional
capacity. The table below shows the expected intermediate results indicators, their baseline and target
values, and at project closing and IEG's assessment of achievement of the indicator target.



                                                                                          IEG
Intermediate Results Indicators                        Baseline Target         Actual
                                                                                          rating
Number of ISTEEBU staff trained and evaluated, 0                    120        136
with satisfaction in design and analysis of
statistics products
                                                                                          High
                                                       0            25%        27.9%
      Of which are female (percent)
                                                       1/1/15       12/31/21 6/30/21

                                                                                                       Page 10 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                    Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BI-Strengthening Institutional Capacity (P149176)



                                                       22.7       55.0        68 +
Beneficiaries satisfied with the quality of services
                                                                                        High
provided by the ISTEEBU (percent)
                                                       1/1/16     12/31/21 11/30/21
Integrated Household Living Conditions Survey
                                                  No        Yes      Yes       Achieved
(Yes/No)
+ The number refers to the survey conducted for the period 2019-2020; there was no
survey in FY 2020-21. (ICR, par. 33)

Outcomes (ICR, page 17 and ISR#12, p. 3)

The outcome indicator for this objective was defined as improved production of regular and timely statistics,
measured by the increased frequency of ISTEEBU yearly publications, their compliance with international
standards, and timely availability to users. The indicator was revised in the second project restructuring; from
that moment on the indicator it would be reported as "a percentage (statistics published in a timely fashion
vs. the overall number that are produced which is estimated at 66.2% this year for now (2019))"
(Restructuring paper No. RES 36131, p. 17, no date). Its purpose was to have a mechanism "to assess the
reliability of statistics being produced" (ISR #12, p. 3).

The results achieved show that ISTEEBU stepped up the production of statistics. The indicator does not
report on the timeliness of statistics produced. The review notes that a larger percentage of ISTEEBU
beneficiaries are satisfied with the quality of its services.; A law approved in May 2021 introduced significant
restrictions to collecting, accessing, and publishing data.

                                                Baseline        Target
Indicator                                                                     Actual      IEG rating
                                                (year)          (year)
                                                0               75            77.8        High
Improved production of regular and timely
statistics (percent of total)
                                                1/1/2015        12/31/2021 6/30/2021

Rating
High


OBJECTIVE 4
Objective
PDO4: Improve mining sector regulatory capacity and practices

Rationale
Theory of change.

The primary inputs driving the changes were investments in skills development, technical assistance, and
resources for analytical work and policy dialogue that could help make a functional review and reorganization
of MEM's selected departments, increase the inspection of mines and establish and maintain a national
database on mineral production and tax revenues. The expected result was better governance in the mining
sector that could lead to more transparency, increase the potential revenue from mining and foster economic
development. The outcome indicator represents an intermediate step to improve capacity and practices in the
mining sector, so it is inadequate to assess if the objective was achieved. A further problem associated with it


                                                                                                       Page 11 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BI-Strengthening Institutional Capacity (P149176)



is that after the second restructuring, the activities that supported the result were dropped, and the indicator
cannot be associated with the activities that remained, which supported objective 1.

Outputs–Intermediate results indicators (ICR, page 18)

The intermediate results indicators associated with this objective were integrated into sub-component 1.4 of
Component 1 (improved revenue collection practices from the mining sector) in support of PDO1. Because
PDO4 was never dropped from the program, it can be argued that the two results indicators associated with
mining in PDO1 also supported this objective. The restructuring paper (RES36131, p. 12) says that
"Streamlined activities to be supported will be focused on the achievement of the remaining and revised IRIs
under this sub-component (now under component 1)", which are presented in the table below for
convenience. By project closing, the ISR reports that the mining database had been established but had not
been populated with data. The results were not achieved.

Indicator                                                       Baseline Target        Actual       IEG rating
Percentage of ASM (Artisanal and Small Miners) mines            70       10            0
inspected annually that are non-compliant with the mining                                           High
regulations and mine inspection files (RES36131, p. 9)          1/1/2015    12/31/2021 6/30/2021
Basic mining data (total mine sites with permits, # of active
                                                                0
miners per site, # of cooperatives, production per mineral,                 3          0
                                                                                                 Negligible
and revenues exported) to be inputted into the national                     31/12/2021 6/30/2021
                                                                1/1/2015
database on a biannual basis.
Source: ISR#12 for dates

Outcomes (ICR, page 17)

The outcome indicator for this objective was improved management and regulatory framework in the mining
sector, measured by the achievement of key milestones, including regulations for Artisanal and Small-Scale
Mining developed, functional reviews of the selected department of MEM (Ministry of Energy and Minerals)
completed, and institutional reform plan implemented; MEM website established and operational. The two
intermediate indicators related to mining that could support achieving the objective were not achieved.

The regulatory framework was delivered before the project closing, but there is no evidence that the project
supported this result, as Component 4 was dropped from the project. Moreover, the two basic activities
associated with mining left after the second restructuring contributed to increasing tax revenue and were
transferred to Component 1, which supported PDO1.

                                                Baseline    Target
Indicator                                                                  Actual      IEG rating
                                                (year)      (year)
                                                No          Yes            Yes
Improved management and regulatory
                                                                                       Achieved
framework for the mining sector.
                                                1/1/2015    12/31/2021 6/30/2021

Rating
Negligible




                                                                                                    Page 12 of 19
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                BI-Strengthening Institutional Capacity (P149176)


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Efficacy in achieving the objectives was high in one, substantial in two and negligible in one. Overall efficacy
                            is, therefore, substantial.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   The ICR does not present a financial and economic analysis of the project because (a) there was no information
   on tax revenues, number of taxpayers, or mining production, essential to estimate financial and economic
   benefits; and (b) a significant range of macroeconomic factors outside the project's scope affect the tax to GDP
   ratio -the base for the PAD's calculations- making it difficult to attribute results to the interventions, a view with
   which the review agrees. Also, the ICR does not present the estimates because of a lack of information in the
   PAD and the first restructuring paper about the assumptions and the numbers used to estimate those benefits.
   Therefore, comparing the original estimates with the project's actual results was impossible.

   There is no information on whether tax authorities improved their operational efficiency or the cost of paying
   taxes fell. Because the Integrated Tax Administration System was not implemented, the expected cost
   reductions and revenue increases coming from the system are unlikely to have materialized. Delays in
   effectiveness also contributed to reducing the project's potential benefits, and the project's reduced scope also
   meant that the original benefits had to be scaled down.

   The reforms may have had some small impact on increasing tax revenues. Data from the IMF Article IV
   Consultation Report of 2022 (IMF Country Report No. 22/257) suggest that revenues from taxes change more
   or less at the same rate as the changes in nominal GDP. The IMF Report lists three groups of taxes for the
   period 2019/20-2021/22: (a) income, profits, and capital gains; (b) goods and services; and (c) on international
   trade and transactions (p. 31). Comparing the changes in tax revenues (a + b + c) and GDP indicates their
   relative performance. Total nominal tax revenues increased by 13 and 12 percent in 2020/21 and 2021/22,
   revenue from taxes on income and goods and services increased by 10 and 14 percent, and nominal GDP
   increased by 9 and 12 percent. The numbers suggest that, at constant prices, the increase in total tax revenue
   and revenue from taxes on income and goods and services was small. In 2020/21 and 2021/22, real GDP
   increased by 3.1 and 3.3 percent, and real revenue from taxes on income and goods and services (excludes
   foreign trade taxes) increased by one and three percent in 2020/21 and 2021/22; the numbers suggest that
   revenues responded little to changes in real income and that that the immediate impact of the reforms may have
   been small.


   Efficiency Rating
          Modest


                                                                                                                               Page 13 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      BI-Strengthening Institutional Capacity (P149176)




a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?            Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     40.00
Appraisal                                                  17.00
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     0
ICR Estimate                                                0
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The relevance of the PDO to the Government and Bank strategies is substantial. The efficacy of the four PDOs
is assessed as substantial. Efficiency is modest.

Improvements in fiscal management helped raise government revenue and improve the predictability of revenue
and tax policy. Predictability improved for aggregate revenue, but the predictability of individual sources of
revenue can still be improved. Also, the likelihood of financial accountability improved because the Supreme
Audit Institution completed the State Financial Accounts audit reports up to 2020, which were delivered to
Parliament. Last, ISTEEBU stepped up its production of statistical reports and improved the timeliness of its
publications.

Several factors contributed to reducing the project’s results: delays in implementing the project, the decision not
to implement the ITAS, the difficulties of implementing some sub-components such as the technical assistance
for macroeconomic modeling, not carrying out activities to foster the implementation of the new tax policy, the
audit institution not being fully independent, the mining database not being populated with the relevant data, and
the legislature not approving yet new regulations for ASM and the mining code. Other factors affecting project
implementation were the lack of collaboration between the government and certain donors after the political
crisis of 2015; this, in turn, created fiscal problems for the government, which reduced its support for public
financial management reform.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Several aspects represent substantial risks for maintaining the results achieved. The country lacks sufficient
absorption capacity to implement projects. The activities associated with publishing statistics and gathering
data have a substantial risk of being curtailed because of the recent legislation that imposed constraints on
these activities. Restricted access to information can lead to reduced accountability and hinders the
management and control of public expenditure. Overall, risks for the project's outcomes are substantial.


                                                                                                    Page 14 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BI-Strengthening Institutional Capacity (P149176)




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The Bank designed a project to help the government strengthen the institutional capacity to improve fiscal
  management. The project had an ambitious program of interventions and activities: four components, 15
  subcomponents, and 59 activities to be carried out in less than six years. The theory of change
  underpinning the interventions and the expected results was sound. Indicators were adequate but could
  have been improved (See Section 9). The ambitious agenda reflects an optimistic assessment of what
  was feasible to achieve, and the PAD underestimated the political and governance risks, rating it
  substantial rather than high; the PAD, as the ICR notes, said that “a change of Government is unlikely to
  generate new priorities and detract attention from the proposed operation” (par. 85). The design covered
  well the project’s technical, financial and economic aspects, its fiduciary aspects, Bank inputs and
  processes, and monitoring and evaluation arrangements.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The Bank carried out regular supervision missions, but the information provided was not used to improve
 the project's execution by resolving the issues identified. Frequent changes of task team leaders weakened
 the quality of supervision, especially of the Project Coordination Unit, and slowed down project
 implementation. The political crisis of 2015 reverberated over several months and affected the project. The
 collaboration between donors and the government deteriorated, and it froze with the Belgian government,
 which had supported the project with a US$5.2 million grant. The government abolished the Public Finance
 Reform Implementation Unit (PFRIU), and replaced it with a Planning and Monitoring and Evaluation
 Office, signaling the new policy path. The risk on absorptive capacity materialized when the PFRIU was
 abolished, as well as the political risk. Still, the Bank's optimism about the importance of reforms and the
 government's commitment to them prevented it from acting faster and more forcefully to resolve the
 problems. Despite these signals, the Bank group missed the opportunity to use the first project
 restructuring to revise some of the project's ambitious activities and targets downward.

 Supervision faltered in updating project documentation. The closing down of the PFRIU, which was
 responsible for technical coordination, was not reflected in the contractual documents and the procedures
 manual, despite the project's Steering Committee recommending updating the manual. The financing
 agreement did not reflect this change either, despite the condition in the agreement that the PFRIU "should
 be maintained at all times during the completion of the project."



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

                                                                                                  Page 15 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BI-Strengthening Institutional Capacity (P149176)




  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The PAD identified the Public Finance Reform Implementation Unit (PFRIU, also known as the Cellule) as
 the entity responsible for monitoring and reporting on project results, including the method, data sources,
 and frequency of reporting for each indicator. An M&E Specialist in the Unit would be in charge of this task.
 The PFRIU was committed to providing regular reports to the Government of Burundi and the World Bank,
 and the M&E expert would produce semi-annual reports to be posted on a dedicated project webpage in
 the Ministry of Finance website which would have the latest data for each indicator and be made available
 to beneficiaries and stakeholders of the project.

 The work to be done was clear. It is derived from the clear theory of change and objectives specified in the
 PAD. The indicators covered the outcomes of the PDO statement; the intermediate results indicators
 captured the contribution of the operation's components and outputs towards the project's objectives, but
 some of them were difficult to measure. They were dropped during the second restructuring, reducing to 10
 from 16, the number of indicators to monitor. The indicators had baseline and target values. Still, there was
 not an outcome indicator for revenue increase. A better link and explanation between the project’s
 indicators and those in the PEFA framework would have supported monitoring better (e.g., predictability of
 tax policy) and corrected some shortcomings in their definition (e.g., delivery of audit reports to Parliament).



b. M&E Implementation
  The Project Implementation Unit (PIU) monitored activities and results and compliance with fiduciary
  procedures. The PIU gathered information about the indicators included in the results framework, but
  there is no information about the methodology of data collection, analysis, and project performance
  monitoring; therefore, the data collected for some indicators lack an explanation about the collection
  method. The reports submitted to the Steering Committee were produced on time but did not include
  comprehensive data, results from each sub-activity, or corrective actions.

  During the second project restructuring, the Bank modified the intermediate results indicators, reducing
  them from 16 to 10. Of the 16, eight indicators were dropped, three were revised, two were new, and five
  were unchanged. Some indicators could not be measured or lacked relevance for achieving the
  intermediate results. Others were revised to avoid duplication of indicators and align them with the
  revised PDO indicators.



c. M&E Utilization
  The ICR does not report if and how the information was used to affect project performance.




                                                                                                     Page 16 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BI-Strengthening Institutional Capacity (P149176)




  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Classified as category C, the project did not trigger any safeguard policy.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial. The ICR informs that the project’s financial statements were audited annually and audit opinions
   were unqualified during project implementation.

   Procurement management. The ICR does not report any issues.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   The ICR does not report any.



d. Other
   Gender. The project sought to improve the capacity of female employees in ISTEEBU by ensuring that a
   quarter of the trainees were women. This was achieved. .

   Poverty reduction. The project supported actions that were expected to increase fiscal space and deliver
   essential public services. While this could be a potential impact of the program, the ICR does not present
   evidence about its impact on poverty reduction.

   Institutional strengthening. The production of statistics improved, but this impact is already accounted for
   under PDO3.




11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                     IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment


                                                                                                  Page 17 of 19
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       BI-Strengthening Institutional Capacity (P149176)



                                   Moderately
Outcome                                                    Moderately Satisfactory
                                   Satisfactory
                                   Moderately
Bank Performance                                           Moderately Satisfactory
                                   Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                     Substantial             Substantial

Quality of ICR                     ---                     Substantial


12. Lessons

With some revisions by IEG, the ICR presents the following lessons,:

        Addressing governance and public financial management problems in contexts with low
         capacity and an environment of fragility, conflict, and violence (FCV) requires long-term
         commitments by the national authorities and the donor community. It also requires a
         thorough analysis of the country's political economy and risk analysis of the political
         conditions to be ready to redesign the project to tackle these events and makes it possible to
         achieve the assistance's goals.

        A government is more likely to capture and maintain the gains in capacity building if the PIU
         is staffed with civil servants rather than consultants –local or foreign– who tend to disperse
         after the project ends.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR informs well about main project developments and has good information in the annexes to
complement that in the main text. It is worth noting its small number of lessons, supported in some instances by
its analysis; the lesson on the benefits of staffing the PIU with a diverse group of civil servants, while appealing
and perhaps sound, does not flow from the analysis in the main text. The ICR could have improved the quality
of its assessment of objectives 1 and 2 by linking the project’s results indicators with the PEFA performance
indicators associated with them and by using the information in the Ministry of Finance website to assess the
predictability of tax policy as recommended in the PEFA methodology.

The section assessing efficiency does not present estimates of financial and economic benefits based on the
project's results; it summarizes the estimates of the PAD and first restructuring paper, which is unnecessary to
assess actual efficiency.




                                                                                                      Page 18 of 19
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  BI-Strengthening Institutional Capacity (P149176)



a. Quality of ICR Rating
   Substantial




                                                                                   Page 19 of 19
