     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: Dam Rehabilitation & Improvement (P089985)



                                                                                Report Number: ICRR0023265

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P089985                                    IN: Dam Rehabilitation & Improvement

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 India                                      Water


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-79430,IBRD-89090,IDA-47870           31-Dec-2016                                        298,394,101.77

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 29-Jun-2010                               31-Mar-2021

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                          350,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                           307,877,655.98                                              0.00

 Actual                                       298,394,101.77                                              0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Hassan Wally               Peter Nigel Freeman          Ramachandra Jammi              IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) of the Dam Rehabilitation and Improvement Project (DRIP) as
   articulated in the Loan Agreement (page 5) was almost identical (except where underlined) to the one in the
   Project Appraisal Document (PAD. paragraph 20) and aimed to:

   "improve the safety and operational performance of selected existing dams in the Borrower's
   territory."


                                                                                                 Page 1 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: Dam Rehabilitation & Improvement (P089985)



   In the PAD the underlined was stated as: "in the territory of the participating states."

   Parsing the PDO. The PDO will be parsed according to the following two objectives:

   1. To improve the safety performance of selected existing dams in the Borrower's territory.

   2. To improve the operational performance of selected existing dams in the Borrower's territory.




b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  14-Jul-2015

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The PDO was supported by the following three components:

   1. Rehabilitation and Improvement of Dams and Associated Appurtenances (appraisal cost:
   US$378.40 million, IBRD Loan: US$151.36, IDA Credit: US$151.36, actual cost: US$333.59
   million, IBRD Loan: US$143.00 million, IDA Credit: US$120.10 million). This component would focus on
   structural and non-structural measures at 223 project dams, many of which were more than 25 years old.
   The number of dams proposed for inclusion in the project was based on proposals received from the four
   participating states. The states had done a review of the status of their dams and determined those dams
   that were most in need of rehabilitation and improvement in order to guarantee their future safety and
   operational capacity. The proposed interventions would include, but not be limited to, such works as:
   treatment of leakage through masonry and concrete dams and reduction of seepage through earth dams;
   improving dam drainage; improving the ability to withstand higher floods, including additional flood handling
   facilities, as required by the hydrological assessments, accompanied by structural strengthening of dams;
   non-structural measures to cater for higher design floods in case structural measures are physically not
   feasible; rehabilitation and improvement of spillways, head regulators, draw-off gates and their operating
   mechanisms, stilling basins, and downstream spillway channels; improving approach roads; improving
   office and housing accommodation; and improving dam safety instrumentation. The project would also
   support hydrological assessments and specialized consulting services, e.g. for the design of state-of-the art,
   but affordable instrumentation. In addition, preparation and implementation of asset management plans,
   emergency preparedness plans, emergency warning systems, public awareness campaigns, and floodplain
   mapping would be included in all states. Operators of dams, state design organizations, and engineering

                                                                                                      Page 2 of 22
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    IN: Dam Rehabilitation & Improvement (P089985)



  cells in Water Resources Departments (WRDs) and SEBs would provide design services and day-to-day
  construction supervision. Consulting services for the more complicated design and third-party supervision
  services and specialized tasks would be recruited to assist WRDs and State Electricity Boards (SEBs), as
  needed.

  2. Dam Safety Institutional Strengthening (appraisal cost: US$25.20 million, IBRD Loan: US$10.08,
  IDA Credit: US$10.08, actual cost: US$21.86 million, IBRD Loan: US$11.77 million, IDA Credit:
  US$5.59 million). This component would focus on strengthening the regulatory and technical frameworks
  for dam safety assurance. The activities to be carried out would include, but not be limited to, targeted
  training nationally (especially at the National Water Academy in Pune) and internationally to Dam Safety
  Organizations at Central (CDSO) and State (SDSO) level to become effective organizations that could take
  the lead in ensuring that dams remain safe from a structural and operational point of view; in-country and
  external training of staff of WRDs and SEBs to assist with the development of appropriate skills and modern
  tools to adequately operate and maintain dams; attendance at dam safety courses; study tours, and linking
  with foreign country agencies that have advanced dam safety programs such as the United States and
  Switzerland; operation of independent dam safety review panels, comprising experts in relevant disciplines;
  development of capacity to carry out reservoir sedimentation studies; development of Management
  Information Systems (MIS) and other programs to capture and analyze data for long-term planning and
  guiding of dam operations; support to the further development within CWC of the Dam Health and
  Rehabilitation Monitoring Application (DHARMA) program that would allow a systematic presentation and
  interpretation of data for effective monitoring of the health of dams; support to the revision of existing
  guidelines on dam safety and preparation of new guidelines, as needed; and training in hazard and
  vulnerability assessment and dam-break analysis.

  3. Project Management (appraisal cost: US$33.90 million, IBRD Loan: US$13.56, IDA Credit:
  US$13.56, actual cost: US$35.37 million, IBRD Loan: US$13.46 million, IDA Credit: US$13.96 million).
  This component would fund activities related to project management. The overall responsibility for project
  oversight and coordination would be under the Dam Safety Rehabilitation Directorate in the Central Dam
  Safety Organization (CDSO) of the Central Water Commission (CWC). This Directorate would act as the
  Central Project Management Unit (CPMU). The Directorate would be assisted by a management and
  engineering consulting firm. Each state would establish a State Project Management Unit (SPMU) attached
  to the WRD Chief Engineer’s (CE) office in charge of the State Dam Safety Organization (SDSO). This Unit
  would have direct responsibility for the coordination and management of the project at state level.

  Revised Components
  According to the ICR (paragraph 18) "The rehabilitation and improvement activities for the Hirakud dam in
  Odisha and some non-structural and institutional strengthening activities were added through the AF. The
  AF increased the funding for the three components without revising their overall scope."



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost. The total project cost at appraisal was estimated at US$557.70 million. This amount was
  revised downwards to US$459.44 million. The actual cost according to the ICR Data Sheet (page 2) was
  US$390.82 million. The difference was due to lower than anticipated disbursements from IBRD loan, IDA
  Credit and borrower contribution (see below for details).




                                                                                                Page 3 of 22
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  IN: Dam Rehabilitation & Improvement (P089985)



Financing. The project was financed through a Bank Loan that totaled US$350.00 million. This loan was
composed of an International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) Variable Spread Loan
(VSL), repayment in 30 years, including 5 years grace period, worth US$175.00 million and an International
Development Association (IDA) Credit (repayment in 35 years, including 10 years grace period) worth
US$175.00 million. The project also received additional financing (AF approved on February 28, 2019) in
the form of an IBRD Loan of US$137 million. According to the ICR (paragraph 19) the AF was to "finance
the additional project cost." With the AF the total Bank financing was US$487.00 million. This amount was
revised downwards to a total of US$307.88 million with the original IDA Credit revised down to US$139.65
million, the original IBRD loan to US$139.65 million, and the AF revised down to US$28.58 million. The
actual disbursed amount totaled US$298.39 million composed of original IBRD loan of US$139.65 million,
IDA Credit of US$130.17 million, and IBRD AF of US$28.58 million (ICR data Sheet, page 2). The total
financing changed at project closing mainly because of currency fluctuation (significant currency fluctuation
occurred during implementation where the exchange rates changed from US$1 = INR 48 at appraisal to
US$1 = INR 73 at closing), including the cancellation of US$35.35 million from the original IBRD Loan and
US$35.35 million from the IDA Credit in 2014 (ICR, paragraph 22). Also, AF was reduced from US$137.00
million to US$14.12 million at closing through multiple cancellations that totaled US$108.43 million, while
US$21.88 million remained undisbursed at project closing. According to the ICR (paragraph 22) "this large
reduction in use of AF was mainly caused by cancelation of works at Hirakud Dam."

Borrower Contribution. The borrower was expected to provide US$70.70 million of counterpart funding.
This amount was revised upwards to US$151.56 million. The actual amount contributed was US$92.43
million (ICR, Data Sheet, page 2).

Dates. The project was approved on June 29, 2010 and became effective 22 months later on April 18,
2012. The Mid-Term Review (MTR) was conducted on October 17, 2014, about 3.5 years into
effectiveness. The PAD had a planned MTR on May 1, 2012, but given the delay in effectiveness, the timing
of the MTR was reasonable. The project closed on March 31, 2021 compared to a planned closing date on
December 31, 2016. The four years and three months beyond the original closing date were to compensate
for the delay in effectiveness and to ensure a sufficiently long project implementation duration as well as
compensate for delays due to Covid-19 restrictions (ICR, paragraph 25). The project received one
Additional Financing (AF) of US$137.00 million on February 28, 2019.

The project was restructured 8 times, all of which were Level 2 restructuring as follows:

1. On February 28, 2013, when the amount disbursed was US$5.07 million, in order to change
disbursement estimates.

2. On April 7, 2014, when the amount disbursed was US$7.14 million, in order to change components and
cost and US$70.70 million of financing was cancelled.

3. On September 26, 2014, when the amount disbursed was US$9.35 million, in order to change the
implementing agency.

4. On July 14, 2015, when the amount disbursed was US$19.01 million, in order to change the
implementing agency, change the Results Framework (RF), the changes in respect of the number of dams
(design floods; stability and seepage; and having basic safety facilities) were relatively minor but there was
a substantial increase in the number of emergency response plans (60 to 150) indicating that the authorities



                                                                                                 Page 4 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: Dam Rehabilitation & Improvement (P089985)



   were taking this aspect very seriously change, components and cost, change the institutional
   arrangements, change Financial Management, and change Procurement.

   5. On May 25, 2017, when the amount disbursed was US$99.84 million, in order to change the Loan closing
   date from December 31, 2016 to June 30, 2018.

   6. On June 19, 2020, when the amount disbursed was US$255.64 million, in order to change the
   Implementing Agency, change the Results Framework, change components and cost, change the original
   Loan closing date from June 30, 2018 to June 29, 2020 and the closing date of the DRIP-AF was extended
   once from June 29, 2020, to March 31, 2021, cancellation of US$8.10 million from the DRIP-AF financing,
   and reallocate funds between disbursement categories.

   7. On December 3, 2020, when the amount disbursed was US$277.84 million, in order
   to change components and cost, cancel financing, reallocate funds between disbursement categories.

   8. On March 18, 2021, when the amount disbursed was US$283.15 million, in order to change in
   components and cost, cancel financing, reallocate funds between disbursement categories.

   Rationale for Changes and their Implications for the Original Theory of Change.

   The above-mentioned changes were justified and did not impact the Theory of Change. Changes were
   justified because the project experienced a considerable delay in effectiveness. This delay resulted in
   staffing issues and "none of the State Project Management Units (SPMUs) were adequately staffed at the
   time of project effectiveness (ICR, paragraph 25)." Also, India had a limited number of contractors with the
   requisite expertise in dam rehabilitation during early implementation of the project. During implementation,
   other Indian states, namely, Karnataka and dam agencies in Jharkhand and Uttarakhand joined the
   project. The RF was revised after it was determined that some small auxiliary dams did not need specific
   dam safety measures. Cancellation of financing was due to significant currency fluctuation occurred during
   implementation as noted above. Also, the cancellation of the Hirakud Dam additional spillway and the
   cancellation of the Damodar Valley Corporation (DVC) project allocation as well as savings in project
   management costs, all of which contributed to cancellation of financing. Finally, the COVID-19 disruptions
   necessitated the extension of the closing date of the DRIP-AF by nine months for an additional construction
   season to allow more time to finish construction works.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Context at Appraisal. Many large dams in India were ageing and had various structural deficiencies as
well as shortcomings in their operation and monitoring facilities. In most states, budgets for dam O&M were
part of the larger budget for irrigation system maintenance, which was typically decided on the basis of
irrigated area rather than need-based. This project would act as a pilot, showing how to return dams to fully
operational and safe condition in a technically and financially sustainable manner, in addition to building the
needed capacity to monitor the performance of dams.



                                                                                                     Page 5 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: Dam Rehabilitation & Improvement (P089985)



Previous Bank Experience. The Bank has extensive experience with water management projects in India.
This includes the following projects: Hydrology Project Phase II, Madhya Pradesh Water Sector
Restructuring Project, Maharashtra Water Sector Improvement Project, Tamil Nadu Irrigated Agriculture
Modernization and Water Bodies Restoration and Management Project, and Orissa Community Tanks
Management Project. In addition, the Bank has similar experiences in other regions of the world including in
Central Asia and China, among others. Based on its long involvement in the water sector and experience
with the institutions involved both at the center and in the states, the Bank was well placed to assist India in
developing the institutional framework required to
support and implement India's existing regulations and procedures in dam safety. In addition, the Bank has
much global and regional experience to support dam rehabilitation and improvement operations. Also, the
Bank’s experiences with disaster risk management can assist the state governments with a better
management of the dams and flood waters.

Consistency with Bank Strategies. At appraisal, the PDO was in line with the Bank's Country
Assistance Strategy for the Republic of India (CAS, FY2009-FY2012), which focused on the development of
infrastructure and support for the poorer states. The PDO was also in line with the Bank’s water resources
strategy which emphasized that: (i) water resources development and management were central to
sustainable growth and poverty reduction; (ii) the Bank needed to assist countries in developing and
maintaining appropriate stocks of well-performing hydraulic infrastructure; and (iii) the Bank’s water
assistance must be tailored to a country’s specific circumstances and be consistent with the overarching
country strategies. The PDO was also in line with two important objectives of the Bank’s Operational Policy
on “Safety of Dams” (OP 4.37), namely, (i) to work with borrowing countries to strengthen their institutional,
legislative, and regulatory frameworks for dam safety programs; and (ii) to ensure that the borrower adopts
and implements adequate dam safety measures for the design, bid tendering, construction, and O&M of the
dam and associated works.

At completion, the PDO continued to be in line with the current Bank Country Partnership Framework (CPF,
FY18–22). The PDO directly supported the first focus area of the CPF: “Promoting resource-efficient
growth”. The project aimed to: enhance the sustainable and efficient management of water resources,
and contribute to more resource-efficient growth in the rural sector through better and more reliable
irrigation supply from the dams (CPF Focus Area 1.1), improved living conditions and sustainability of cities
through improved water supply for domestic drinking water and industrial use (CPF Focus Area 1.2),
increased access to sustainable energy by strengthening dam safety and operation for better hydropower
generation (CPF Focus Area 1.4), and enhanced disaster risk management through better drought and
flood management (CPF Focus Area 1.5). The CPF also identified climate-smart engagement as a cross-
cutting theme. The project contributed to climate-smart engagement through improving dam safety and
disaster risk management.

Consistency with Government Strategies. At appraisal, the PDO was in line with India's National Water
Policy (April 2002). The strategy had a section on safety of hydraulic structures, where it indicated that
there should be proper organizational arrangements at the national and state levels for ensuring the safety
of storage dams and other water-related structures. The PDO was also in line with the Dam Safety Act
(updated in 2008) which called for regular inspections of all large dams and establishing functional
independent dam safety review panels.

At completion, the PDO continued to be in line with the government’s priorities for dam safety and climate
change at project closure. Dam safety continued to be considered a national priority as indicated by the
approval of the DRIP-II before the closing date of the DRIP. The PDO was in line with the Dam Safety

                                                                                                      Page 6 of 22
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                       Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      IN: Dam Rehabilitation & Improvement (P089985)



               Act (December 2021), which emphasized the importance of dam safety in the country and mandates the
               establishment of dam safety institutions and the setting up of a National Dam Safety Fund. The 2021 Act
               provided legally binding framework for improving the O&M funding and sustainability of dams. The ICR
               (paragraph 28) stated that "the government also realizes that the optimum use of existing dams and
               guaranteeing their safety under climate change impacts are becoming increasingly important."

               Level of Ambition of the PDO. The PDO was pitched at an appropriate level of ambition given the Bank's
               experience in India and globally. Climate change impacts were addressed in hydrological assessments,
               emergency management, O&M, and retrofitting of dams. Moreover, the project introduced a number of
               advanced technologies (ICR, paragraph 38).

               Summary of Relevance of Objectives Assessment. The PDO statement was clear and focused and with
               an adequate level of ambition. Objectives were also in line with the Bank strategies and the GoI's priorities
               for dam safety and climate priorities. Therefore, Relevance of Objectives is rated High.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To improve the safety performance of selected existing dams in the Borrower's territory.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change (ToC). To achieve the stated objective, the project would support dam rehabilitation and
                             improvement through: (i) structural rehabilitation including: leakage treatment, seepage reduction, dam
                             drainage development, and improvement of spillways, head regulators and gates; (ii) non-structural measures
                             including: establishing an asset management plan, emergency preparation and warning systems, and
                             hydrological assessments. These activities were expected to: 1. Improve safety of project dams, specifically,
                             dams would be able to safely cater for designed floods; dams would show acceptable stability and seepage;
                             and basic dam safety facilities would be established in place, 2. Contribute to improved operational
                             performance pf project dams. Anticipated long-term outcomes would be enhanced dam safety to ensure
                             water security and strengthening of disaster risk management.

                             The achievement of the PDO was underpinned by the following assumptions: 1. Some initially selected dams
                             might be replaced by other dams if more urgent rehabilitation works emerged, and 2. More States/Institutions
                             were expected to participate in the project during implementation.

                             The stated activities in the ToC were directly connected to the PDO in a plausible causal chain. The
                             assumptions that underpinned the achievement of the PDO were realistic.


                                                                                                                              Page 7 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   IN: Dam Rehabilitation & Improvement (P089985)



Outputs

The following outputs were reported by the ICR (Annex 1) unless referenced otherwise.

      186 project dams had the improved ability (structural or non-structural) to safely cater for the design
       floods (original target: 200, revised target: 198; achievement rate based on the revised target: 94%).
      191 project dams had acceptable stability and seepage (original target: 200, revised target: 198;
       achievement rate based on the revised target: 96%).
      198 project dams had basic dam safety facilities in place (original target: 200, revised target: 198;
       achievement rate based on the revised target: 100%). The access of 153 dams was improved with
       approach roads, bridges, and culverts; external lighting was provided at 101 dams; security systems
       were installed at 65; gallery lighting was improved at 27; critical equipment for emergency support was
       supplied to 69; central monitoring and control systems were installed at 26; staff facilities and other
       buildings were constructed or rehabilitated at 115; and environment protection measures were
       implemented at 15 dams. In addition, various monitoring instruments were installed at 118 dams,
       including 109 hydro-meteorological instruments, 95 geotechnical instruments, 73 geodetic
       instruments, and 43 seismic instruments. (ICR, paragraph 36).
      198 project dams had the revised dam flood hydrology assessed and actions agreed to address
       changes in design parameters (original target: 223, revised target: 198; achievement rate based on
       the revised target: 100%).
      189 project dams had the necessary remedial measures reviewed and addressed (original target: 223,
       revised target: 198; achievement rate based on the revised target: 100%).

Outcomes

      The project improved the ability of the project dams to cater the revised design floods. Revised design
       floods were calculated for all 198 dam projects (target achieved) in accordance with the new
       standards and according to the latest hydrological and meteorological data available. Improving the
       ability of the project dams to cater the revised design floods was achieved through the rehabilitation or
       reconstruction of spillway channels, additional spillway gates or increase in spillway length, re-
       sectioning of dams, construction of parapet walls, and construction of fuse plugs (ICR, paragraph 34).
       By project completion, 189 project dams had the necessary remedial measures reviewed and
       addressed compared to a target of 198 and a baseline of none. The project also supported non-
       structural measures, such as flood routing and reservoir management, pre-release reservoir water
       based on flood warning, and the preparation and implementation of emergency action plans (EAPs).
       By project completion 186 dams had improved ability to cater the revised design floods (Outcome
       Indicator 1) compared to a baseline of 60 dams and a revised target of 198 dams.
      The project also increased the number of dams with acceptable stability and seepage from a baseline
       of 7 to a total of 191 dams (outcome indicator 2). According to the ICR (paragraph 35) the project
       identified 80 dams with seepage-related and 169 with structural stability-related deficiencies. Seepage
       issues were addressed through seepage control measures for masonry/concrete dams included
       raking and pointing of upstream face with UV resistant high strength mortar; dam body grouting,
       treatment of contraction joints, upstream face geo-membrane; and for embankment dams include
       grouting of foundation and provision of cut-off. While structural stability was addressed
       through stability measures that included: embankment dam re-sectioning or repair of deformed slopes,
       repair of upstream embankment and downstream slope protection, masonry/concrete dam reaming of
       porous and foundation drains, masonry/concrete dam backing concrete, and repair of abutments (ICR,

                                                                                                   Page 8 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   IN: Dam Rehabilitation & Improvement (P089985)



       paragraph 35). The ICR (paragraph 35) noted that seven dams had critical stability and seepage
       issues were not effectively addressed due to the need for more detailed investigation and
       comprehensive approaches, but these were being addressed under DRIP-II.
      The project improved dam safety facilities for 198 dams compared to a revised baseline of 16
       (outcome indicator 3, target fully achieved. The project identified 182 dams as lacking one or more
       safety facilities for an effective response to the emergency situations. This was achieved through
       improving access; installing security systems; improving gallery lighting; supplying critical equipment
       for emergency support; installing central monitoring and control systems; rehabilitating or constructing
       staff facilities and other buildings were ; and implementing environment protection measures. In
       addition, various monitoring instruments were installed including: hydro-meteorological instruments,
       geotechnical instruments, geodetic instruments, and seismic instruments. According to the ICR
       (paragraph 36) "these facilities met the basic needs of each dam to monitor and record structural
       behaviors, displacements, seepages, to forewarn dam operators on possible risks, and to ensure
       proper operations in an emergency."

Summary of Efficacy Assessment. The evidence provided in the ICR point to the success of the project
in improving the safety performance of selected existing dams in the Borrower's territory through integrated
structural and non-structural measures. One outcome indicator target was fully achieved and two outcome
targets were substantially achieved, and one intermediate outcome indicator target was fully achieved, while
another was substantially achieved. Based on this, the efficacy with which this objective was achieved is
rated Substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To improve the operational performance of selected existing dams in the Borrower's territory.



Rationale
Theory of Change (ToC). To achieve the stated objective, the project would support institutional
strengthening through: strengthening of the central and state Dam Safety Organizations (DSOs); provide
training and capacity building activities to dam personnel; support further development of the Dam Health and
Rehabilitation Monitoring Application (DHARM) program within the Central Water Commission (CWC); and
revise and develop guidelines. These activities were expected to strengthen DSO offices to carry out their
mandated functions adequately, project dams would have adequately trained staff who could implement the
approved operation manuals, grievances would be satisfactorily resolved, and the number of skilled women
professional would be increased in dam operations and management. This would collectively result in
improved operational performance of project dams in terms of: project dams with need-based O&M plans
operationalized; required budget per state for adequate O&M; and project dams where emergency response
plans prepared and disseminated to the population. Anticipated long-term outcomes would be enhanced dam
safety to ensure water security and strengthening of disaster risk management.


                                                                                                  Page 9 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   IN: Dam Rehabilitation & Improvement (P089985)



The ToC lacked specific assumptions that underpinned the achievement of this objective. Overall, the causal
connection between the stated activities and the expected outcomes was clear. However, it was not clear in
the ToC the means that would help states get the required budget for adequate O&M.

Outputs

The following outputs were reported by the ICR (Annex 1) unless referenced otherwise.

      55% of the required budget per state had adequate O&M (baseline: 50% - ICR stated it should be
         33%, original target: 80%, achievement rate: 67%).
        198 project dams had been registered with the data uploaded in Dam Asset Management System
         (original target: 180, revised target: 198, target achieved).
        190 project dams had updated and approved dam operational manuals (original target: 180, revised
         target: 150, over achieved).
        Over 5,400 personnel have been trained during 185 national training programs with a total of 982
         female officials participating in the training (ICR, paragraph 45).
        9 academic institutions were supported by the project for upgradation of testing laboratories,
         equipment, and software. In addition, academic institutes conducted 55 training programs in various
         domains of dam safety, benefitting about 1,100 State Officials from the DRIP IAs (ICR, paragraph 45).
        58% of grievances had been satisfactorily resolved by the project level GRC (original target: 75,
         achievement rate: 77%).
        57% of skilled women professionals worked in dam operations and management - Kerala -WRD
         (target: 25%, over achieved).
        5 skilled women professionals worked in dam operations and management under DRIP – Uttarakhand
         (target: 10, achievement rate: 50%).
        13 guidelines and manuals were prepared under the project to ensure uniformity and standardization
         of various procedures across the country (ICR, paragraph 46).

Outcome

      By project completion 190 dams had need-based O&M plans prepared/updated and operationalized
       (baseline: 50, revised baseline: 0, original target: 150, achievement rate 127%). In India, prior to the
       project dam safety practices varied among states and organizations. In 2018, with project support, a
       “Guideline for Preparing Operation and Maintenance Manual for Dams” was published. It provided the
       basis for preparing the need-based dam O&M plans. The Guideline included procedures to ensure
       dam safety for finalization of the annual O&M budget based on asset management plans. It
       also covered various dam details including: description and operation of the dam, inspections and
       maintenance, instrumentation and monitoring and assigned responsibilities for physical operations
       and maintenance (ICR, paragraph 40).
      Through project support, 55% of the required budget per state had adequate O&M (baseline: 50%,
       revised baseline: 33%, original target: 80%, achievement rate: 67%). The project supported policy
       reforms at the Central and State levels, thereby developing a conducive atmosphere for O&M budget
       allocation. The project also contributed to creating awareness about the importance of dam safety
       budgets among policy makers and administrators (ICR, paragraph 41). The ICR (paragraph 41) noted
       that the project laid the foundation to issue and implement the Dam Safety Act, which stipulated the
       need for adequate O&M funds for dams. Under the Act, GoI was considering institutionalizing a


                                                                                                Page 10 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   IN: Dam Rehabilitation & Improvement (P089985)



         national level “Dam Safety Fund” for the O&M and periodic rehabilitation of its large portfolio of dams
         (ICR, paragraph 41). Support to the implementation of the Dam Safety Act would continue under
         DRIP-II.
        By project completion, 185 project dams had emergency response plans prepared and approved
         (original target: 80, revised target: 150, over achieved). However, these were partially disseminated
         due to the COVID-19 impacts. In 2016, under the guidance of the project, the “Guidelines for
         Developing Emergency Action Plans for Dams” was published, which included 223 dam break
         analyses coupled with flood inundation maps. Built on these analyses, the185 Emergency Action
         Plans (EAPs) were prepared and approved. At project closing, 78 EAPs were disseminated (original
         target: 60, revised target: 150, achievement rate: 52%). The ICR (paragraph 42) stated that
         dissemination would continue after project closure once COVID-19 was under control. The ICR also
         noted that EAPs for the remaining dams in India will be developed following the guideline published
         under this project.
        Also, 198 dams had asset management plans prepared and implemented (original target: 180, revised
         target: 198, target achieved). This system provided a tool to register and track the asset information
         for project dams, and allowed the preparation of maintenance requirements and the O&M budget in a
         transparent manner (ICR, paragraph 43). The project also supported the CWC to develop the a web-
         based tool to support the effective collection and management of authentic asset and health data for
         all large dams in India (DHARMA was launched nationally in January 2018). This tool would help India
         on a long term basis for management as well as monitoring of safety and health status of dams as
         envisaged in Dam Safety Act. Details of all 198 dams under DRIP were uploaded in DHARMA
         (original target: 180, revised target: 198, target achieved). The ICR (paragraph 43) noted that data on
         1,500 dams-beyond the scope of the project, were registered in DHARMA.
        The project strengthened the institutional arrangement on dam safety, with eight DSO offices
         established and/or strengthened to carry out mandated functions on dam safety (original target: 4,
         revised target: 9, achievement rate: 88%). All dams in any State were under the jurisdiction of the
         State DSO for safety inspections, analysis of information from inspections, and preparation of reports
         and recommendations on dam safety and remedial measures. Training was provided to officials of
         DRIP-states and non-DRIP states included technical topics, topics related to project protocols such as
         preparation of Project Screening Template (PST), DHARMA application, and utilization and
         management of dam safety instruments. With the comprehensive training program, 196 dams had
         adequately trained staff to implement the approved operation manual (baseline: 50, original target:
         150, over achieved).
        Finally, climate change impacts were addressed in hydrological assessments, emergency
         management, O&M, and retrofitting of dams. The hydrological assessments used the latest
         meteorological and hydrological data, incorporating recent climate change impacts on rainfall and the
         increasing frequency and intensity of extreme events (ICR, paragraph 47). Therefore it is plausible to
         conclude that the project interventions enhanced the resilience to climate change.

Summary of Efficacy Assessment. The evidence provided in the ICR and in the above-mentioned
discussion revealed that the project supported relevant activities to improve the operational performance of
selected existing dams in the Borrower's territory. However, the RF lacked relevant indicators to measure the
improvement in the operational performance of selected existing dams compared to the situation prior to the
project intervention. Also, the end target on the required O&M budgets was not yet fully achieved. Therefore,
the efficacy with which this objective was achieved is rated Modest as it is difficult to assess the impact of the
project activities on improving the dam operational performance.


                                                                                                    Page 11 of 22
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               IN: Dam Rehabilitation & Improvement (P089985)




                            Rating
                            Modest


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Overall Efficacy is rated Substantial. The project succeeded in improving the safety performance of
                            selected existing dams in the Borrower's territory (PDO1) through integrated structural and non-structural
                            measures. The project also supported relevant activities to improve the operational performance of selected
                            existing dams in the Borrower's territory (PDO2). However, an accurate assessment of PDO2 was not
                            possible as the Results Framework lacked relevant indicators to comprehensively measure this objective.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



   5. Efficiency
   Economic and Financial Analysis (EFA)

   ex ante

                               The base level of the economic rate of return (ERR), undertaken in 2009 constant prices, was estimated
                                at 37% for a 90% (one order of magnitude) rate of risk reduction, under a 12% discount rate. The
                                analysis for DRIP included only annual net incomes from agricultural production and electricity generated
                                from hydropower dams and replacement costs of houses at the extent of 30%.
                               The analysis for DRIP followed the advised practice of making an overall assessment of the probability of
                                failure (POF) based on a risk reduction by 0.1 (i.e. one order of magnitude) between the with/without
                                project alternatives (WIP/WOP).
                               Sensitivity analysis was undertaken, assuming other ratios of the POF, cost overrun, and delays and/or
                                reduction in benefits. At the assumed rates of risk reduction at 0.5 and 0.8, the results show that the ERR
                                would reduce to 35 and 32%, respectively. The threshold level of an ERR of 12% was met when the rate
                                of risk reduction is 1.69. ERRs would still be above the level of opportunity cost of capital of 12%t,
                                ranging from 33% when project costs overrun by 20%, and 24% with a combination of 20% cost overrun
                                and 2 years delayed benefits.

   ex post



                                                                                                                             Page 12 of 22
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      IN: Dam Rehabilitation & Improvement (P089985)



      The EFA at completion estimated the mean Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR) at 43% with a
       Net Present Value (NPV) of US$558 million at 12% discount rate. The mean EIRR excluded 10 dam
       projects that served large agricultural areas and skewed the mean EIRR higher to 192% when included
       in the analysis.
      The economic returns were analyzed for each individual dam project, with INR 21,540 million spending
       across the 198 dam projects in seven states. Beside the benefit estimates at appraisal, the ex post
       analysis also included benefit estimates for fisheries in the affected reservoirs.
      Sensitivity Analysis. The same sensitivity analysis scenarios at appraisal were used at completion. When
       all project costs were increased by 20%, the overall EIRR decreased to 35%, close to the estimate at
       appraisal. When all project benefits were delayed two years, the overall EIRR decreases to 25%.
      Implementation Efficiency. The project experienced a two year delays in effectiveness. The ICR
       (paragraph 52) attributed this delay to the complexity of the project involving the Central and State
       participation which required high level government review and approval. This two year delay had a
       cascading effect as it resulted "in the weakening of capacity of PMUs as most staff moved to other
       positions and also resulted in delay in procurement of EMC services" (ICR, paragraph 65). There were
       also delays that stemmed from difficulties in attracting contractors, and the long approval time for de-
       siltation activities. Also, due to the COVID-19 lockdown, the project lost eight months of implementation
       time and missed a full construction season (ICR, paragraph 67). The ICR (paragraph 65) also noted that
       India had "little capacity and experience to prepare and implement such a large number of dam
       rehabilitation and improvement activities." Worth noting also is that the construction/working period of
       dam safety interventions in India is relatively short as most structural interventions could only be
       constructed from January to June during the non-monsoon period. In conclusion, while the project
       experienced implementation delays, the majority of activities were successfully implemented.

Summary of Efficiency Analysis. The ex post EIRR at 43% exceeded the ex ante estimate at 37%. The
project experienced about a four year delay beyond the original closing date. The project was initially
implemented in four states, but was scaled up to seven states. The AF (US$137 million) was meant to finance
the additional project cost of US$113.5 million associated with new dam rehabilitation and improvement
activities as well as the US$87.5 million financing gap that was created by an earlier cancellation. Some delays
were beyond the control of the project as in the case of COVID-19 restrictions. Overall, efficiency is rated
Substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                    0
 Appraisal                                                 37.00
                                                                                     Not Applicable
                                                                                    0
 ICR Estimate                                              43.00
                                                                                     Not Applicable


                                                                                                   Page 13 of 22
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      IN: Dam Rehabilitation & Improvement (P089985)



* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of Objectives was rated High. Overall Efficacy was rated Substantial. The project
succeeded in improving the safety performance of selected existing dams in the Borrower's territory (PDO1)
through integrated structural and non-structural measures. The project also supported relevant activities
to improve the operational performance of selected existing dams in the Borrower's territory (PDO2). However,
an accurate assessment of PDO2 was not possible as the Results Framework lacked relevant indicators to
comprehensively measure this objective. Efficiency was rated Substantial. The ex post EIRR at 43% exceeded
the ex ante estimate at 37%.

Based on the assigned rating for the three criteria (Relevance of Objectives, Overall Efficacy and Efficiency), the
Outcome of the project is rated Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The following risks could potentially impact the Development Outcome:

1. The risk related to securing adequate financing for O&M operations. Public funds were not enough to
close the financing gap for O&M, which may impact development outcomes (ICR, paragraph 80). This
situation was expected to be partially mitigated under DRIP-II which will support the implementation of the
Dam Safety Act (2021) that stipulates the adequate funding of O&M and the establishment of a National
Dam Safety Fund and further address the challenges of O&M financing gap.

2. Environmental risk. While India is prone to climate change impacts, this risk will be addressed through the
non-structural measures, such as the Emergency Action Plans (EAPs) and warning systems supported by
the project.

3. Operational risk. The project supported strengthening institutional staff capacity which was expected to
improve the capacity to better implement dam safety mandates.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
        Strategic Relevance and Approach. This project would act as a pilot, showing how to return
          dams to fully operational and safe condition in a technically and financially sustainable manner, in
          addition to building the needed capacity to monitor the performance of dams. The PDO was in line

                                                                                                    Page 14 of 22
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
IN: Dam Rehabilitation & Improvement (P089985)



      with the Government's priorities for the water sector and in line with the Bank's strategies for the
      country (see section 3 for more details). The Bank has rich global and regional experience which
      made it well placed to assist India in developing the institutional framework required to support
      and implement India's existing regulations and procedures in dam safety.
     Technical Aspects. The project was complex with the involvement of multiple Implementing
      Agencies (IAs) at Central and State levels and a large number of dam portfolios. The project was
      designed to rehabilitate several diverse dams to be fully functional and safe, in a technically
      sound and financially sustainable manner, and to strengthen institutional capacity for dam safety
      administration. Design benefitted from embedded flexibilities that enabled the project to deal with
      changes during implementation, for example: an unallocated fund was agreed upon to include
      more states and institutes during the implementation stage and to accommodate possible cost
      overruns; and adequate flexibility was provided to allow fund reallocation across components and
      agencies to effectively utilize the IDA Credit and IBRD Loan (ICR, paragraph 64). Design also
      incorporated lessons from the previous dam safety operations, most notable was that the
      rehabilitation and improvement proposals should be based on thorough assessments of dams.
      Design also featured a batch based approach that allowed states to implement the dam
      interventions in batches to address the most urgent dam rehabilitation and improvement needs
      (ICR, paragraph 64).
     Implementation Arrangements. Multi-tiered implementation arrangements were put in place.
      The Project Management Unit (PMU) at the Central level in the Central Water Commission (CWC)
      and State-level PMUs for each of the nine State-level IAs were responsible for project
      coordination and management. A multidisciplinary management and engineering consulting firm
      was recruited to support the CWC with the overall project implementation (ICR, paragraph
      66). All PMUs were gradually staffed with qualified personnel, supplemented with individual
      consultants to enhance the technical, safeguard, monitoring and evaluation (M&E) and fiduciary
      capacities. Implementation arrangements also included a National Level Steering Committee
      (NLSC) to address policy issues and a Technical Committee (TC) to address technical issues.
      However, the two year delay in effectiveness weakened the capacity of PMUs as most staff
      moved to other positions and this also resulted in delaying procurement of the Engineering and
      Management Consulting Firm (EMC) services (ICR, paragraph 65).
     Fiduciary Aspects. Initial procurement arrangements represented a bottleneck for the project
      and procurement strategies had to be adjusted to repack possible works in an appropriate manner
      to make the contracts more attractive for qualified contractors (ICR, paragraph 65). Financial
      management (FM) arrangements followed country systems for budgeting, fund flow and
      payments, accounting and reporting, and auditing for the project for most of the agencies (ICR,
      paragraph 75). This helped in timely accounting and reporting for such a pan-India project.
      However, staffing was an major issue because at the CPMU there was no full time FM
      consultant hired.
     Risk Assessment. Six risks were identified at appraisal relating to O&M,
      institutional, implementation and technical capacity, and cost overruns. The later was rated
      Moderate, however, this Review finds cost overruns with such a complex project should have
      been rated High. While the PAD included adequate mitigation measures, the measures to
      mitigate cost overruns were not enough, and the project sought additional financing during
      implementation. According to the ICR (paragraph 63) while "proper risk mitigation measures were
      developed, it took time to mitigate the identified issues." Also, the two year delay in effectiveness
      was not anticipated.



                                                                                                Page 15 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: Dam Rehabilitation & Improvement (P089985)



        M&E arrangements. M&E design included a clear Results Framework (RF) with realistic targets.
         While the RF included a clear set of indicators to measure progress against achievement of the
         first PDO, it lacked outcome indicators to comprehensively assess the second PDO.

  Summary of Quality-at-Entry (QAE) Assessment. Overall the project had a sound design and reflected
  strategic relevance to the national and state development priorities. There were minor shortcomings
  related to underestimation of the risk related to cost overruns, weakness at the fiduciary level, and M&E
  design shortcomings. Based on this assessment, QAE is rated Satisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The Bank conducted 21 implementation support missions over the life of the project. Project
 implementation benefited from a multidisciplinary team of experienced staff and consultants who
 supervised the project and provided implementation support on technical quality control, procurement,
 financial management, safeguards, and project management (ICR, paragraph 78). The Bank also provided
 proactive, strategic advice on the challenging technical and management issues. The Bank team worked
 proactively with counterparts to restructure the project eight times to accommodate evolving dam safety
 needs, implementation delays and unexpected impacts of COVID-19. This enabled the successful
 completion of project activities and the efficient utilization of the IBRD Loan and IDA Credit (ICR, paragraph
 78). However, the Bank could have used the restructurings to address M&E design weaknesses. Also,
 more attention should have been given to strengthening compliance with safeguards.

 Summary of Quality of Supervision Assessment. The Bank successfully guided a multi-state
 complex project through implementation challenges and risks, and worked proactively to adapt to the
 changes on the ground. Overall, Quality of Supervision is rated Satisfactory.

 Based on the ratings assigned to QAE and Quality of Supervision, Bank Performance is rated Satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
      The PAD did not include a Theory of Change (ToC) or results chain. Nevertheless, the ICR included
        an ex-post ToC that was constructed based on the PDO, the project activities and

                                                                                                   Page 16 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: Dam Rehabilitation & Improvement (P089985)



        the results indicators as reported in the PAD. Overall, the ToC in the ICR reflected the relation
        between the project inputs, outputs, outcomes and long-term outcomes.
       The two PDOs were assessed through six PDO outcome indicators: PDO1 was assessed through:
        1. Number of project dams with the ability (structural or nonstructural) to safely cater for design
        floods; 2. Number of project dams with acceptable stability and seepage; 3. Number of project dams
        with basic dam safety facilities in place. It is worth noting that 12 dams needed more detailed
        assessments and further improvements were deferred to the follow-on project (DRIP-II). These
        three outcome indicators were directly connected to PDO1, and were measurable, and had
        reasonable targets. However, initial baselines were inaccurate and were corrected during
        implementation. PDO2 was assessed through Outcome indicators: 4. Number of project dams with
        need-based O&M plans operationalized; 5. Percentage of required budget per State for adequate
        O&M; and 6. Number of project dams where emergency response plans have been prepared and
        disseminated to the population were connected to PDO2. While these outcome indicators were
        measurable and had reasonable targets, they did not fully capture improvement in operational
        performance of the project dams.
       The Results Framework included 9 intermediate results indicators (IRIs). Most IRIs were relevant
        and linked to the stated activities and helped to track the achievement of the outcomes and test the
        links in the ToC. The IRIs were measurable, included baselines (where relevant) and had
        reasonable targets.
       Overall, M&E had a sound design. However, the RF could have benefited from the inclusion of
        more indicators to comprehensively assess the improvement in dam operational performance.



b. M&E Implementation
       M&E implementation was under the overall coordination and supervision of the Central Project
         Management Unit (CPMU). M&E data were collected and analyzed with support from the MIS,
         government agencies, and the M&E consultants. All PMUs had dedicated M&E staff. A Monitoring
         Information System (MIS) was established and updated weekly to track the project data and
         monitor progress of activities.
        The MIS ensured that different parties entered and managed information in a standard and
         accountable manner. It captured physical and financial details, such as the list of selected dams,
         PSTs, Dam Safety Review Panel (DSRP) inspections, design flood reviews, tender notices
         published, training materials, minutes of various committee meetings, dam specific EAPs and
         O&M Manuals, and project rehabilitation reports. According to the ICR (paragraph 70) the MIS
         was used by the Bank to monitor the project systematically and retrieve any project-related
         information.
        Third Party Independent Performance Evaluation was carried out by the Indian Institute of
         Technology (IIT) Roorkee with the scope to review the achievements against the
         stated objectives, identify and assess the factors which facilitated or impeded the achievements,
         and suggested suitable measures for improvement.
        Overall, M&E implementation arrangements were adequate with data collected systematically and
         analyzed.




                                                                                                 Page 17 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: Dam Rehabilitation & Improvement (P089985)



c. M&E Utilization
       According to the ICR (paragraph 71) "the M&E data collected were used effectively to inform
         project implementation and project management decisions." The availability of data allowed
         project management at Central and state level to make adjustments to project implementation.
         The M&E data also informed a series of project restructurings.
        A dedicated website for the dissemination of information to the public in general was developed
         for the project (ICR, paragraph 70). The MIS and website provided relevant information in the
         public domain for dissemination and benefit of the professional community and dam owners.

  Summary of M&E Quality. M&E design was clear, but with some minor shortcomings. Implementation
  arrangements were adequate with data systematically collected and analyzed. Utilization of M&E data
  was evident in informing management decisions and project restructurings. Therefore, M&E Quality is
  rated Substantial.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was assigned an Environmental Category B (Partial Assessment). Six safeguard policies were
   triggered under the project: Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01), Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP
   4.11), Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12), Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10), Safety of Dams (OP/BP
   4.37), and Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50). The project activities were not expected to
   have significant adverse environmental impacts as physical interventions would be in the nature of
   rehabilitation and improvement of existing assets. None of the activities at the project dams was expected to
   result in involuntary resettlement, as dam heightening was not supported. Some land might to be acquired
   in case of spillway enlargement, but it was not expected that this would involve resettlement of people or
   acquiring private land. None of the agreements with riparian countries requires notification for the kind of
   activities planned under the project. It was determined by Bank management that the proposed project falls
   under the exception to the notification requirement of paragraph 7 (a) and (b) of OP 7.50.

   According to the ICR (paragraph 73) "the project complied with all triggered safeguards policies."

   Compliance with Environmental Safeguards. An environmental and social management framework
   (ESMF) assessment was prepared and disclosed according to the World Bank safeguard policies and the
   GoI regulations. During the AF phase, the ESMF was updated into two separate sections on Environmental
   Management Framework (EMF) and Social Management Framework (SMF). The project contributed to the
   improvement of safeguard requirements in dam safety in India. Prior to the project, there were no guidelines
   available in India to manage environmental impacts of dam rehabilitation works and to guide dam owners
   explicitly on necessary advanced actions. Therefore, the “Operational Procedures for Assessing and
   Managing Environmental Impacts in Existing Dam Projects” was prepared, approval from line Ministry of
   Environment, Forest and Climate Change was taken and issued. The ICR (Annex 10) reported that the
   capacity of IAs and CPMU to fully understand environmental and social impacts was identified as one of the
   major challenges in implementing in the project. This was evident with environmental, social, health and

                                                                                                  Page 18 of 22
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    IN: Dam Rehabilitation & Improvement (P089985)



  safety monitoring absent in the on-going sub-projects. There were very few trainings conducted to augment
  capacity of staff with respect to provisions laid down in the ESMF and their application, and CPMU failed to
  to advise SPMUs that there was a need to design and develop monitoring formats to collect E&S data on a
  monthly basis. Also, project contractors were not submitting the mandatory EMPs for approval. There was
  little interest in the SPMUs for monitoring the E&S parameters as stipulated in the ESMF, no specific
  discussion of the SPMUs to the project contractors on submission of EMP for their contracts. State level IAs
  did not have any specific person designated or appointed to manage E&S aspects, and periodic
  reporting was absent (ICR, Annex 10).

  Compliance with Social Safeguards. The implementing agencies had an established Grievance
  Redressal Mechanisms (GRM). This enabled timely disposal of complaints. A total of 43 grievances and
  arbitration cases were received, mostly relating to procurement, contract management, non-payment of
  bills, contractual claims, change in tax regime and compensation. Almost all aggrieved parties were the
  project contractors or bidders. By project closing, 25 cases (58% of grievances received) were satisfactorily
  resolved (ICR, paragraph 74).




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management (FM). According to the ICR (paragraph 75) "the project met the Financial
  Management (FM) requirements of the Bank." As a multi-state project, FM followed country systems for
  budgeting, fund flow and payments, accounting and reporting, and auditing, which helped in timely
  accounting and reporting. Interim Financial Reports were submitted on a timely basis. Audit reports were
  submitted for some entities within timelines and for others with delays. However, FM staffing was a major
  issue at the CPMU as no accounts staff was posted by the government. A full-time consultant was
  appointed who managed the accounts and reports on behalf of the project and according to the ICR
  (paragraph 75) "this arrangement worked well for the project."

  Procurement. According to the ICR (paragraph 76) "the project met the procurement management
  requirements of the Bank, and followed its guidelines and requirements." However, the procurement
  process experienced considerable delays during early implementation. Procurement activities benefited
  from the Bank support through repackaging the works, modifying the qualification criteria in the bidding
  documents, workshops and capacity building of the officials, support of the engineering and management
  consulting firm (EMC) (ICR, paragraph 76). While weak procurement capacity of the IA officials was
  identified early in the project, it was aggravated due to frequent transfer of officials. This was addressed by
  the Bank team through organizing frequent training and workshops for the project officials as well as
  officials from the participating states. Procurement post reviews were carried out on an annual basis and
  according to the ICR (paragraph 76) there were no considerable procurement issues.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other


                                                                                                    Page 19 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: Dam Rehabilitation & Improvement (P089985)



   The ICR (paragraph 61) reported that "dedicated post graduate dam safety programme in few selected
   apex institutions. The IIT Roorkee and IISC Bangalore started the dedicated post graduate programme in
   dam safety/dam engineering to strengthen the knowledge base of India as well as ensure trained
   manpower with requisite technical skill to operate the dams safely and efficiently."



11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Bank Performance                Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                  Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                  ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR included four lessons. The following are emphasized with some adaptation of language:

1. To ensure dam safety, projects need to apply a holistic approach that integrates structural
and non-structural interventions. The project changed the mindset of dam management agencies
and dam owners who tended to focus on purely structural measures. The project gave a strong
emphasis on the integrated structural and non-structural measures. Based on the thorough dam
assessments and high quality of design, the structural measures significantly improved the dam
safety through spillway rehabilitation and improvement, leakage treatment and seepage reduction,
dam drainage improvement, and basic dam safety facility improvement. A series of non-structural
measures enhanced emergency preparation and public awareness, improved dam O&M, upgraded
asset management, strengthened data monitoring, and ensured that remedial measures were in
place. The non-structural measures helped better operate and manage dam infrastructure, as well
as complement to the structural measures to mitigate climate risks and enhance the resilience of
downstream communities.

2. Complex infra-structure projects need a flexible design that can accommodate possible
changes in priorities and cost overruns to ensure effective implementation. This project was
complex with a considerable number of large dams and multiple Central and State participants. The
project embedded flexibilities in design to adapt to the possible changes in priorities and cost
overruns. The project implementation applied an adaptive approach to implement the dam
interventions in batches. The batch-based approach allowed the IAs to address the most urgent dam
rehabilitation and improvement needs with priorities. It also allowed the government agencies, dam
owners, and contractors to gain experience through ‘learning by doing’. The team worked proactively
with clients to restructure the project several times to keep the investments relevant and effective.
The utilization of a tailored MIS had ensured the consistency and reliability of project data collection
and application.


                                                                                                    Page 20 of 22
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       IN: Dam Rehabilitation & Improvement (P089985)



3. Enhancing dam safety is a long-term process that can create significant impacts beyond
the project scope. This project created significant impacts in India beyond the project scope from
technical, financial, managerial, institutional and legislative perspectives. The GoI recognized these
and requested the Bank to continue support on dam safety with the approval of the DRIP-II and
possible engagement of DRIP-III. The Bank’s long-term engagement provides an opportunity to
develop projects that support a country’s priorities and potentially achieve significant impacts.

The following lesson is emphasized by IEG:

4. To ensure an accurate assessment of outcomes, M&E design needs to include relevant
outcome indicators that fully measure the project achievements. The project supported several
activities to improve the operational performance of selected existing dams. However, the lack of
relevant indicators to measure the improvement in the operational performance of existing dams
made it difficult to fully assess the project achievements in this area.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

Quality of Evidence. The ICR benefited from the data collected by the M&E system, which enabled tracking the
progress of activities and assessing the achievement of the PDO. However, the RF lacked indicators to
comprehensively assess the improvement in the operational performance of selected existing dam.

Quality of Analysis. The ICR provided clear linking between evidence and findings and used the evidence base
to serve the arguments under the different sections, in particular the discussion on outcomes.

Lessons. Lessons reflected the project experience and were based on evidence and analysis.

Results Orientation. The ICR included a comprehensive discussion on the achievement of the PDO. The
discussion was adequately balanced between reporting on the achievement of outcome indicators and what the
project actually achieved on the ground.

Consistency with guidelines. The ICR used the available data to justify most of the assigned ratings. Discussion
of outcomes was adequate. The efficiency analysis provided good justification on the validity of the project
investments. However, the discussion on M&E design and on Bank performance was brief and could have
benefited from more details.

Conciseness. The ICR provided comprehensive coverage of a complex multi-state project,
and candidly reported on shortcomings. Reporting on safeguards included an explicit statement on compliance
and detailed information was provided in Annex 10 of the ICR. The ICR also included information rich Annexes
that covered different aspects of the project.



                                                                                                   Page 21 of 22
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      IN: Dam Rehabilitation & Improvement (P089985)



Overall, the Quality of the ICR is rated Substantial, but with minor shortcomings.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                   Page 22 of 22
