     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     6O Regional Disaster Vuln Reduct. Projs (P117871)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0023175

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P117871                                    6O Regional Disaster Vuln Reduct. Projs

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 OECS Countries                             Urban, Resilience and Land


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-49850,IDA-49860,IDA-54500,TF-    31-Dec-2016                                               94,385,359.82
 10204,TF-10206,TF-11131,TF-11132,TF-
 16733,TF-19232,TF-19396,TF-A3698

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 23-Jun-2011                                31-Jan-2022

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            32,120,000.00                                   45,191,511.54

 Revised Commitment                            100,519,366.90                                   45,181,185.83

 Actual                                         94,385,359.82                                   47,013,628.93




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Wendy Schreiber Ayres       Fernando Manibog             Kavita Mathur                  IEGSD (Unit 4)




 P157918_TBL
 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P157918                                    SVG RDVRP AF - EU ( P157918 )

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 St. Vincent and the Grenadines             Urban, Resilience and Land


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)

                                                                                                  Page 1 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     6O Regional Disaster Vuln Reduct. Projs (P117871)



                                                                                                                0

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 02-Mar-2017

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                    Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                                     0.00                                             0.00

 Revised Commitment                                      0.00                                             0.00

 Actual                                                  0.00                                             0.00




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project was conceived as phase 1 of a three phase Program to be implemented through an Adaptable
   Program Loan. The first phase covered projects in Saint Vincent and the Grenadines (SVG) and in Grenada.

   The Project Development Objective (PDO) as stated in the Financing Agreement between SVG and the
   International Development Association (IDA) dated September 9, 2011 (page 5) was to measurably reduce
   vulnerability to natural hazards and climate change impacts in the Recipient’s territory and in the Eastern
   Caribbean Sub-region. The PDO as stated in the Financing Agreement between Grenada and IDA dated
   September 20, 2011 (page 5) was to measurably reduce vulnerability to natural hazards and climate change
   impacts in the Recipient’s territory and in the Eastern Caribbean Sub-region.

   The Project was conceived as phase 1 of a three phase Program to be implemented through an Adaptable
   Program Loan. The first phase covered projects in Saint Vincent and the Grenadines (SVG) and in Grenada.

   The Project Development Objective (PDO) as stated in the Financing Agreement between SVG and the
   International Development Association (IDA) dated September 9, 2011 (page 5) was to measurably reduce
   vulnerability to natural hazards and climate change impacts in the Recipient’s territory and in the Eastern
   Caribbean Sub-region. The PDO as stated in the Financing Agreement between Grenada and IDA dated
   September 20, 2011 (page 5) was to measurably reduce vulnerability to natural hazards and climate change
   impacts in the Recipient’s territory and in the Eastern Caribbean Sub-region.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes



                                                                                                 Page 2 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     6O Regional Disaster Vuln Reduct. Projs (P117871)



  Date of Board Approval
  09-May-2014

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Component 1: Prevention and Adaptation Investments (cost at appraisal US$19.1 million, actual cost
   US$54.23 million). This component focused on implementing and testing a broad spectrum of interventions
   aimed at reducing vulnerability in public buildings and infrastructure in the participating countries.
   Subprojects under this component supported: (i) developing infrastructure and carrying out related
   supporting studies, including: (a) developing community infrastructure, (b) rehabilitating and constructing
   bridges and reducing risk in public spaces, and (c) improving resilience to climate risks in the water supply
   system; and (ii) retrofitting and designing public buildings to improve disaster resilience, including: (a)
   rehabilitating selected schools’ buildings and (b) rehabilitating selected public accommodation for the
   elderly.

   Revised component 1: Under the first restructuring, funds were reallocated from component 1 to a new
   component 5 created to enable the project to finance the Caribbean Catastrophic Risk Insurance Facility
   (CCRIF) insurance premium. Through the Additional Financing (AF) of April 2014 for SVG, activities totaling
   US$23.56 million were added to component 1, bringing the total cost of the component to US$42.66 million.
   These included financing of river training, bridge rehabilitation and reconstruction, road realignment, coastal
   defenses, and replenishment of the emergency contingency component. It also included additional slope
   stabilization works, expansion of river defense works, and construction of additional satellite warehouses to
   strengthen community disaster preparedness. Through the AF of April 2015 for Grenada, activities totaling
   US$5.2 million were added to component 1, bringing the total cost of the component to US$47.86 million.
   These included the carrying out of selected infrastructure investments and related supporting studies,
   including: (a) pre-engineering studies and design for the Morne Rouge drainage system; (b) river training
   works for the St. Johns River flood mitigation sub-project; and (c) support for the preparation of sub-
   projects. Through the Additional Financing (AF) of May 2017 for SVG, activities totaling US$6.59 million
   were added to component 1, bringing the component cost to US$54.45. These included financing for select
   infrastructure investments. Under the restructuring of December 2018, errors in previous documentation
   were corrected, and funds in component 3, which had been earmarked for the contingency emergency
   response (CERC), were reallocated to component 1, bringing the cost of component 1 to US$54.23 million
   (Project Paper, December 2018, para. 13, footnote 8).

   Component 2: Regional Platforms for Hazard and Risk Evaluation, and Applications for Improved
   Decision Making (cost at appraisal US$22.2 million, actual cost US$40.82 million). This component
   focused on building the regional capacity for assessment of natural risks and integration of such
   assessment into policy and decision-making process for the development of investments, disaster risk
   mitigation, and disaster response across sectors by: (a) facilitating regional collaboration, including
   knowledge sharing to develop and apply construction standards and methods for critical public
   infrastructure and urban flood mitigation, and to strengthen regional collaboration for urban and flood risk
   reduction; and (b) reducing the risk for regional interconnectivity, including improving the international
   airport to maintain an adequate emergency response capability and to comply with the international
   operational standards.



                                                                                                     Page 3 of 21
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  6O Regional Disaster Vuln Reduct. Projs (P117871)



Grenada took the lead on piloting integrated approaches to urban flood mitigation (St. John’s River in St.
Georges). SVG took the lead on piloting integrated approaches to watershed management (Arnos Vale
Watershed) and coastal protection (Georgetown). In collaboration with other countries from the region and
the support of regional technical agencies, the respective ministries of works took the lead on organizing the
Eastern Caribbean regional knowledge sharing and learning process to develop and apply construction
standards and methods in the selected areas. Grenada also was to make necessary investments at its
international airport to ensure its continued operations in accordance with international aviation regulations.

Revised component 2. Under the first restructuring, funds were reallocated from component 1 to a new
component 5 created to enable the project to finance the Caribbean Catastrophic Risk Insurance Facility
(CCRIF) insurance premium. Through the AF of 2014 for SVG, activities totaling US$15.44 million were
added to component 2, bringing the total cost of the component to US$37.64 million. These included
financing for construction of bridges, river defense works, and emergency recovery coastal defense works.
It also including funding for capacity building of the Ministry of Transport and Works to strengthen its
disaster response. Through the AF of April 2015 for Grenada, activities totaling US$3 million were added to
component 2, bringing the total cost of the component to US$40.64 million. These included financing for (a)
hazard data development; (b) hydro-meteorological infrastructure and data management; (c) watershed
analysis and training for flood and drought management; and (d) capacity building for forest management.
Under the restructuring of December 2018, errors in previous documentation were corrected, and funds in
component 3, were reallocated to component 2, bringing the component cost to US$40.82 million.

Component 3: Natural Disaster Response Investments (cost at appraisal US$2.0 million, actual cost
US$1.9 million). This component financed emergency recovery and reconstruction subprojects under an
agreed action plan of activities (Agreed Action Plan of Activities) designed as a mechanism to implement
the Recipient’s rapid response to an emergency. In the event of a request for reallocation of funds from
other project components funded from the IDA regional pool, the Bank would first have to determine if the
proposed subprojects would be eligible for IDA regional funding.

Following an adverse natural event, and subject to: (a) the Bank’s satisfaction that a situation of national
emergency exists; (b) a government’s declaration of emergency in accordance with national law; and (c) the
submission of a recovery action plan satisfactory to the Bank that describes subprojects and activities to be
financed, a government may request the Bank to re-categorize financing or provide additional financing to
cover early recovery and rehabilitation costs.

If no adverse natural event occurred during the lifetime of the project, financing under the component would
not become active. This mechanism complemented the participating countries’ memberships of the
Caribbean Catastrophe Risk Insurance Facility (CCRIF), since the trigger was a declaration of emergency
following an adverse natural event, rather than the CCRIF’s parametric trigger.

Revised component 3: Through the AF of 2014 to SVG, US$1 million was added to component 3 to
replenish the Natural Disaster Response Investment Component of the original operation, which was
utilized in response to the December 2013 disaster event. This brought the total cost of component 3 to
US$3 million. Under the restructuring of December 2018, funds in component 3 were reallocated to
component 2, bringing the component cost to US1 million.

Component 4: Project Management and Implementation Support (cost at appraisal US$3.8 million,
actual cost US$5.26). This component would support strengthening and developing the institutional
capacity for project management, including: (a) preparation of designs and tender documents; (b)


                                                                                                  Page 4 of 21
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    6O Regional Disaster Vuln Reduct. Projs (P117871)



  preparation of project reports; (c) processing of contracts and tender evaluation; (d) coordination of
  participating line ministries; (e) supervision of the quality of works; (f) training of staff in project management
  and implementation support; (g) capacity building for accreditation to the United National Framework
  Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) Climate Adaptation Fund; and (h) related activities on project
  management and implementation.

  Revised component 4: Through the AF of 2014 to SVG, activities totaling US$0.6 million were added to
  component 4, bring the total cost of the component to US$4.4 million. These included financing for (a) a
  senior quantity surveyor and procurement and contract management specialist; (b) a monitoring and
  evaluation (M&E) specialist; and (c) provision of training to the Public Sector Investment Management Unit
  (PSIPMU) staff and the staff of key agencies involved in the implementation of the project. Through the AF
  of April 2015 to Grenada, activities totaling US$0.6 million were added to component 4, bringing the total
  cost of the component to US$5 million. These included support for strengthening and developing the
  institutional capacity for project management, and improving the capacity for disaster risk management and
  climate change monitoring. Through the AF of May 2017 to SVG, activities totaling US$0.26 million were
  added to component 4 for project management and implementation support. This brought the component
  cost to US$5.26 million.

  Component 5: Payment of CCRIF insurance premium. Under the first restructuring, a new component
  was added to finance the Recipient’s catastrophe risk insurance premiums for the period of May 30, 2013 to
  May 30, 2015 for a total not to exceed US$2 million. The Ministry of Finance was responsible for the
  management of this activity, although no Bank funds would flow directly into the government treasuries.
  Instead, a direct payment would be made from the World Bank to the CCRIF. A new intermediate indicator
  was added to the results framework to reflect this activity.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost: The original estimated project cost was US$47.1 million. Following the first AF of 2014 of
  US$40.6 million to SVG, the project cost rose to US$87.7 million. Following the second AF of 2015 of
  US$8.8 million to Grenada the project cost rose to US$96.5 million. Following the third AF of 2017 to SVG
  US$6.81, the project cost rose to US$103.31 million. The actual cost at closing date, January 31, 2022, was
  US$94.4 million.

  Financing: The project’s cost was financed through an IDA Credit of totaling US$10 million, with co-
  financing from the Climate Investment Funds in the amount of Pilot Program for Climate Resilience Grant of
  US$8.0 million, Strategic Climate Fund Loan of US$8.2 million, with an additional Strategic Climate Fund
  Loan of US$3.8 million and a Strategic Climate Fund Grant of US$5 million to Grenada; and a Credit for
  US$10.92 million co-financing from the Climate Investment Funds in the amount of Pilot Program for
  Climate Resilience Grant of US$7.0 million, Strategic Climate Fund Loan of US$3.0 million, with an
  Additional Financing Credit of US$35.6 million equivalent, including a Credit US$19.0 million equivalent
  from the Crisis Response Window resources and a Grant from the Strategic Climate Fund – Pilot Program
  For Climate Resilience of US$5.0 million and Additional Financing Grant from the European Union in the
  amount of US$6.81 million equivalent to Saint Vincent and the Grenadines and Grenada. A total of US$94.4
  million was disbursed.




                                                                                                       Page 5 of 21
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  6O Regional Disaster Vuln Reduct. Projs (P117871)



Recipients’ Contributions: The Recipients—Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, and Grenada—did not
contribute to the project’s cost.

Restructuring:

First Restructuring. The project was restructured on May 31, 2013 to enable Grenada to finance the CCRIF
insurance premium coverage from June 1, 2013, to May 30, 2015. A new disbursement category was
introduced, activities in components 1 and 2 were reduced, and a results indicator was added to reflect the
CCRIF insurance premium.

Second Restructuring. The project restructuring was approved on May 9, 2014 to provide AF of US$40.6 to
SVG to finance emergency recovery and reconstruction activities, scale up project activities, and cover a
cost overrun. Targets in the results framework were revised to reflect the increase in the scope of activities
and a new indicator was added. The closing date was extended by two years to December 31, 2018.

Third Restructuring. The project restructuring was approved on June 8, 2015 to provide AF to Grenada
US$8.8 million. Funds were to: (a) scale up investments for flood protection and improve drainage in urban
areas; (b) acquire baseline data; (c) optimize and modernize the hydro-meteorological data collection
network and data management system; (d) provide training in watershed modeling for flood and drought
hazard mapping and calculation of hydraulic parameters for climate-proofing infrastructure design; and (e)
build capacity in forest management. The AF comprised an additional Strategic Climate Fund Loan in the
amount US$3.8 million, and an additional Strategic Climate Fund Grant in the amount of US$5.0 million.
The loan, credit and grant closing dates were extended by two years to December 31, 2018, to
accommodate the increased scope of the Project. The targets in the results framework were revised to
reflect the increase in the scope of activities and new indicators were added.

Fourth Restructuring. The project was restructured August 10, 2015 was to extend the premium payments
for CCRIF coverage for an additional year in Grenada. In SVG, the government reallocated funds among
disbursement categories after the December 2013 Christmas Eve Trough in SVG to access US$900,000 for
emergency recovery and reconstruction subprojects, added to the US$1 million allocated to the CERC. In
addition, a change in the disbursement process was made to simplify accounting procedures and improve
efficiency so that expenditures were no longer split by the various sources of funding.

Fifth Restructuring. The project was restructured on February 8, 2017 to trigger of the safeguards policy for
Pest Management (OP/BP 4.09), to allow for incidental pesticide use under the project.

Sixth Restructuring. The project restructuring was approved on May 16, 2017 to provide AF of US$6.81
million to SVG through a grant agreement between the European Union, through the European
Development Fund, and the World Bank. The AF funded reconstruction of the Chateau Belair jetty and the
rehabilitation of road infrastructure. In addition, overall project management was scaled up to provide
adequate financial management and technical support for the supervision of civil works and to enhance the
capacity of the Ministry of Transport and Works.

Seventh Restructuring. The project was restructured on December 10, 2018 to extend the closing date by
24 months from December 31, 2018, to December 31, 2020, to allow for the completion of activities. This
was the second extension of the closing date. The results framework was revised; funds in Category 2 that
were earmarked for CERC were reallocated to component 1.



                                                                                                 Page 6 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     6O Regional Disaster Vuln Reduct. Projs (P117871)



   Eighth Restructuring. The project was restructured on December 3, 2020 to extend the closing date by six
   months from December 31, 2020 to June 30, 2021, due to the implementation delays caused by the impact
   of the COVID-19 pandemic.

   Ninth Restructuring. The project was restructured on June 28, 2021 to extend the closing date of SVG’s IDA
   credit 4986-VC (US$10.92 million equivalent) and IDA credit 5450-VC (US$35.6 million equivalent) by
   seven months from June 30, 2021 to January 31, 2022, to enable the completion of activities that suffered
   delays due to the eruption of La Soufriere volcano on April 9, 2021. (The Grenada portion of the Project
   closed on June 30, 2021.)

   Dates: The project was approved on June 23, 2011 and became effective on October 18, 2011. The project
   closed on January 31, 2022, five years and one month after the original closing date of December 31, 2016.

   Split Rating. As the project scope became more ambitious, a split rating is not applied.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country and Sector Context at Appraisal

The impacts of climate change were being felt in the Caribbean at the time of appraisal. The small island
economies were highly vulnerable to natural hazards because of their size, geography, and location.
Climate shocks represented a dominant factor driving productivity fluctuations in the region, thus severely
affecting development prospects. In the Eastern Caribbean, natural disasters accounted on average for
almost 20 percent of the variance of real GDP growth and the evidence showed that an adverse natural
event in one country has a statistically significant spillover effect on neighboring countries in the region.

It was therefore critical for the Eastern Caribbean to find ways to achieve economic and social development
that was more resilient to the climate they live in. The World Bank was supporting Caribbean-led efforts to
increase climate resilience and decrease vulnerability to natural disasters. A concerted effort in this regard
was taking place under the Caribbean Regional Pilot Program for Climate Resilience, which involved two
closely linked and complementary tracks: (a) country-based investments in six states (Haiti, Jamaica,
Dominica, Grenada, St. Lucia, and St. Vincent and the Grenadines); and (b) region-wide activities, including
data management and monitoring for improving understanding of climate risks and potential impacts,
necessary to prepare actions to enhance climate resilience, and to tackle risks and vulnerabilities common
to all Caribbean countries.

Alignment with Country Priorities

The PDO was well-aligned with the priorities of Grenada, SVG, and the Eastern Caribbean subregion. The
project was fully aligned with Grenada’s country priorities of coping with external shocks and laying the
groundwork for broad-based economic growth.[1] The project was also aligned with Goal Four of the SVG’s
country priorities—improving physical infrastructure, preserving the environment and building resilience to
climate change—as presented in the National Social and Economic Development Plan 2013–2025, which
was under preparation at the time of the project’s appraisal. This plan emphasizes the importance of

                                                                                                     Page 7 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     6O Regional Disaster Vuln Reduct. Projs (P117871)



climate risk management in sustainable development. Objectives include enhancing the capability of SVG
to prepare effectively for, respond to, and mitigate disasters and to reduce the adverse impacts of climate
change. Finally, the PDO was aligned with the 2001 Comprehensive Disaster Management Strategy of the
Caribbean Disaster Emergency Management Agency, the regional inter-governmental agency for disaster
management, which focused on institutionalizing disaster management in the region.

Alignment with Bank Strategy

The project’s objectives are assessed as fully aligned with the World Bank’s strategy as laid out in its
Regional Partnership Framework for the Eastern Caribbean States for the Period FY22-FY25 (Report
160349-LAC). The overarching objective of the framework is to support green, resilient, and inclusive
development and competitiveness as the OECS countries recover from the Covid-19 crisis, address their
medium-term development priorities, and build resilience to climate change and other external shocks. The
framework supports the high-level outcome of strengthened resilience to climate change and other shocks
and aims to help the countries recover from the pandemic while safeguarding their natural resources and
building resilience to climate change.

The Bank’s 2018 Systematic Regional Diagnostic for the OECS countries also highlights key constraints
and opportunities for green, inclusive, and sustainable growth in the region, the national, and regional
development strategies of the Eastern Caribbean. It also specifies the priorities for resilient recovery from
the impacts of the Covid-19 pandemic crisis.

Previous World Bank Experience

The World Bank has a long history of partnership and collaboration with the states of the Eastern
Caribbean, and the project was part of the World Bank’s ongoing support to the Eastern Caribbean to build
resilience to natural disasters and climate change. As a key partner in disaster recovery and disaster risk
reduction, it financed the Grenada Emergency Recovery and Disaster Management Project (P069922), for
US$10.7 million (closed on October 31, 2005), which focused on disaster mitigation and institutional
strengthening activities in Grenada and SVG. In addition, the Bank administered a trust fund in support of
the Grenada Post-Hurricane Ivan School Rehabilitation Project for US$14.2 million (closed in June 2009),
aimed at rehabilitating and reconstructing schools and health facilities damaged by the hurricane. The Bank
also financed the Grenada Economic and Social Policy Development Credit (P117000) for US$8 million
(closed on June 30, 2011), which supported policy reforms aimed at strengthening the countries resilience
to external shocks. Other activities included the Caribbean Pilot Program for Climate Resilience technical
assistance, the SVG Hurricane Tomas Emergency Recovery Loan (P124939), and the Saint Lucia
Hurricane Tomas Emergency Recovery Loan (P125205). An evaluation carried out by the World Bank
November 2010 following Hurricane Tomas in indicated that investments financed by the Bank to reduce
risk over the past decade functioned well in the face of a 1-in-500-year rainfall event.[2] Similar conclusions
were reached in the evaluation of school infrastructure in Grenada following Hurricane Ivan in 2004.[3] The
World Bank’s involvement in reconstruction activities in both Grenada and SVG in the 10 years before
appraisal also led to a shared understanding of the vulnerability and importance of various sectors and
asset types proposed for construction, rehabilitation, or retrofitting under the project. Finally, a trust fund
administered by the World Bank financed studies on the links between poverty and environment in four
small island developing states and the potential of OECS catastrophe insurance to speed reconstruction
and recovery following a natural disaster.




                                                                                                     Page 8 of 21
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      6O Regional Disaster Vuln Reduct. Projs (P117871)



               As the objective remained relevant throughout the project implementation period and was a necessary
               response to a development gap in Grenada and SVG, relevance is rated High.

               [1] These priorities were laid out 2009 Budget Speech, the Prime Minister’s speech at the Townhall Meeting
               of March 31, 2009, and the Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility Letter of Intent for the Third Review of
               the International Monetary Fund.

               [2] World Bank, Saint Lucia Hurricane Tomas Rapid Damage Assessment (2010),

               [3] World Bank, Grenada: A Nation Rebuilding (2005).


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Objective: Measurable reduction in vulnerability to natural hazards and climate change impacts in the
                             Recipient’s territory and in the Eastern Caribbean Sub-region.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change

                             The project’s theory of change indicated that the project’s inputs—financial and technical assistance support
                             from IDA and other financiers—would directly lead to the achievement of project outputs, which in turn would
                             lead to the project’s outcomes. The activities related to SVG consisted of (a) studies, and (b) retrofitting,
                             constructing, and rehabilitating infrastructure. The key outputs were (a) schools, emergency shelters
                             retrofitted; (b) roads and bridges rehabilitated, (b) satellite warehouses constructed, (c) retrofitting,
                             constructing, and rehabilitating roads and bridges, (d) feasibility study and detailed design for a new hospital
                             prepared, and (e) drainage systems improved.

                             The activities related to Grenada consisted of (a) studies, and (b) retrofitting, constructing, and rehabilitating
                             infrastructure. The key outputs were (a) schools, emergency shelters, and homes for the elderly retrofitted
                             and rehabilitated; (b) roads and bridges rehabilitated, (c) La Sagesse and Beausejour community
                             infrastructure rehabilitated or constructed, and (d) water tanks and associated structures installed.

                             In turn, the outputs would be expected to result in the outcome of measurable reduction of vulnerability to
                             natural hazards and climate change impacts in the SVG and in Grenada. Overall, the causal pathways from
                             inputs to outcomes were valid and direct, and the outcomes achieved could be mostly attributed to the



                                                                                                                                   Page 9 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   6O Regional Disaster Vuln Reduct. Projs (P117871)



project’s interventions. The activities, if completed, would be sufficient to provide a critical mass for the
expected change.

The key assumptions for achieving this objective were: (a) The political will and commitment of the
governments remain high during project implementation; (b) natural hazard impacts will not derail project
implementation, but rather serve to inform a responsive project design. The assumptions were reasonable.

Outputs

Infrastructure constructed or rehabilitated

      100 percent of Grenada's infrastructure was made less vulnerable to natural hazard and climate
         change impacts in Project areas. This matched the end project target presented in the 2015 Project
         Paper for the 2015 AF. The activities contributing to strengthening of infrastructure included
         rehabilitating and retrofitting infrastructure and public buildings, river training, bridge rehabilitation and
         reconstruction, road realignment, and construction of coastal defenses.
        Water storage capacity increased by 550,000 gallons in Grenada as a result of the project. This is 22
         percent higher than the target of 450,000 gallons set out in the PAD.
        13,369 gabion baskets were used in construction of flood mitigation works in SVG. This is 60 percent
         higher than the target of 8,400 set out in the PAD.
        2.22 kilometers of rural roads were constructed. This is 47 percent below the target of 4.15 kilometers
         set out in the 2018 Project Paper.
        Seedling holding capacity within rehabilitated nurseries in Grenada increased by 50,000. This
         matched the target presented in the 2015 Project Paper for the AF.

Institutions and administrative capacity strengthened

      15 government officials in Grenada were trained in spatial data analysis under the project. This
         matches the target presented in the 2015 Project Paper for the AF.
      23 government officials in SVG have completed training on producing location specific exposure
         maps. This matches the target of presented in the 2021 Restructuring Paper, up from eight in the
         PAD.
        An Operations Manual has been prepared and an action plan of activities is being updated annually to
         ensure preparation to facilitate disbursement in the event of an emergency. This matches the target
         presented in the 2015 Project Paper for the AF.
        36 functional hydromet stations in Grenada are providing data to a shared platform. This exceeds the
         target of 35 presented in the 2018 Project Paper.
        Light Detection and Ranging (LiDAR) mapping for the entire territory of Grenada has been completed
         and is available on a shared platform. This matches the target presented in the 2015 Project Paper for
         the AF.
        Public building geo spatial information has been collected in SVG. This matches the target presented
         in the 2015 Project Paper for the AF.
        100 percent of public buildings in SVG are geo referenced in a national exposure database. This
         matches the target presented in the PAD.
        A country-wide emergency communication network is in place. This matches the target presented in
         the 2015 Project Paper for the AF.

                                                                                                        Page 10 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   6O Regional Disaster Vuln Reduct. Projs (P117871)




      Capacity of six communities to respond to disaster events has increased. This matches the target
       presented in the 2015 Project Paper for the AF.
      21 location specific exposure maps have been completed in SVG by staff trained under the project.
       This exceeds the target of 20 presented in the 2015 Project Paper for the AF.
      Six designs and pre-engineering/geotechnical studies were completed for road protection and bridges
       rehabilitated under the project. This matched the end project target set out in the PAD.
      54 designs and pre- engineering/geotechnical studies completed for roads and bridges rehabilitated
       under the project in SVG. This is double the end project target of 27 set out in the 2018 Project Paper,
       up from six in the PAD.

      No government officials in Grenada were trained in forest management under the Project. Output not
         achieved - the end project target set in the 2015 Project Paper for the AF was eight.

Intermediate outcomes

      425 beneficiaries in SVG experienced reduced risk of flooding in areas with flood mitigation works
         financed by the project. This matched the end project target set in the 2015 Project Paper for the AF,
         up from 60 people in the PAD. The increase is due to the increased scope of flood mitigation works in
         SVG following the AF.
        27,297 (13,327 female) people benefitted from reduced risk to failure of roads and bridges due to
         natural hazards or climate change impacts in SVG. This is 15 percent lower than the target of 32,156
         (15,660 female) set out in the 2018 Project Paper, up from 10,500 in the PAD.
        216 agriculture workers in SVG are benefitting from upgraded feeder roads. This is 52 percent higher
         than the target of 142 set out in the 2018 Project Paper.
        1,002.3 farm acres in SVG are benefitting from upgraded access roads. This is 41 times the target set
         out in the 2018 Project Paper.
        100 percent of activities in SVG have incorporated a beneficiary feedback system. This is double the
         target set in the 2018 Project Paper.
        Country is eligible for insurance payment (and has received payment) in case of an insured event.
         This matches the target set in the 2013 Project Paper.

The PDO indicator "direct project beneficiaries, of which female" was fully achieved. As targeted (in the
2015 Project Paper for the AF to Grenada), 110,000 people directly benefited from the project, 49 percent of
whom were female.

The PDO indicator "beneficiaries with reduced risk to failure of public buildings and infrastructure
due to natural hazards or climate change impacts in SVG and Grenada" was exceeded by 43
percent. 1,093 people in SVG and Grenada experienced reduced risk to failure of public buildings and
infrastructure due to natural hazards or climate change impacts. The target set out in the PAD was 764.

The PDO indicator "beneficiaries with reduced risk to failure of public buildings due to natural
hazards or climate change impacts in SVG" was exceeded by 39 percent. 445 people in SVG
experienced reduced risk to failure of public buildings due to natural hazards or climate change impacts. The
target presented in the PAD was 320.




                                                                                                 Page 11 of 21
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                6O Regional Disaster Vuln Reduct. Projs (P117871)



                            The PDO indicator "beneficiaries with reduced risk to failure of public buildings due to natural
                            hazards or climate change impacts in Grenada" was fully achieved. As targeted in the PAD, 444 people
                            in Grenada experienced reduced risk to failure of public buildings due to natural hazards or climate change
                            impacts.

                            The PDO indicator "relocated low-income households with access to safe infrastructure addressed
                            under the project" was fully achieved. As targeted (in the 2015 Project Paper for the AF), 41 low-income
                            households were relocated to areas with safe infrastructure under the project.

                            The PDO indicator "government officials from Public Works, Agriculture, Forestry, and NAWASA able
                            to set up and run watershed analysis software" was fully achieved. 15 government officials from Public
                            Works, Agriculture, Forestry, and NAWASA were able to set up and run watershed analysis software. This
                            matches the target presented in the 2015 Project Paper for the AF. Moreover, the training activities and the
                            installation are completed, and the network is fully operational.

                            The PDO indicator targets were fully achieved or exceeded. Nearly all the project outputs, which contributed
                            to the achievement of the outcomes were achieved or exceeded. As discussed in the theory of change
                            above, the outputs are expected to result in the outcome of measurable reduction of vulnerability to natural
                            hazards and climate change impacts in the SVG and in Grenada. The efficacy of the project in achieving this
                            objective is Substantial.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Overall efficacy is rated Substantial. The objective of measurable reduction in vulnerability to natural hazards
                            and climate change impacts in the Recipient’s territory and in the Eastern Caribbean Sub-region is rated
                            Substantial. Overall efficacy is rated Substantial.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   Economic efficiency. An economic analysis of the project was conducted at appraisal (PAD, page 12). The
   benefits were calculated using the estimated damage expenditures averted from a Category 1 hurricane, as
   expressed as a percentage of GDP, due to the mitigating investments of the disaster management project. The
   costs included the investment and the operations and maintenance costs of constructing, rehabilitating, and

                                                                                                                               Page 12 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      6O Regional Disaster Vuln Reduct. Projs (P117871)



retrofitting infrastructure and of strengthening institutions to better prepare for and respond to disasters. The
assumptions and methodology used in the cost-benefit analysis were appropriate. The net present value (NPV)
of the investments in SVG at appraisal was estimated to be US$37.5 million using a discount rate of 12 percent,
and the economic rate of return (ERR) was estimated to be 92 percent. The NPV of the investments in Grenada
at completion was estimated to be US$17.5 million using a discount rate of 12 percent, and the ERR was
estimated to be 26 percent.

The economic assessment at completion followed a methodology similar to the assessment done at appraisal
(ICR, paragraph 59). The net present value (NPV) of the investments in SVG at completion was estimated to be
US$22.6 million using a discount rate of 12 percent, and the economic rate of return (ERR) was estimated to be
44 percent. The lower NPV and ERR for the investments in SVG than estimated at appraisal are due to higher
costs of investments than originally anticipated. The NPV of the investments in Grenada at completion was
estimated to be US$18.6 million using a discount rate of 12 percent, and the ERR was estimated to be 24
percent. The results indicate that the project interventions are economically justified.

Neither the PAD, nor the ICR provided an overall ERR for the project.

Implementation efficiency. The project closing date was extended by three years and one month following the
approval of the 2015 AF—required in part to cover a cost overrun—to allow adequate time to complete ongoing
contracts, and to absorb the AF. Time overruns detracted from efficiency, given the opportunity cost of capital
and the service fee that borrowers continued to pay on Bank loans.

Overall, efficiency was modest, and well below the estimates at appraisal due to higher than originally foreseen
investment costs. There were shortcomings in planning and design of some investments, procurement, and
contract management, that delayed project implementation. The efficiency of the project is rated Modest.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                    0
 Appraisal                                                 0
                                                                                     Not Applicable
                                                                                    0
 ICR Estimate                                              0
                                                                                     Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome




                                                                                                   Page 13 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      6O Regional Disaster Vuln Reduct. Projs (P117871)



With high relevance of objectives, substantial efficacy, and modest efficiency, the overall rating is Moderately
Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The risk to development outcome is considered to be moderate. Two risks exist,

Financial Risk. The project strengthened institutional capacities to manage infrastructure. However,
financing must be secured for the continued operation and maintenance of the infrastructure constructed,
rehabilitated, and retrofitted under the project.

Institutional risk. The continued relevance of and use of the data sharing platforms requires focused
attention on their upkeep and maintenance. In addition, national data policies are needed to that include
access, sharing, and privacy considerations.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  At project entry, the objective of achieving a measurable reduction in vulnerability to natural hazards and
  climate change impacts in the Recipient’s territory and in the Eastern Caribbean Sub-region was of high
  strategic priority. In addition, the approach of developing a regional project allowed for sharing of
  experiences and regional capacity building. However, the project was ambitious given weak capacity of
  the government agencies. Extensive supervision by the task team was planned at entry to manage the
  risks.

  The project design was based on considerable understanding of the risks and vulnerabilities of Caribbean
  infrastructure by the Bank’s preparation team. The project design was also informed by lessons learned
  from other Bank-financed projects working on similar issues. The key lessons adopted in the project
  design included (a) retrofitting, rehabilitation, and disaster risk mitigation investments contribute to
  resilience in the face of adverse natural events; (b) integration of hazard risk information in territorial
  planning and investment decision making is institutionally complex and information intensive, requiring
  simultaneous capacity building at various institutions and collaboration with academic and professional
  communities; (c) combining modeling with technical assistance is required to strengthen policy makers’
  understanding of risk and the decisions needed to mitigate risk; (d) having access to insurance to cover
  the costs of emergency response and reconstruction can speed recovery from a natural disaster (PAD,
  paragraphs 42–45).

  The project’s approach was straightforward, with support for strengthening the resilience of infrastructure,
  coupled with support for building capacity of government institutions. The project activities were sufficient

                                                                                                    Page 14 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     6O Regional Disaster Vuln Reduct. Projs (P117871)



  to achieve the project objectives. The technical aspects of the project were sound. Overall project
  management, and coordination of implementation was appropriate, with the ministries of finance of SVG
  and Grenada having overall implementation responsibility, with line ministries (education, health, public
  works, and the like) provided advice and technical support (PAD, page 10). Mitigation measures for
  project risks, including provisions for extensive staff training, were appropriately built into project design.
  The results framework was generally well designed, including indicators that were aligned with
  operational objectives and that had baselines and appropriate targets. Safeguards and fiduciary
  arrangements were adequately designed to ensure compliance with Bank requirements. Safeguards
  instruments acceptable to the Bank were prepared and disclosed and capacity building was carried out.

  The project was designed efficiently as a regional project, given the planned Adaptable Program Loan
  trajectory at the time of appraisal, with both regional and country-level objectives. This design was a test
  of the concept that building regional linkages through data coordination and management would provide
  regional improvements as a positive externality and reduce the transaction costs of each country
  developing its own data management system. The PDO provided flexibility to SVG and Grenada to define
  their own priorities in risk reduction. The design was also intended to lower transaction costs for the
  government on project management and supervision by consolidating interventions in multiple sectors
  under a single project managed by a single agency in each country.

  However, the quality at entry did have shortcomings. Estimated costs proved too low, leading to some
  activities being under-budgeted. In addition, the teams did not initially budget for relocation of utility poles
  and municipal water lines. The under-budgeting led to cancellation of some activities, and delays in
  implementation of others as AF was mobilized. Finally, the assessment of the risks during implementation
  as medium-low overestimated the country’s implementation capacity.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Five task team leaders led project preparation and implementation over a period of ten years. However,
 each TTL was first involved as a team member prior to assuming the TTL role, so the handovers involved
 minimal disruption.

 Some 20 implementation support missions were held during project implementation, one every six months
 or so. Aide Memoires and Implementation Status and Result Reports were of high quality and candid,
 thoroughly covering all key issues and providing practical recommendations on how to address challenges,
 such as proposing options for river remodeling options in Grenada to lessen the private land to be acquired
 and therefore the costs of relocating people. The Bank team proactively revised the project’s performance
 ratings in response to changes in implementation progress.

 Supervision of safeguard and fiduciary aspects of the project was adequate and appropriate. The Bank
 team paid close attention to the fiduciary and safeguard and environmental and social aspects during
 project implementation, holding workshops and trainings, and addressing challenges. Issues were



                                                                                                       Page 15 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     6O Regional Disaster Vuln Reduct. Projs (P117871)



 identified and reported on and were addressed in a timely and constructive manner. The team provided
 good technical inputs and arranged technical experts to support the project.

 The Bank team proactively restructured the project multiple times, to respond to Grenada’s need for
 support with financial protection through CCRIF, bring onboard AF, adjust activities to reflect
 implementation challenges and emerging country priorities, amend the results framework in response to
 the AF, and to extend the project closing date.

 Recognizing the weak capacity of the governments, the Bank focused considerable resources on
 supervision. Specifically, in Grenada, the Bank team followed up closely with the government teams to
 ensure access to land was secured, and budgeting and other issues were resolved with technical
 assistance and training. The Bank team responded to the challenges and worked consistently with
 government counterparts to adjust activities to ensure the project met its objectives.

 In SVG, the Bank team agreed with the government on an action plan to ensure that communication was
 robust, and challenges were quickly identified, and solutions identified and implemented. Actions included
 technical missions every two months or so, conference calls every two weeks, and regular updates to an
 implementation plan providing timely information implementation progress.

 The Bank proactively identified and resolved challenges to the achievement of the project development
 outcomes. The team paid close attention to the fiduciary and safeguard and environmental and social
 aspects during implementation, holding various workshops and trainings, and addressing challenges.
 Issues were identified and reported on and were addressed in a timely and constructive manner. The team
 provided good technical inputs and arranged technical experts to support the project.

 Overall, the quality of supervision is rated satisfactory notwithstanding minor shortcomings in the proactive
 identification of and resolution of challenges.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The theory of change was generally sound, specifying how the key activities and outputs led to the
 outcomes as reflected in the results framework. The project development objectives of achieving a
 measurable reduction in vulnerability to natural hazards and climate change impacts in the Recipient’s
 territory and in the Eastern Caribbean Sub-region were clearly specified. Although the PDO indicators were
 measurable, they were nearly all at the output rather than the outcome level, and did not indicate how
 people’s lives changed as a result of the project.



                                                                                                   Page 16 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     6O Regional Disaster Vuln Reduct. Projs (P117871)



 The results framework was revised during the 2013 restructuring to introduce the CCRIF insurance
 payment, and again during the 2014 AF, the 2015 AF, the 2017 AF, and the 2018 restructuring to reflect
 changes in the project’s activities and the additional results expected due to the AF and specify some
 indicators more clearly. However, the revisions in the results framework did not address the weaknesses
 noted above.

 The intermediate results indicators, tracking outputs, such as kilometers of roads rehabilitated, were
 adequate to capture the contribution of the operation’s activities and outputs toward achieving the project’s
 objectives. The proposed data collection methods were adequate for all indicators. Overall, the project
 implementing agencies had the capacity to implement the M&E arrangements.



b. M&E Implementation
  The implementing agencies of Grenada and SVG collected the data related to the activities, outputs, and
  outcomes for which they were responsible and reported them in quarterly progress reports. They also
  prepared project scorecards that formed part of the project progress reports, which provided clear and
  concise information of the project's implementation status and progress towards the PDOs. The
  implementing agencies prepared an annual M&E report which it presented to the Pilot Program for
  Climate Resilience. Reported results were discussed and verified during each mission.

  However, no attempts were made to document the outcomes that were not included in the results
  framework. For example, the project teams could have explained what changed as a result of agricultural
  workers and farms gaining access to upgraded roads, or of increasing water storage capacity.



c. M&E Utilization
  The quarterly progress reports prepared by the Grenada and SVG Project Management Units provided
  detailed status updates on progress towards outputs and disbursements. The M&E system as designed
  and implemented was sufficient to assess the achievements of the project, producing outputs that
  plausibly contributed to the PDO of achieving a measurable reduction in vulnerability to natural hazards
  and climate change impacts in the Recipient’s territory and in the Eastern Caribbean Sub-region.

  However, there were shortcomings in capturing other aspects of the results chain, such as how the
  outputs strengthened capacity of the government to prepare for and address natural disasters and
  climate events. Additional data are required to monitor the changes that took place as a result of
  training, upgrading rural roads, increasing water storage capacity, and the like. These data could have
  been collected through surveys and other data collection methods.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues



                                                                                                   Page 17 of 21
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    6O Regional Disaster Vuln Reduct. Projs (P117871)



a. Safeguards
  At appraisal the project was assigned Environmental category “B,” because works proposed under the
  project were largely rehabilitation and retrofitting of selected infrastructure and public buildings, and impacts
  were generally associated with the actual construction phase of the works activities. Four safeguard policies
  were triggered during preparation of the project: Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01), Involuntary
  Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12), Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04), and Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11).

  In January 2017, the project was restructured to trigger the safeguards policy for Pest Management (OP/BP
  4.09), as incidental pesticide use was envisaged for some sub-projects. This need for the incidental use of
  pesticides was identified in early 2016, when the designs were finalized for the rehabilitation of public
  buildings.

  Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01). The ISR dated June 21, 2021 stated that the overall
  safeguards compliance of the project was moderately satisfactory, because compliance with Involuntary
  Resettlement was moderately satisfactory. Compliance with the other three safeguard policies was
  satisfactory. Neither the ICR nor the final ISR of the project dated December 22, 2021 reported on
  safeguard compliance at project closing. The Governments of Grenada and SVF prepared and disclosed in-
  country and through the Bank's website a project level Environmental Assessment, including an
  Environmental Management Framework. They include reference to two groups of projects: those which
  would require a stand-alone Environmental Assessment and those comprising uncomplicated rehabilitation
  works where the impacts are limited to the construction phase (for example, repair and retrofitting).

  Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12). The governments prepared and disclosed in-country and through
  the Bank's website on April 1, 2011 resettlement planning frameworks (RPFs). In Grenada, only a small
  number of people were affected in any significant way. In SVG, a Resettlement Policy Framework for the
  project was developed as well as a Grievance Redress Mechanism. There were several project activities
  which resulted in relocation, land acquisition, and involuntary resettlement. All the relocation plans, and
  Resettlement Action Plans were disclosed on the project’s page of the government’s websites.

  Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04). In SVG, the performance rating for OP4.04 Natural Habitats was rated
  Highly Satisfactory due to the execution of a rapid avian assessment for road works in a sensitive/complex
  area (Fenton Road—Green Hill).

  Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11). The ICR does not report on compliance with this safeguard
  policy.

  Pest Management (OP/BP 4.09). The ICR does not report on compliance with this safeguard policy.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial management. The Project Management Units in the respective countries were responsible for
  the financial management of the project in their respective countries. In Grenada and SVG, the units had
  substantial experience with World Bank fiduciary guidelines and were managing World Bank-financed
  projects. The two units had an adequate financial system which provided accurate and timely information,
  with reasonable assurance, that funds were being used for intended purposes. At project close, the units


                                                                                                    Page 18 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     6O Regional Disaster Vuln Reduct. Projs (P117871)



   were assessed by the Bank financial management specialists to have adequate financial management
   systems deemed to be functioning. They also assessed that they had moderate shortcomings in financial
   management, which did not prevent the timely and reliable provision of information required to manage
   and monitor the implementation of the project. The project closed with a moderately satisfactory rating for
   financial management (ISR, dated June 21, 2021). The ICR does not report on compliance with the Bank’s
   financial management policies.

   Procurement. The country’s Project Management Units were responsible for procurement. Both has
   experience with procurement under previous Bank-funded projects. The project closed with a moderately
   satisfactory rating for procurement (ISR, dated June 21, 2021). The ICR does not report on compliance
   with the Bank’s procurement policies.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                   Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                      IEG
                                                                                   Disagreements/Comment
                                Moderately
Outcome                                                  Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
                                Moderately
Bank Performance                                         Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                  Modest                   Modest

Quality of ICR                  ---                      Substantial


12. Lessons

      Strengthening resilience across the Eastern Caribbean Region requires identification
       of activities, outputs, and outcomes at the regional level, not just at the country level.
       A clear vision and strategy for strengthening resilience across the region is required to
       ensure that activities at this level, for example for enhancing regional connectivity and data
       sharing across countries, are identified and financed.
      Including instruments and dialogue on financing reconstruction and recovery in
       addition to investments in infrastructure can strengthen resilience to natural
       disasters. The Bank has been assisting the countries of the Eastern Caribbean Region to
       learn about and adopt innovative risk reduction and risk financing instruments, such as the
       CCRIF, and the Catastrophe Deferred Drawdown (CAT DDO), a contingent credit line that
       provides immediate liquidity to countries in the aftermath of a natural disaster. In addition, in
       both Grenada and SVG, a comprehensive disaster risk management dialogue with the

                                                                                                     Page 19 of 21
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       6O Regional Disaster Vuln Reduct. Projs (P117871)



         governments allowed for further strengthening of financial protection mechanisms and
         strategies through the regional Disaster Risk Financing Technical Assistance.
        Having more accurate estimates of the costs of compensating project-affected people
         at the start of the project can help government’s budget for the expenses in a timely
         manner. The Government of Grenada faced challenges in budgeting for the costs of
         compensating people affected by various infrastructure projects. Having a clear
         understanding of the number of people likely to be affected and the costs of compensating
         them at the beginning of the project can help the government budget for those costs at the
         outset of the project implementation period.
        Making use of a dedicated portfolio manager can result in more accurate cost
         estimates of project activities. Actual project costs were much higher than estimated at
         appraisal, leading to some activities being canceled while others were delayed while AF was
         mobilized to cover cost over-runs. Having a dedicated portfolio manager assess costs of
         various activities during appraisal in collaboration with all participating ministries and
         institutions may have led to more accurate cost estimates from the beginning.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provides a detailed overview of the project. It is clearly written and is largely consistent with the
guidelines. It provides adequate details of the project’s activities, including a detailed annex summarizing the
efficiency analysis. The ICR also provides a good theory of change analysis in regard to the causal links and
the full results chain.

However, the ICR did not report on compliance with several safeguards issues triggered for the project. Nor
does it report on compliance with the Bank’s financial management policies and procedures, including the
timeliness of submission of interim financial reports, the opinions of the external audits, and whether all
outstanding funds had been returned to the Bank at project closure. Further, the ICR did not report on
compliance with the Bank’s procurement policies and procedures. While cognizant of the shortcomings, the ICR
is rated Substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                     Page 20 of 21
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
6O Regional Disaster Vuln Reduct. Projs (P117871)




                                                                                 Page 21 of 21
