     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     COVID-19 Financial Access DPF (P172863)



                                                                              Report Number: ICRR0023048

1. Operation Information



 Operation ID                             Operation Name
 P172863                                  COVID-19 Financial Access DPF

 Country                                  Practice Area (Lead)
 Mexico                                   Finance, Competitiveness and Innovation



 Non-Programmatic DPF

 L/C/TF Number(s)                         Closing Date (Original)                 Total Financing (USD)
 IBRD-91040                               31-May-2021                                     1,000,000,000.00

 Bank Approval Date                       Closing Date (Actual)
 19-May-2020                              31-May-2021

                                          IBRD/IDA (USD)                             Co-financing (USD)

 Original Commitment                      1,000,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                       1,000,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Actual                                   1,000,000,000.00                                              0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by               ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Ranga Rajan                Christopher David         Christopher David Nelson        IEGSD
 Krishnamani                Nelson



2. Program Objectives and Pillars/Policy Areas
DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives

The program development objective (PDO) of this Development Policy Lending (DPL) operation as stated in
the Program Document (PD, page 2) was:




                                                                                               Page 1 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      COVID-19 Financial Access DPF (P172863)



" To contribute to the government's efforts: (i) to support liquidity in the financial sector; and (ii) to
establish instruments for improved financial access ".


b. Pillars/Policy Areas
There were two pillars/policy areas (PAs) (PD, page 3):

PA #1. Supporting liquidity in the financial sector.

PA # 2. Enabling instruments for improved financial access.


c. Comments on Program Cost, Financing and Dates

Financing. An IBRD loan of US$1,000.00 million financed this operation. The loan was fully disbursed.

Dates. The operation was approved on May 19, 2020, became effective on May 28, 2020 and closed as
scheduled on May 31, 2021.

Other changes. The implementation of prior actions eight and nine (discussed in section 3) were delayed due to
suspension of the operation of civil registries to avoid contagion following the COVID-19 outbreak. Civil registries
were not included in the list of essential activities posted by the Ministry of Health. To address the situation, the
Ministry of Interior (SEGOB) sent official letters to the 32 federal entities prompting them to denominate civil
registries as essential activities.


3. Relevance of Design

a. Relevance of Objectives

 Country and sector context. This operation supported part of the Government's response to the COVID-19
 pandemic. In addition to the adverse public health consequences, the pandemic had financial
 consequences. To address these, it was important to have liquidity buffers in banks and efficient digital
 financial channels to pass through that support households and firms. Adopting financial measures for short-
 term relief and initiating policy reforms for a resilient financial recovery were important to the Government
 strategy.

 Government strategy. The 2019- 2024 National Development Plan (NDP) proposed reorienting public
 spending towards new social programs. The 2020 - 2024 National Financial Inclusion Policy (PNIF) strategy
 articulated the need for financial inclusion. This operation supported four of the six PNIF objectives: (i)
 facilitating access to financial products and services to people and micro, small and medium-size enterprises
 (MSMEs); (ii) increasing digital payments among the population; (iii) enhancing the financial skills of the
 population; (iv) addressing the financial inclusion of vulnerable people.




                                                                                                      Page 2 of 15
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    COVID-19 Financial Access DPF (P172863)



Bank strategy. The development objectives were well-aligned with the County Partnership Framework (CPF)
for 2020-2025. The objective one of the CPF explicitly highlighted the need for "fostering financial
intermediation and inclusion".

Previous Bank experience. The Bank has supported Mexico's financial inclusion agenda through ongoing
dialogue and other operations. The support included: (i) Technical Assistance (TA) through the Financial
Inclusion Global Initiative (FIGI) for expanding the financial inclusion agenda: (ii) A Financial Inclusion DPF in
June 2019; and (ii) Expanding Rural Finance Investment Project. Concurrent with this operation, the Bank was
also preparing: (i) a parallel DPF for supporting economic and social measures in the wake of the COVID-19
pandemic; and an (ii) An Investment Policy loan - the Mexico National Digital Identity System - that
complemented this operation.

Given the urgent need, this operation - the first COVID- related DPF financed by the Bank - was prepared in
3.7 months. In this context, the Bank deemed a stand-alone DPF as the most suitable instrument for achieving
the PDO. This operation supported two types of upstream financial reforms: One, short-term efforts to protect
jobs and boost household incomes following the pandemic, and two, measures aimed at contributing to a
resilient recovery through increasing financial access of the population.

Macroeconomic Outlook. Mexico renewed a Flexible Credit Line (FCL) with the International Monetary Fund
(IMF) in 2019. The Bank's assessment at appraisal concluded that despite the deterioration of the global and
domestic economic conditions following the COVID-19 pandemic, Mexico's macroeconomic outlook was
adequate for supporting a DPF operation. The prior actions were based on solid analytical underpinnings
(discussed below).


b. Relevance of Prior Actions

Rationale

Pillar 1. Supporting liquidity in the financial sector. This pillar aimed to strengthen the banking system's
liquidity to encourage them to lend more to MSMEs and households following the COVID-19 pandemic. There
were two prior actions (PAs).

PAs # 1 and 2. As a PA (# 1), the Central Bank reduced the monetary regulation deposit (DRM) in April 2020
that banks were required to maintain with the Central Bank. This prior action also required the banks to inform
the Central Bank of the destination of the resources they had received for the return of the DRM. According to
the clarifications provided by the team, the Central Bank set a deadline in November 2020 to unwind the DRM
only for those institutions that provided a lower proportion of loans to households and MSMEs during the first
months of the pandemic.

As a PA (# 2), the Central Bank reduced the cost of its Ordinary Additional Liquidity Facility (FLAO) in April
2020. According to the clarifications provided by the team, FLAO was part of the menu of instruments
established by the Central Bank to prevent a systemic credit crunch and that it was originally established by the
Central Bank during the Global Financial Crisis in 2008 as an additional liquidity window via secured credits.

The analytical underpinnings of the prior actions were based on: (1) World Bank (2020) " Macroeconomic Policy
in the Time of Covid-19: A Primer for Developing Countries. This work suggested that, following the pandemic,
the Central Bank was to ensure that banks have adequate resources to lend more to firms to preempt massive

                                                                                                    Page 3 of 15
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    COVID-19 Financial Access DPF (P172863)



layoffs and bankruptcies. The prior actions together would enable banks to lend more to MEMEs and
households. Therefore, the relevance of the PAs is satisfactory.

2. Establish instruments for improved financial access. While the measures described above were short-
term measures, reforms in this pillar aimed at establish instruments for improving the financial access of the
population. There were nine prior actions.

PA # 3. The government enacted the Credit Institutions Law in March 2020, enabling minors (between 15 and
17 years): (i) to open a bank savings account; and (ii) manage the funds without adult representation. The law
required that minors could only receive wage payments and electronic transfers from government and social
programs through this account.

Before this law, minors were not allowed to open bank accounts. This undermined the financial inclusion of
almost seven million minors who were legally part of the work force, and 1.4 million had a formal job. Moreover,
3.4 million minors were eligible for government social programs. The analytical underpinnings of this prior action
were based on the: (i) World Bank/IMF's (2017) Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP) for Mexico; and
(ii) World Bank's (2019) analytical work "Achieving effective financial inclusion in Mexico: The payments
perspective". This prior action was appropriate as allowing minors to open a bank account would not only help
minors receive wages and other government benefits in the short run, it would also help in their financial
inclusion in the medium term. Therefore, the relevance of this PA is satisfactory.

PA # 4. As a prior action, the Government issued regulations on July 9, 2019, mandating the National
Commission for the Defense and Protection of Financial Users (CONDUSEF) for strengthening the Financial
Technology Institutions' (ITFs) transparency. ITFs, besides providing services that were needed during the
pandemic, such as digital payments, deposits, crowdfunding lending and investments would help in facilitating
financial intermediation in the recovery phase. According to the clarifications provided by the team,
crowdfunding is a type of lending whereby the funds are provided by individuals (investors if there is a return)
that collectively fund a specific project. While Mexico's existing Fintech Law contained general consumer
protection provisions, this prior action mandated CONDUSEF to issue secondary regulation for strengthening
the transparency of ITFs.

The analytical underpinnings of this prior action were based on the World Bank/IMF (March 2017) " Financial
Sector Assessment for Mexico". and World Bank 2017 " Good Practices for Financial Consumer protection".
These works recommended public disclosure of the regulatory requirements of the ITFs for
strengthening financial consumer protection. Given that this information is important for consumers with limited
financial skills, this prior action was appropriate. Therefore, the relevance of this PA is satisfactory.

PA # 5. The Central Bank issued regulations for implementing an electronic payments platform ("CoDi") on
October 3, 2019. Cash-based transactions were high in Mexico, with only a third of the merchants accepting
electronic payments. In 2016, payments with debit and credit cards in Mexico were about 8.9% of the Gross
Domestic Product (GDP), as compared to 17.6% in Brazil, 20.1% in India and 75.7% in China. The Central
Bank in 2019 established "Codi" in 2019 as an alternative payment method that could be operated from any
smartphone. This prior action aimed to increase electronic payments transactions.

The analytical underpinnings of this prior action were based on World Bank (2018) " Achieving Financial
Inclusion in Mexico: The Payments Perspective". Given that electronic payments is recognized worldwide as
more efficient than cash-based transactions, this prior action was appropriate and would help in the financial
inclusion of the population. Therefore, the relevance of this prior action is satisfactory.


                                                                                                   Page 4 of 15
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    COVID-19 Financial Access DPF (P172863)



PA # 6. The Government amended the Credit Institutions Law in June 2019, mandating prioritization of projects
targeting the financial needs of women. While financial access gaps between men and women exist in many
countries, these gaps were larger in Mexico (as compared to the average of Latin American and Caribbean
(LAC) and Organization of Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) countries). Due to their financial
exclusion, women were more vulnerable to adverse external shocks. The analytical underpinning of this prior
action based on the World Bank (January 2019) "Achieving financial inclusion in Mexico. The Payments
Perspective". This prior action was appropriate for the intended outcome of financial inclusion of women.
Therefore, this prior action is satisfactory.

PA # 7. The Government enacted the Education Law on September 2019 and issued the Training Program
Operational Guidelines in December 2019. This guidelines identified financial education be part of the school
curriculum from preschool through high school. According to a World Bank study (2018), "Improving
Financial Education Delivery in Mexicans: A Financial Education Report and Roadmap", Mexicans exhibited
lower financial ability. The study observed large gaps in the delivery of financial education in Mexico's public
education system, which had not yet integrated financial education as part of their curriculum. This prior action
sought to incorporate financial education as part of curriculum in all schools (including all private and public
preschool, primary, secondary and high schools).

The analytical underpinnings of this prior action were based on the World Bank/IMF (March 2017) "Financial
Sector Assessment - Mexico" and World Bank (2019) "Achieving Effective Financial Inclusion in Mexico: The
Payments Perspective". This prior action had strong analytical underpinnings. Therefore, this prior action is
satisfactory.

PA # 8 and 9. These prior actions were part of a broader policy and institutional reforms aimed to create a
national personal identification (ID) system. Mexico had a highly fragmented personal identify management
system, with many government agencies issuing identification credentials and little coordination between them.
This led to significant overlapping and fraud. Moreover, over 3.7 millions did not have a legal ID. The lack of a
single ID system hampered people's access to financial services and social program transfers for large
segments of the population.

PA # 8. As a prior action (# 8), the Government established the National Service of personal ID for verifying
personal identify by third parties (including financial institutions) on May 31, 2019. The Government also
mandated the National Population Registry (RENAPO) in the Ministry of Health with the tasks of establishing
and maintaining the ID system.

PA # 9 sought to link the civil registries with the national registration system. As a prior action (# 9), the
Government established mechanisms for exchanging data between civil registries related to individual's identify
and its verification with biometric data through agreements with the states.

Civil registration in Mexico was decentralized in Mexico and mandatory in the states, which are divided into
2,460 municipalities. Each municipality was responsible for creating civil registration records of residents. While
the National Population Registry (RENAPO) was responsible for overall coordination of civil registries, it lacked
effective mechanisms for ensuring that data pertaining to births, vital events and deaths from different registries
were conducted in a standardized manner. This prior action aimed at harmonizing the data in the national
identification registry through bilateral agreements between the states.

The analytical basis for the Prior Actions 8 and 9 were solid and based on the World Bank (2018) " Digital
Identification System Mexico". This work recommended that an interoperable, national database system


                                                                                                     Page 5 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     COVID-19 Financial Access DPF (P172863)



 was appropriate, that linked relevant civil registries and identity systems as a key action to enable digital
 financial inclusion. The two prior actions were appropriate. While prior action # 8 would help in mitigating the
 issue from a highly fragmented personal identification system, prior action # 9 would help in harmonizing the
 data in the national identification registry. The prior actions were appropriate and are therefore rated as
 satisfactory.

 The PDO was highly relevant to the Government and the Bank strategy for Mexico. The prior actions combined
 the urgent need to provide rapid liquidity to the financial system, with other measures aimed at setting the
 groundwork for increased access and usage of financial services by the population both during the pandemic
 and in the recovery phase. The selected prior actions were based on solid analytical underpinnings and there is
 an explicit, comprehensive and convincing results chain linking the prior actions to the achievement of the
 PDOs. Therefore, the overall relevance of design is satisfactory.



Rating

Satisfactory


4. Relevance of Results Indicators

Rationale

Pillar One. Supporting liquidity in the financial sector. There was one Results Indicator (RI).

RI # 1. Reducing DRM and creating an additional source of liquidity would improve the bank's liquidity
position following the pandemic and enable them to increase lending to households and MSMEs. This
indicator directly supported the short-term measure supporting liquidity and was verifiable. Therefore, the
relevance of this RI is satisfactory.

Pillar Two. Enabling instruments for improved financial access. Reforms in this area aimed at
establishing instruments for financial inclusion of vulnerable groups. There were ten RIs.

RI # 2 and RI # 3. RI # 3 measured the number of minors (between the ages of 15 to 17) with a bank
account in their name when the operation closed. RI # 4 measured the share of female minors with a bank
account. The indicators could be monitored and were directly linked to the intended outcome of financial
inclusion of minors. Therefore, the relevance of these RIs are rated as satisfactory.

RI # 4 and RI # 5. RI # 4 measured the percentage of licensed Electronic Payments Funds Institutions
(IFPEs) that complied with the transparency requirements in December 2021. Complementing this
indicator, RI # 5 measured the number of payments that were processed electronically through the "CoDi"
platform in December 2021. The RIs directly supported the outcome of monitoring and promoting
FINTECH products. The indicators were verifiable and appropriate for the financial inclusion of the
population with limited financial ability. Therefore, the relevance of this RI is satisfactory.

RI # 6. This indicator measured the percentage of women benefitting from the state development bank's
financial access programs. This indicator could be monitored and was appropriate for the intended
outcome of financial inclusion of women. However, this indicator was defined as a simple average, as

                                                                                                      Page 6 of 15
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    COVID-19 Financial Access DPF (P172863)



opposed to a weighted average (due to the limitations set by the the ack of gender-disaggregated data at
the time of the preparation). Moreover, the baseline included one institution which did not lend to
individuals. Therefore, the relevance of this indicator is moderately satisfactory.

RI # 7. This indicator required that all schools (including all private and public preschool, primary,
secondary and high schools) incorporate financial education in their curriculum, when the operation
closed. The target was unrealistic, given the critical additional steps that were required before financial
education could be incorporated intp school curriculum (such as developing a strategy for teacher training,
preparing documents for trainers, and reviewing and developing materials for textbooks). Therefore, the
relevance of this indicator is moderately unsatisfactory.

R! # 8 and 9. RI # 8 measured the number of entities (including financial institutions) requesting
verification services from the National Population Registry (RENAPO). This indicator was broadly defined,
as a more narrowly focused indicator on financial institutions would have been more appropriate for
monitoring the operations' achievements. RI # 9 measured the number or enquiries to the National
Identification Service. Given that the indicators were for the most part appropriate, relevance of these
indicators is satisfactory.

RI # 10. This indicator measured the number of states that rolled out the ID services to record vital events
in a standardized manner and the percentage of population they were covering. This indicator was a
direct measure of the prior action. Therefore, this indicator is satisfactory.

Of the ten results indicators, eight were satisfactory, one moderately satisfactory and one moderately
unsatisfactory. Therefore, the relevance of the results indicators is substantial.

Table. Results Indicators (RIs), the Prior Actions (PAs) they support, baseline values, target
values, actual change in RI relative to target and RI achievement rating



                                                                                   Actual
                                                                                 change in
                                              Baseline     Target
                                                                        Actual      target
                     Associated      RI      (including (including                          RI achievement
         RIs                                                          value of relative
                        PAs      relevance units and units and                                   Rating
                                                                         target       to
                                               dates)      dates)
                                                                                  targeted
                                                                                   change
PDO 1. Supporting liquidity in the financial sector
                                              Baseline     Target
                                               (March     (August                   15.6%
                                                                         Actual
 RI # 1. The Central                         2020): 320 2020):                   reduction
                                                                       (August
  Bank reduced the     PA # 1    Substantial    billion     15%                     of the    Satisfactory
                                                                     2020): 270
total amount of DRM                            Mexican reduction                   stock of
                                                                     billion MXN
                                                 Peso   in the stock                 DRM
                                                (MXN)     of DRM
 RI # 1. The Central   PA # 2 Substantial. Baseline        Target        Actual    Target:    Satisfactory
    Bank enabled                               (March     (August      (August 270 billion
  bank’s access to                           2020): 320

                                                                                                    Page 7 of 15
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                       Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    COVID-19 Financial Access DPF (P172863)



liquidity by reducing                         billion 2020): 270 2020): 270
     the cost of its                        Mexican billion MXN Billion
    ordinary liquidity                        Peso
          facility                           (MXN)
PDO 2. Enabling instruments for improved financial access.
  RI # 2. Number of
                                                         Target     Actual
  minors ages 15 to                         Baseline
                                                      (December (December      Target
 17 that had a bank    PA # 3 Substantial (March                                           Satisfactory
                                                         2021):     2021):    exceeded
account in their own                        2020): 0
                                                       1,200,000 4,439,206
           name
    RI # 3. Share of
                                                         Target     Actual
female minors ages                          Baseline
                                                      (December (December      Target
 15 to 17 that had a   PA # 4 Substantial (March                                           Satisfactory
                                                         2021):     2021):    exceeded
    bank account in                         2020): 0
                                                          50%        52%
    their own name
 RI # 4. Percentage
       of licensed
   Electronic Funds                                      Target     Actual
                                            Baseline                          Over two
 Institutions (IFPEs)                                 (December (December
                       PA # 5 Substantial (March                               thirds of   Satisfactory
 in compliance with                                      2021):     2021):
                                           2020): 0%                          the target
  transparency and                                       100%        89%
      disclosure in
        contracts
  RI # 5. Number of                         Baseline     Target     Actual
payments processed                           (March (December (December        Target
                       PA # 5 Substantial                                                  Satisfactory
   through the CoDi                          2020):      2021:      2021):    exceeded
         platform                           260,000     450,000 3,606,134
RI # 6. % Of women
                                                         Target     Actual
    benefitting from                        Baseline
                                                      (December (December      Target
 state development     PA # 6    Modest      (March                                        Satisfactory
                                                          2021):    2021):    exceeded
    banks’ financial                      2020): 46%
                                                          60%        74%
   access programs
 RI # 7. Percentage
                                                         Target
        of schools                          Baseline                Actual    Far short
                                                      (December
     incorporating     PA# 7     Modest      (March              (December     of the      Negligible
                                                         2021):
 financial education                      2020): O%               2021): 0%    target
                                                         100%
  in their curriculum
                                                                    Actual
  RI # 8. Number of                         Baseline     Target
                                                                               Target
  entities requesting  PA # 8 Substantial (March (December                                 Satisfactory
                                                                 (December    exceeded
verification services                       2020): 0 2021): 50
                                                                 2021): 204
  RI # 9. Number of
                                                         Target     Actual
      identification
                                            Baseline (December (December
    enquiries to the                                                           Target
                       PA# 9  Substantial (March         2021:      2020):                 Satisfactory
 National Service of                                                          exceeded
                                            2020): 0    300,000 6,300,000
        Personal
                                                          daily      daily
      Identification

                                                                                             Page 8 of 15
                   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                   COVID-19 Financial Access DPF (P172863)



                RI # 10. Number of
               states that rolled out
                                                                 Baseline    Target     Actual
                 the ID services to
                                                                  (March (December (December
               record vital events in
                                                                2020): Six 2021): 25 2021): 24 Target
                   a standardized       PA# 10     Substantial                                                 Satisfactory
                                                               states, 18% states,      states,  realized
                  manner and the
                                                                   of the  65% of the 72% of the
                   percentage of
                                                                population population population
                  population they
                   were covering.

   Rating

   Satisfactory

   5. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
EFFICACY_TBL




                OBJECTIVE 1
                Objective
                To support liquidity in the financial sector.

                PA # 1 -2: RI # 1.

                Rationale
                Theory of change. The causal links between the reforms and outcomes were logical, and the outcomes were
                monitorable. Reducing the Monetary Regulation Deposit (DRM) and creating additional source of funding
                through the Ordinary Additional Liquidity (FLAO), could be expected to increase the liquidity of banks and this
                in turn would enable them to increase lending. These measures can be expected to aid in mitigating the
                impact of COVID-19 on credit to households and MSMEs.

                Outcomes (ICR pages 26 - 27 and page 41).

                      The Central Bank reduced the DRM in April 2020, and provided access to cheaper short-term
                       financing through FLAO to banks. In addition, the Central Bank: (i) expanded access to development
                       banking institutions so that they could obtain liquidity through guaranteed loans or repurchase
                       agreements; (ii) increased the number of securities that were eligible as collateral; (iii) provided
                       liquidity to financial institutions holding government debt, so that they could access short-term funding
                       without having to dispose of their securities: (iv) Through the window for temporary exchange of
                       guarantees, provided liquidity to stock market instruments that saw their liquidity decrease in the
                       secondary market; and (v) provide liquidity to corporate stock certificates and long-term corporate debt
                       through the Corporate Securities Repurchase Facility.
                      The stock of DRM held with the Central Bank decreased from 320 billion (Mexican Peso) on March
                       31, 2020, to 270 billion MXN, on August 31, 2020. This represented a 15% reduction as targeted.
                       According to the clarifications provided by the team, the stock of DRM outstanding remained at almost
                       270 billion MXN.




                                                                                                                  Page 9 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   COVID-19 Financial Access DPF (P172863)



The operation significantly contributed to strengthening the liquidity position of banks following the pandemic.
The efficacy of this PDO is satisfactory.



Rating

Satisfactory

OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To establish instruments for improved financial access.
PA # 3 -9. RIs 3 - 10.

Rationale
Theory of change. Reforms aimed at enabling minors to open bank accounts and incorporating financial
education in school curriculum can be expected to increase the financial inclusion of minors. Reforms aimed
at strengthening the transparency of Fintech products, can be expected to protect the vulnerable population
accessing Fintech products. Growth in the number of CoDi users, were aimed at increasing the extent of
electronic payments transactions. Reforms aimed at increasing the number of women benefitting from the
state development bank's financial access programs, were aimed at their financial inclusion. Reforms aimed
at exchanging data between civil registries sought to improve the effectiveness of ID verification process. The
combination of these reforms can be expected to increase financial access in Mexico and thereby enhance
financial inclusion. The link between the reforms and intended outcomes were logical and the indicators could
be verified.

Outcomes.

      The number of minors with bank accounts increased to 4.3 million exceeding the target of one million.
       52% of the minors (2.3 million) were women, as compared to the target of 50%. The ICR (paragraph
       27) notes that the targets were exceeded due to the launch of a large public transfer program and
       introduction of new products by commercial banks.
      Nine Electronic Payment Fund Institutions (IFPEs) were licensed under the FINTECH law in
       December 2021. Of these, eight complied with the transparency and disclosure requirements of the
       National Commission for the Defense and Protection of Financial Services Users (CONDUSF), short
       of the target of nine. The remaining IFPE that was licensed, presented the supervisor with inaccurate
       information that had not been rectified when the operation closed. Given that over two-thirds (89%) of
       the target was achieved, efficacy is satisfactory.
      Over 3.6 million electronic payments were processed through the "CoDi" platform by December 31,
       2021, as compared to 260,000 at the baseline in March 2020, and exceeding the target of 450,000.
       The average number of daily electronic transactions more than tripled from 2,265 in March 2020 to
       7,903 in December 2021. The number of accounts with at least one electronic payment also increased
       steadily since the launch of the system, reaching 769,734 in December 2021. Given that the target
       was surpassed, efficacy is satisfactory.
      The Development Unit (UBD) at the Ministry of Finance provided gender-disaggregated data when the
       operation closed on the number of women beneficiaries from six state development bank's financial
       access programs. Of the total number of beneficiaries, the weighted average of the share of women

                                                                                                  Page 10 of 15
                         Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                         COVID-19 Financial Access DPF (P172863)



                               beneficiaries increased from 46% at the baseline to 74.1% in December 2021, exceeding the target of
                               60%. Starting from a total of 1,760,000 in March 2020, the number of beneficiaries increased 33%, to
                               over 2,340,000 in December 20211. The ICR (paragraph 31) observed that this increase was mainly
                               due to the Trusts instituted in relation to agriculture (FIRA). FIRA catered to over 2,000,000 women in
                               December 31, up from 1,300,000 in March 2020. The ICR notes that this increase was due to the
                               expansion of FIRA's microcredit program, which reached almost 1,850,000 women receiving loans.
                               The efficacy is satisfactory.
                              None of the schools incorporated financial education as part of their school curriculum (as compared
                               to the target of all schools). The ICR notes that this reform is not expected to be operational before
                               August 2023 or even later. The efficacy of this PDO is negligible.
                              204 entities requested verification services from the National Population Registry by December 31,
                               2021, exceeding the target of 50. Of these 204, 68 were from banks. The rest were from public
                               institutions, educational establishments, other public entities, the judiciary and one autonomous
                               agency.
                              The identification verification enquiries to the National Service of Personal Identification went up to to
                               a monthly average of 630,000 enquiries, far exceeding the target of 300,000 enquiries.
                              By December 31, 2021, 24 states had rolled out the standardized identification service to record vital
                               events, marginally short of the target of 24 states. The standardized identification service covered
                               72% of the population, exceeding the target of 65%.

                      Eight of the nine intended outcomes were realized or exceeded. Given this, efficacy is satisfactory.



                      Rating

                      Satisfactory


OVERALL EFF TBL OLD




Overall Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
Rationale

Of the nine results indicators, seven were realized or surpassed. Overall efficacy is satisfactory.



Overall Efficacy Rating
Satisfactory


      6. Outcome

      Rationale




                                                                                                                          Page 11 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      COVID-19 Financial Access DPF (P172863)



The operation's development objectives are highly relevant to the Government and the Bank strategy for
Mexico. The prior actions were based on solid underpinnings and were appropriate along the results chains for
realizing the intended objectives of: (i) strengthening the liquidity position of the banks as a short term measure
in the wake of the pandemic: and (ii) establishing instruments for improved financial access which in turn would
aid in the overarching objective of financial inclusion of the population. Overall outcome is satisfactory.


a. Rating

Satisfactory

7. Risk to Development Outcome

Government commitment. The ICR (paragraph 47) observed that the Mexican authorities are committed to
improving access to finance, especially for vulnerable segments of the population, and promoting digital
technologies in the financial sector in the wake of the pandemic. However, there is modest risk to the
sustainability of development given that: (i) reforms pertaining to incorporating financial education in
schools. Given that the outcome of this reform depends on the coordinated work different stakeholders,
there is risk that the outcome may not be realized even by the end of 2023; and (ii) The reform pertaining to
setting a personal identification system could be undermined due to inadequate funding to National
Population Registry (RENAPO).


8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Bank Performance – Design

Rationale


Given the urgency, the Bank expedited the preparation of this operation. The operation was prepared in
just 3.7 months, despite the team adjusting to the challenges of remote work. The Bank prepared this
operation based on the experiences from previous and ongoing Bank engagements through DPF
operations in Mexico. The operation was prepared in close collaboration with the IMF (on macroeconomic
issues) and with the International Finance Corporation (IFC) in areas relating to access to finance. The
prior actions were based on sound analytical underpinnings (discussed in section three) and appropriate
along the results chain for realizing the intended outcomes. The design included considerations for the
short-term needs in the face of the COVID-19 pandemic. and the importance improving financial access of
vulnerable groups in the medium term. The preparation team appropriately identified the macroeconomic
risk as substantial at appraisal, given the high degree of uncertainty regarding the ultimate implications of
the pandemic, including how long it would last and how the different transmission channels would evolve
(such as trade, financial flows and commodity prices).

There were moderate shortcomings at design. The two results indicators RI # 6 pertaining to the
percentage of women benefitting from state development banks' benefitting from state development banks
and RI # 7 pertaining to the percentage of schools incorporating financial education in their official
curriculum were unrealistic. While the shortcoming pertaining to RI # 6 was partly due to the lack of

                                                                                                     Page 12 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      COVID-19 Financial Access DPF (P172863)



gender-disaggregated information at the time of preparation, the shortcoming pertaining to RI # 7 was due
to unrealistic timeframe. The preparation team underestimated the several pieces of work that needed to
be completed before the outcome could be realized.



Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

b. Bank Performance – Implementation

Rationale

The ICR (paragraph 41) noted that although an implementation status report (ISR) was not required. the Bank
team worked in close contact with the Mexican authorities during implementation and requested for information
on the results indicators as of June 2021 for an interim assessment of effectiveness. The Bank team also held
several meetings with authorities to track indicators from different institutions in Mexico, in the absence of active
monitoring from the government unit responsible for monitoring (the unit of Banking. Securities and Savings
(UBVA). The early engagement and discussion on loan performance initiated by the team soon after June 2021
ensured that the review of this operation could be completed by June 2021.



Rating

Satisfactory

c. Overall Bank Performance

Rationale

Overall bank performance is moderately satisfactory, given the shortcomings at design.


Overall Bank Performance Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

9. Other Impacts

a. Social and Poverty

The policy measures following the COVID-19 pandemic aimed to avoid a liquidity crunch which could disrupt the
payment systems, leading to job losses were aimed at the poor and vulnerable, who have limited resources to
cope with negative shocks. Including financial education in school curriculum when completed is likely to have

                                                                                                      Page 13 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     COVID-19 Financial Access DPF (P172863)



sizeable impacts of financial inclusion of youth. Likewise, the improvements on access to a national identification
can contribute to addressing a key constraint in the effective implementation of social programs.



b. Environmental

The PD (paragraph 75) observed that no significant negative effects on the environment, forests and other natural
resources were expected from the prior actions of this operation. The ICR does not report any adverse
environmental impacts during implementation.



c. Gender

The three reforms supported by this operation - enabling youth to open bank accounts, percentage of women
benefitting from state development banks' financial access programs and incorporating financial education in all
schools - were aimed at financial inclusion of women.



d. Other

The reforms enabling the Ministry of Interior (SECOP) establish the National Service of Personal Identification
(SNIP), enabled exchange data between civil registries related to individual's identity were part of a broader policy
and institutional reform agenda to create a unique system of personal identification in Mexico (ICR, paragraph
40).




10. Quality of ICR

Rationale

The ICR is well-written. The theory of change articulated in the text clearly articulates the links between prior
actions, the chosen indicators and the intended outcomes. The ICR also candidly discusses the shortcomings
of some indicators and discusses the ways the indicators could have been improved upon. The quantitative
evidence provided in the text is adequate to assess the project performance. The ICR draws good lessons from
the experience of implementing this project.



a. Rating

Substantial



                                                                                                    Page 14 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      COVID-19 Financial Access DPF (P172863)



11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                    IEG
                                                                                  Disagreement/Comments
Outcome                          Satisfactory          Satisfactory
                                 Moderately
Bank Performance                                       Moderately Satisfactory
                                 Satisfactory
Relevance of Results
                                 ---                   Satisfactory
Indicators
Quality of ICR                   ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR draws the following three lessons from the experience of implementing this operation.

1. Engagement with all stakeholders involved in implementation of the prior actions can help in
ensuring feasibility. The prior action seven in this operation - incorporating financial education in school
curriculum - relied on the feedback provided by the Banking, Securities and Savings Unit (UBVA), which was
coordinating the efforts to include financial education in schools. Broader consultations with the other entities
working on this reform would have helped in providing more evidence that the development objective and the
result indicator was unrealistic within the proposed time frame.

2. Previous engagements and strong analytical underpinnings can help in designing a fast-disbursing
crisis-response Development Policy Financing (DPF) operation. The preparation of this DRF within 3.7
months underscored the importance of the Bank's long-standing dialogue with Mexico. Additionally, the
analytical foundations were strengthened by a previous Bank-financed operation of enhancing financial access
to vulnerable segments of the population.

3. The assumptions underlying the targets of the outcome indicators need to be spelled out to avoid
overly ambitious targets. This DPF implicitly assumed that identity verification services (prior action eight)
would incorporate the use of the biometric data, which was supported by a World Bank project. The operation
did succeed in establishing a Unique Population Registration Number (CURB) as a more robust way to verify
the identification of people. However, CURB did not have the sophisticated feature of biometric data, and as a
result the target was overly ambitious.


13. Project Performance Assessment Report (PPAR) Recommended?

No




                                                                                                     Page 15 of 15
