     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Ghana Commercial Agriculture (P114264)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0023067

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                   Project Name
 P114264                                      Ghana Commercial Agriculture

 Country                                      Practice Area(Lead)
 Ghana                                        Agriculture and Food


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)                 Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-50770,IDA-62540,TF-14170,TF-          30-Sep-2017                                          157,851,607.17
 A9432

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 22-Mar-2012                               31-Dec-2021

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                       Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            100,000,000.00                                   16,950,000.00

 Revised Commitment                             166,950,000.00                                   16,950,000.00

 Actual                                         157,851,607.17                                   16,950,000.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Richard Anson              Chikako Miwa                  Christopher David Nelson        IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The project development objective (PDO), as stated in the Financing Agreement (FA, 2012), and the Project
   Appraisal Document (PAD, 2012), for this Ghana Commercial Agriculture Project (CAP), was: “to increase
   access to land, to private sector finance, and to input- and output-markets by smallholder farms
   through private-public partnerships (PPPs) in commercial agriculture in Accra Plains and SADA



                                                                                                   Page 1 of 31
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  Ghana Commercial Agriculture (P114264)



zone.” The SADA zone referred to the Savanah Agricultural Development Zone, which was a target area for
developmental support.

The PDO was revised twice, as follows:

First Revision (FA, November, 2015): The objective of the Project was “to improve agricultural productivity
and production of both smallholder and nucleus farms in selected project intervention areas with
increased access to reliable water, land, finance, and agricultural input and output markets”;

Second Revision (FA, October, 2018): The objective of the Project was “to improve agricultural
productivity and production of both smallholder and nucleus farms in selected project intervention
areas of the Recipient’s territory”.

This ICRR parses the original and revised PDOs as follows:

Objective 1 (Original): “To increase access to land by smallholder farms through private-public partnerships
(PPPs) in commercial agriculture in Accra Plains and SADA zone.”

Objective 1 Revision 1: Dropped. Objective 1 was no longer a part of PDO after the first restructuring (ICR,
para. 46).

Objective 2 (Original): “To increase access to private sector finance by smallholder farms through private-
public partnerships (PPPs) in commercial agriculture in Accra Plains and SADA zone.”

Objective 2 Revision 1: Dropped. Objective 2 was no longer a part of PDO after the first restructuring (ICR,
para. 46).

Objective 3 (Original): “To increase access to input and output markets by smallholder farms through
private-public partnerships (PPPs) in commercial agriculture in Accra Plains and SADA zone.”

Objective 3 Revision 1: Dropped. Objective 3 was no longer a part of PDO after the first restructuring (ICR,
para. 46).

Objective 4: None at appraisal.

Objective 4 Revision 1: “To improve agricultural productivity of both smallholder and nucleus farms in
selected project intervention areas with increased access to reliable water, land, finance, and agricultural
input and output markets.” It was a new objective added at the first restructuring.

Objective 4 Revision 2: “To improve agricultural productivity of both smallholder and nucleus farms in
selected project intervention areas of the Recipient’s territory.” It was a revised objective after the second
restructuring.

Objective 5: None at appraisal.

Objective 5 Revision 1: “To improve agricultural production of both smallholder and nucleus farms in
selected project intervention areas with increased access to reliable water, land, finance, and agricultural
input and output markets.” It was a new objective added at the first restructuring.


                                                                                                   Page 2 of 31
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Ghana Commercial Agriculture (P114264)



   Objective 5 Revision 2: “To improve agricultural production of both smallholder and nucleus farms in
   selected project intervention areas of the Recipient’s territory.” It was a revised objective after the second
   restructuring.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  31-May-2018

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   Component 1: Strengthening investment promotion infrastructure, facilitating secure access to land
   (Appraisal/Original allocation: US$11.8 million; Revised: US$5.9 million; Actual: US$5.4 million). At
   appraisal, the planned activities included: (i) enhancing the investment climate and promoting investments;
   (ii) improving land governance in support of inclusive land access; and (iii) supporting out-grower
   arrangements, including developing a framework for out-grower schemes. At the second restructuring, the
   component title was changed to: “Facilitating investment promotion in commercial agriculture”. Under the
   revised component title, similar activities as originally designed were implemented, with a stronger
   emphasis on promoting commercial agriculture.

   Component 2: Securing PPPs and smallholder linkages in the Accra Plains (Appraisal/Original
   allocation: US$45.4 million; Revised: US$21.7 million; Actual: US$21.2 million). At appraisal, planned
   activities included: (i) technical assistance in support of the PPP transaction; (ii) a full feasibility study for the
   PPP and transaction advice; (iii) organizing small-holder participation in the PPP; and (iv) viability gap
   funding for the PPP. At the second restructuring the component title was changed to: “Promoting private
   sector investments and small-holder linkages in selected areas” and the relevant activities were adopted.

   Component 3: Securing PPPs and smallholder linkages in the SADA zone (Original allocation (ref.
   component 3 at appraisal): US$64.3 million; Revised: US$117.9 million; Actual: US$105.4 million). At
   appraisal, planned activities included: (i) financing establishment costs and facilitating the development of
   out-grower schemes and contract farming arrangements; (ii) investing in land development for commercial
   agriculture; (iii) rehabilitating and constructing new agricultural storage infrastructure and processing
   facilities; and (iv) supporting business development services among agricultural service providers and
   investing in processing businesses. At the second restructuring, the title of the component was changed to:
   “Rehabilitation/modernization of irrigation schemes and reforming of irrigation institutions and
   management”. After the second restructuring, activities focused on: Rehabilitation/modernization of
   irrigation schemes; Restructuring and Strengthening of Public Irrigation and Drainage Institutions; and
   Development of Water-User Associations and Private Scheme Management Entities.



                                                                                                           Page 3 of 31
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Ghana Commercial Agriculture (P114264)



  Component 4: Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation (Original allocation: US$14.3 million;
  Revised: US$21.2 million; Actual: US$22.3 million). At appraisal, activities under this component focused on
  the operations of the project implementing agencies. It would also finance the various monitoring and
  evaluation functions. After the second restructuring, this component implemented similar activities as
  envisioned at appraisal, while considering the various revisions.

  Note: The original allocation at appraisal included US$3.0 million for reimbursement of PPF; and US$6.2
  million for contingencies.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Costs: The total project costs at approval was US$145 million. Due to revisions in financing
  arrangements (see below), the revised project costs were US$166.9 million. The actual project costs at
  closing were US$157.3 million (or about 108% of the approved total costs) due to a shortfall in
  disbursements in some of the project activities.

  Financing: At approval, the IDA credit (No. 50770) was US$100 million, supplemented by Trust Fund (TF)
  grant from USAID for US$45 million, with no Government counterpart contributions. During early
  implementation, the TF was reduced to US$16.95 million due to USAID’s internal shifts of budget priorities.
  An additional IDA Credit was approved for US$50 million in 2018, resulting in a total project financing of
  US$166.9 million.

  Borrower/Recipient Contribution: There was zero Government counterpart contribution, because of
  budgetary constraints, although Government contributed through its project management and technical
  personnel.

  Dates: The Project was approved on March 22, 2012, and became effective on April 8, 2013. This lag was
  due to meeting the various conditions of effectiveness, especially with respect to the delay in establishing
  the trust fund for the cofinancing by USAID, coupled with the delay in preparing the Project Implementation
  Manual. The original closing date was September 30, 2017, with the final closing date being December 31,
  2021 (for an additional 51 months).

  Restructurings: Significant Changes During Implementation, Revised Objectives, Components and
  Allocations and Revised Indicators/Targets (see ICR, p. 8 - 13 for details of the main changes)

  The project underwent two restructurings: in November, 2015, and in October, 2018. In each of these
  restructurings, the PDO, indicators and components were revised (see ICR, paras. 12 – 24).

  First Restructuring (2015):

  The PDO was revised as follows: “The objective of the Project was to improve agricultural productivity and
  production of both smallholder and nucleus farms in selected project intervention areas with increased
  access to reliable water, land, finance, and agricultural input and output markets”. The original PDO was
  reformulated because it referred to “increased access to reliable water, land, finance and agricultural input
  and output markets”, which were interventions envisaged under the project to achieve the ultimate and core
  development objectives of increasing agricultural productivity and production.



                                                                                                  Page 4 of 31
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Ghana Commercial Agriculture (P114264)



   The PDO indicators were revised as follows: (i) all of the targets for the key indicators were decreased, and
   some were dropped (e.g., yields, gross margins, area under formal commercial arrangements, public-
   private partnership activities in the Accra plains irrigation PPP, no of direct beneficiaries), to reflect
   enhanced realism; (ii) several targets were added to reflect revised project components, with respect to:
   yields for vegetables; hectares (ha) of improved irrigation and drainage were introduced to reflect the
   addition of this component; restructuring and strengthening public irrigation management agencies,
   establishing Water User Associations.

   Project components were increased from four to seven (see ICR, Table 2), with the 3 additional
   components, as follows: (i) component 5: Investments in physical rehabilitation and modernization of
   selected existing public irrigation and drainage infrastructure; (ii) component 6: Support for the restructuring
   and strengthening of public irrigation and drainage institutions; (iii) component 7: Support for the
   development of water users’ associations and private scheme management entities.

   Second Restructuring (2018):

   The PDO was revised as follows: “The objective of the Project was to improve agricultural productivity and
   production of both smallholder and nucleus farms in selected project intervention areas of the Recipient’s
   territory”. The main reason for the revision was to simplify further the objective by removing reference to
   project activities.

   Other revisions included: (i) an additional activity for supporting agricultural inputs for Government’s priority
   program (Planting for Food and Jobs/PFJ); (ii) reduction of irrigation schemes; (iii) consolidating the project
   components, from 7 to the original 4 components.

   Based on the above revisions, there was: an overall reduction in the scope of the project and level of
   ambition of the PDO, with respect to most of the original targets, while adding realistic targets to the revised
   components; substantially revising intermediary indicators, especially by adding new indicators to reflect the
   project’s strengthened focus on irrigation rehabilitation and institutional strengthening of irrigation
   management entities.

   Split Rating: The project’s level of ambition decreased through the two restructurings to reflect greater
   realism, while the project commitments increased by additional financing. IEG concurred with the ICR (para.
   29) that a split evaluation was deemed necessary, also consistent with the harmonized guideline between
   OPCS and IEG.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country and Sector Context: The project objectives were relevant to addressing relevant criteria identified
during project design involving: the sector context and critical constraints; aligning with opportunities and
associated strategies of the Government and Bank; building on and integrating relevant sector experience.
Key sector constraints addressed by the project were: low levels of productivity and production by most
smallholders and commercial farmers; associated high levels of poverty, especially in the SADA and Accra
plain areas; limited access to land, input and output markets, agricultural technologies, and finance, as

                                                                                                       Page 5 of 31
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Ghana Commercial Agriculture (P114264)



               major constraints to transitioning to commercial agriculture, and to increasing productivity, production, and
               incomes; limited access to Government’s approved public-private partnership framework, which was
               expected to induce increased investments in agriculture; high potential for irrigated commercial agriculture
               in the Accra plains.

               Relevance to Government Strategies: At appraisal, the Project was strongly relevant and aligned with
               supporting the implementation of core components of the Government’s Agricultural Strategy (2010-2015).
               At project closing, the Project aligned with the Government’s flagship program, “Coordinated Program of
               Economic and Social Development Policies (2017-2024)" e.g., this program was underpinned by 7 pillars
               for promoting agricultural development; ACIP was strongly alignment with 4 of these pillars – ICR/para.28).

               Relevance to Bank Assistance Strategies: At appraisal, the Project was in line with the Bank’s Country
               Assistance Strategy for Ghana (CAS, FY08-FY12, Pillar 1, outcomes 2 and 3). At project closing, the
               Project was strongly aligned with the subsequent Bank Country Partnership Frameworks (FY12-FY16,
               FY17-FY20, FY22-FY26), especially the 3rd focus area (i.e., promoting resilient and sustainable
               development, including “promoting irrigation inclusive agricultural development”; ICR, para. 28).

               Prior Sector Experience: The Project was built on the Bank’s previous sector experience and lessons,
               since the 1990s (and generally according to high priority of the sector in each of the country strategies). The
               project design also considered strategic aspects of relevant and complementary on-going projects financed
               by the Bank (e.g., Public Private Partnership Project (P125595) and Second Land Administration Project
               (P120636). These projects highlighted the importance of designing/implementing: appropriate institutional
               roles, arrangements, and mechanisms; and well-focused capacity building of key public/private entities.

               At the project design stage and also by project closure, the PDO, including the revised PDO following
               project restructuring, was most relevant in terms of there being full alignment between project objectives
               and the Government’s and Bank’s strategy of promoting Ghana’s competitive and sustainable agricultural
               development. The revised PDO’s emphasis on promoting agricultural productivity and production of
               smallholders further strengthened the project’s high strategic relevance. Subsequently, and during early
               phases of implementation, it was confirmed that the targets were overly ambitious, given various constraints
               arising during implementation (further discussed below). Nevertheless, the project’s design focus remained
               highly relevant.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective



                                                                                                                   Page 6 of 31
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Ghana Commercial Agriculture (P114264)



To increase access to land through private-public partnerships (PPPs) in commercial agriculture in Accra
Plains and the Savanah Agricultural Development (SADA) zone. (Original, valid for the implementation period
of April 2013 to November, 2015).

Rationale
The PAD did not include a theory of change (ToC) because it was not required at the time the PAD was
written. The ICR reconstructed a ToC for the project which was consistent with its overall objective, strategy,
and components (ICR, Figure 1, para. 4). The ICR highlights the rationale for the project, and the role of
expanding commercial agriculture by smallholders and commercial farmers, and associated actors.

Theory of Change: The ToC postulated the following activities to contribute to the achievement of objective 1:
promoting land-leasing mechanisms, strengthening land commission, and conducting campaigns to promote
PPPs. These activities were postulated to generate outputs including: protocol/framework for dealing with
investors at agricultural sector level established; model land lease agreement developed; framework for out-
grower scheme developed; and community investor guidelines for large-scale land transactions prepared.
These outputs were postulated to contribute to an outcome of increased access to land. In the long-term, the
ToC postulated that the three original objectives were inter-related, and each contributed toward the broader
objectives of increasing productivity and production (which became more explicit in the two restructurings).

Critical assumptions for the ToC included: the Government would take a lead and effective role in
dissemination of appropriate technologies to smallholders, who were assumed to adopt them; adequate
investor-smallholder incentives and demand to engage in their partnerships and to make the required
investments.

Outputs: (ICR, paras 29-33)

(i) Protocol/framework dealing with investors at agricultural sector level was established, achieving the
original target.

(ii) Model for land-lease agreement was developed, achieving the original target.

(iii) Framework for outgrower scheme was developed, achieving the original target.

In addition to the results measured by the results framework, the ICR reported the following 3 strategic
outputs, which did not have any formal targets.

(iv) Community-investor guidelines for large scale land transactions were completed.

(v) Suitable lands for improved rainfed rice cultivation in the SADA zone were identified.

(vi) Diagnostic review of land rights and land uses in the Nasia-Nabogo valley were conducted and
completed..

Outcomes: (ICR, paras 29-33)

The ICR did not provide relevant evidence regarding the outcome of the increased access to land, while
including the following results on the long-term outcomes on the increased productivity.



                                                                                                   Page 7 of 31
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Ghana Commercial Agriculture (P114264)



(i) Yields of targeted crops (noting that yields for most crops were revised downwards during 1st
restructuring):

(a) The yield of maize in SADA zone increased from the baseline (BL) of 1.96 metric tons (MT) per hectare
(ha) to actual/A of 2.80 MT/ha, not meeting the original target/OT of 3.92 MT/ha (71% of the original
target); (b) rice (SADA zone): Baseline/BL: 1.53; OT: 3.06; A: 5.54; Actual as % of Original Target: 181%; (c)
soya (SADA zone): BL: 1.26; OT: 2.52; A: 3.66; Actual as % of Original Target: 145%;(d) rice (Accra plains):
BL: 2.47; OT: 4.94; A: 5; Actual as % of Original Target: 101%; (e) vegetables (Accra plains): BL: 8.18; OT
8.18; A: 11.86 Actual as % of Original Target: 145%;

(ii) 14,264 Direct Beneficiaries were reached, well below the original target of 50,000 direct beneficiaries (29%
of the original target). Although the number of beneficiaries is a corporate indicator, the number of direct
beneficiaries did not measure the outcome level results of Objective 1.

(iii) 40,900 tons of main crops (i.e., maize, soyabean, rice) were produced (by 2015), vs. an end-of-project
production target of 97,000 tons for these 3 major crops (or 42%; ICR, para. 32);

Referring to the ToC above, no evidence on increases in land access was provided in the ICR. In addition,
while the critical assumptions on the sufficient interests from investors and communities and the high level of
investments were ambitious, no evidence was provided regarding to what extent these critical assumptions
were fulfilled. Therefore, the attributability of the increased yields and inferred production of target crops to the
project was weak. Thus, the achievement of objective 1 is rated modest.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
Dropped. Objective 1 was no longer a part of the PDO after the first restructuring (ICR, para. 46).

Revised Rationale
Dropped.



Revised Rating
Not Rated/Not Applicable


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To increase access to private sector finance through PPPs in commercial agriculture in Accra Plains and
SADA zone. (Original, valid for the implementation period April 2013 to November 2015).

Rationale

                                                                                                      Page 8 of 31
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Ghana Commercial Agriculture (P114264)



Rationale: Same as stated above for Objective 1.

Theory of Change: The ToC postulated the following activities to contribute to the achievement of objective 2:
strengthen the capacities/expertise and role of the Ghana Investment Promotion Center in commercial
agriculture promotion; carry out investment promotional campaigns among target communities and potential
investors; promote investment-oriented PPPs among Government, investors, and smallholders. These
activities were postulated to lead to outputs including: protocol/framework dealing with investors at agricultural
sector level established; model for land-lease agreement developed; and framework for out-grower scheme
developed. These outputs were postulated to contribute to the intermediate outcome on the increased access
to finance for the potential investors of out-grower schemes, further contributing to the outcome on the
increased area in the SADA zone under formal commercial arrangements. In the long-term, the ToC
postulated that the three original objectives were inter-related, and each contributed toward the broader
objectives of increasing productivity and production.

While the ToC did not include explicit actions for expanding access to finance by target beneficiaries, the ToC
assumed that the above activities and assumed profitability levels would “enable” and achieve expanded
access to finance to target beneficiaries from financial entities in the targeted project areas.

Outputs (ICR, paras 29-33, some of which also contributed to Objective 1 outlined above):

(i) Protocol/framework dealing with investors at agricultural sector level was established, achieving the
original target.

(ii) Framework for out-grower scheme was developed, achieving the original target.

(iii) US$26.5 million private investment was mobilized, which was equivalent to of Ghanaian Cedi (GHc) 44.5
million (with the exchange rate of GHc1.67615 = US$1 as of January 31, 2012 (PAD, page ii), and exceeding
the original target of Ghanaian Cedi (GHc) 30 million.

In addition to the results measured by the results framework, the ICR reported the following outputs, which
did not have any formal targets.

(iv) Community-investor guidelines for large scale land transactions were completed.

(v) US$9.4 million of matching grants were allocated to 31 grantees in the first round (May, 2014), while also
leveraging $2.2 million in private capital contributions by the grantees. The matching grants supported land
development (40% of the matching grant funds disbursed), irrigation infrastructure (17%), warehouses (20%),
capacity building (10%), technical assistance (8%), and roads and electricity (5%).

Outcome (ICR, paras 29-33):

(i) 5,946 ha of area in the SADA zone were under formal commercial arrangements such as out-grower
schemes and contract farming, not achieving the original target of 25,000.00 ha (24% of the original target).

Referring to the ToC above, no indicator measured increases in access to private financing. Less than one
quarter of the original target of the PDO indicator on the area under formal commercial arrangements was
achieved. Thus, the achievement of objective 2 is rated modest.



                                                                                                    Page 9 of 31
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Ghana Commercial Agriculture (P114264)




Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 2 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
Dropped. Objective 2 (improved access to private sector finance) was no longer a part of the PDO after the
first restructuring (ICR, para. 46).

Revised Rationale
Dropped.



Revised Rating
Not Rated/Not Applicable


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
To increase access to input and output markets through PPPs in commercial agriculture in Accra Plains and
SADA zone. (Original, valid for the implementation period April 2013 to November 2015).


Rationale
Theory of Change: The ToC postulated that the following activities would contribute to the achievement of
objective 3: rehabilitating and constructing new agricultural storage infrastructure and processing facilities;
and supporting business development services among agricultural service providers and investing in
processing businesses. These activities were postulated to help generate key outputs, including: farmers
applying improved technologies or management practices; storage capacity increased; and incremental sales
increased. These outputs were postulated to contribute to the outcome of increased gross margins of
selected crops. In the long-term, the ToC postulated that the three original objectives were inter-related, and
each contributed toward the broader objectives of increasing productivity and production.

Critical assumption of the ToC was: the project activities to facilitate PPP transactions would contribute to
expanding beneficiary access to input and output markets in the targeted project areas.

Outputs (ICR, paras 29-33):

(i) 100% of farmers applying improved technologies or management practices, exceeding the original target
of 80%.

(ii) The total storage capacity (from GCAP interventions) increased from the baseline of 0 MT to 15,340 MT,
not achieving the original target of 23,000 MT (67% of the original target, and 130% of the down-ward revised
target of 11,700 MT).


                                                                                                   Page 10 of 31
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Ghana Commercial Agriculture (P114264)



(iii) Value of incremental sales (collected at farm-level) increased to GHc18.7 million (or 95% of the revised
target). The original target was 200% increase from the baseline that was under preparation at appraisal
(PAD, page 35). No baseline and original target for this indicator was reported in the ICR.

Outcome (ICR, paras 29-33):

Gross margins of maize and rice in the SADA zone were more than doubled, while that of soya in the same
area almost achieved the original target. On the other hand, less than two-thirds of the original target of gross
margin for rice in Accra Plains were met (for detailed figures, see ICR, Table 3). Referring to the ToC, the
mixed achievements of the outputs and the missing baseline and target for the increase in the incremental
sales at farm level negatively affected the attributability of the achieved outcome to the project. Thus, the
achievement of objective 3 is rated modest.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 3 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
Dropped. Objective 3 was no longer a part of the PDO after the first restructuring (ICR, para. 46).

Revised Rationale
Dropped.



Revised Rating
Not Rated/Not Applicable


OBJECTIVE 4
Objective
None at appraisal.

Rationale
None at appraisal.



Rating
Not Rated/Not Applicable


OBJECTIVE 4 REVISION 1
Revised Objective


                                                                                                  Page 11 of 31
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Ghana Commercial Agriculture (P114264)



To improve agricultural productivity of both smallholder and nucleus farmers in selected project intervention
areas with increased access to reliable water, land, finance, and agricultural input and output markets.
(Added at the first restructuring, for implementation period December 2015 - October 2018).

Revised Rationale
Theory of Change: The ICR did not highlight specific changes in the ToC arising from the first restructuring,
while making reductions in the scope of the original targets for production (and productivity) increases of the
major target crops, in both rainfed and irrigated areas (average decrease of production target of about 51%,
ICR, Tables 3 and 4, para. 34), to reflect greater realism. The various activities, outputs and outcomes
specified in the ToC (ICR, Figure 1), including increased productivity and area under production (under formal
commercial arrangements), and expanded irrigation activities, were assumed to contribute toward this
objective of increased productivity (and increased gross margins and incomes of beneficiaries). The role and
effects of the project’s addition of support for irrigation was not discussed explicitly in the ToC. The analyses
and results of the ICR imply that the project’s support for enhancing and modernizing irrigation facilities/more
reliable water supplies contributed to increased productivity and gross margins. It would have been useful if
the ICR included more explicit analyses of the direct effects of the project’s irrigation activities. Also, the ToC
with respect to revised Objective 4 assumed that smallholder and nucleus farmers would seek to expand their
production area under irrigation, and that smallholder and nucleus farmers would adopt the improved
technologies to enable increased crop productivity and gross margins. These are sound assumptions, based
on global experience.

Outputs: (ICR assumes these outputs contributed to the productivity objective and targets)

(i) Area with improved irrigation and drainage services provided (new and existing):

Revised target: 7,690 has; Actual: 9,312 has.; Actual as % of Target: 121%;

(ii) Framework for outgrower scheme developed:

Original target: Yes; Actual: Yes

(iii) National framework for outgrower and contract farming arrangements:

Target: Yes; Actual: Yes

(iv) Increased storage capacity (resulting from GCAP interventions):

Revised Target: 11,700 tons; Actual: 15,340; % of Revised target: 131%;

(v) Training activities for staff of Ghana Irrigation Authority (GIDA) and Irrigation Company of Upper Region:
No target was provided; 11,504 person hours;

(vi) Rehabilitation of Tono and Kpong Left Bank Irrigation Schemes (new and improved irrigation and
drainage):

Revised Target: 10,000 has.; Actual: NA; “good progress” (ICR, para. 34);




                                                                                                    Page 12 of 31
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Ghana Commercial Agriculture (P114264)



(vii) Procurement progress of Kpong Right Bank Irrigation Schemes: overall “good progress” (ICR/para. 34);
(viii) Passage of Water Users Association Law: Target not Specified in ICR; Approved in May, 2016;

Outcomes: (ICR assumes project outputs contributed to the productivity objective):

(i) Yields of Rainfed Maize (MT/ha.): Revised Target: 2.74; Actual: 2.8 (at completion); % of Target: 102%;

(ii) Yields of Rainfed Rice (MT/ha.): Revised Target: 2.14; Actual: 5.54; % of Target: 259%;

(iii) Yields of Rainfed Soya (MT/ha.): Revised Target: 1.76; Actual:3.66; % of Target: 208%;

(iv) Yields of Irrigated Rice (MT/ha.): Revised Target: 3.09: Actual: Not Available (NA);

(v) Yields of Irrigated Vegetables (MT/ha.): Revised Target: 10.23; Actual: NA;

(vi) Gross Margins (maize in SADA zone): ($/ha.): Revised Target: 815; Actual:2785; % of Target: 342%;

(vii) Gross Margins (rice in SADA zone): ($/ha.): Revised Target: 1436; Actual: 5464; % of Target: 380%;

(viii) Gross Margins (soya in SADA zone): ($/ha.): Revised Target: 3201; Actual: 5447; % of Target: 170%;

(ix) Gross Margins (rice in Accra plains): ($/ha.): Revised Target: 1874: Actual: 3800; % of Target: 203%;

(x) No. of Direct Beneficiaries: Original Target: 50,000; Revised: 14,000; Actual (2021): 240,264;

As shown above, the project met, exceeded or made good progress toward meeting the productivity (by end
of 1st restructuring and end of project) and gross margin targets of all target crops, as well as good progress
toward meeting other associated output and outcome targets shown above, also consistent with the above
ToC. These achievements warrant a Substantial rating.



Revised Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 4 REVISION 2
Revised Objective
To improve agricultural productivity of both smallholder and nucleus farms in selected project intervention
areas of the Recipient’s territory. (Revised at the second restructuring, for implementation period Nov. 2018 –
Dec. 2021, primarily to simplify project objectives).

Revised Rationale
Theory of Change: The ICR did not highlight specific changes in the ToC arising from the second
restructuring, while considering reductions (in first restructuring) in the scope of the original targets for
productivity increases of the major target crops, in both rainfed and irrigated areas (average decrease of
production target of about 51%, ICR, Tables 3 and 4, para. 34), to reflect greater realism. The various
activities, outputs and outcomes specified in the ToC (ICR, Figure 1), and a general reference to “improved

                                                                                                  Page 13 of 31
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Ghana Commercial Agriculture (P114264)



agricultural technologies promoted by the project” (ICR, para. 38, with no details specified), were assumed to
contribute toward this objective of increased productivity, and therefore, also assumed to contribute to
increased gross margins of key crops and incomes of direct beneficiaries.

Outputs (ICR, paras 29-40 and annex 1): (ICR assumes these outputs contributed to the productivity
objective and targets)

This involved progress for the same outputs outlined above, under Objective 4/Revision 1. There is one
additional output introduced as part of revision 2:

(i) Length/kms. of irrigation canals newly constructed: Target: 100; Revised: 150: Actual (2021): 85; Actual as
% of Revised Target: 57%;

Outcomes (ICR, paras 29-40 and annex 1):

(i) Farmers in GCAP intervention areas who applied improved agricultural technologies (% of total farmer
beneficiaries): Target (2017): 97%; Actual: 100%; % of Target: 103%;

(ii) Yields of Rainfed Maize (MT/ha.): Revised Target: 2.74; Actual (at completion): 2.8; % of Target: 102%;

(iii) Yields of Rainfed Rice (MT/ha.): Revised Target: 2.14; Actual: 5.54; % of Target: 259%;

(iv) Yields of Rainfed Soya (MT/ha.): Revised Target: 1.76; Actual:3.66; % of Target: 208%;

(v) Yields of Rice/Accra Plains (MT/ha.): Revised Target: 3.09: Actual: 3.09; % of Target: 100%;

(vi) Yields of Vegetables/Accra Plains (MT/ha.): Revised Target: 10.23; Actual: 11.86; % of Target: 116%;

(vii) “Significant increases” in gross margins of target crops: “well above” the 30% target increase;

(viii) No. of Direct Beneficiaries: Revised Target: 14,000; Actual (2021): 240,264;

(ix) No. of WUAs established and functional (at canal/scheme levels): Target (2017): 42; Actual: 40; % of
Target: 95%;

As shown above, following the second restructuring and by the end of the Project, and consistent with the
ToC, it met or exceeded all of the productivity targets, as well as other targets for activities and indicators
which contributed to meeting the objective of increased agricultural productivity. This included the additional
output of newly constructed irrigation canals. Accordingly, the rating is Substantial.



Revised Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 5
Objective

                                                                                                   Page 14 of 31
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Ghana Commercial Agriculture (P114264)



None at appraisal.

Rationale
None at appraisal.



Rating
Not Rated/Not Applicable


OBJECTIVE 5 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
To improve agricultural production of both smallholder and nucleus farms in selected project intervention
areas with increased access to reliable water, land, finance, and agricultural input and output markets.
(Added at the first restructuring for implementation period December 2015 – October 2018).

Revised Rationale
Theory of Change: The ICR did not highlight specific changes in the ToC arising from the first restructuring,
while making reductions in the scope of the original targets for production (and productivity) increases of the
major target crops, in both rainfed and irrigated areas (average decrease of production target of about 51%,
ICR, Tables 3 and 4, para. 34), to reflect greater realism. The various activities, outputs and outcomes
specified in the ToC (ICR, Figure 1), including increased productivity and area under production, were
assumed to contribute toward this objective of increased production (and increased gross margins and
incomes of beneficiaries). This ToC and expected outcomes assumed there would be adequate technical
expertise developed/applied effectively, sufficient investor and community interest/demand and increased
public and private sector investments.

Outputs: (ICR assumes these outputs contributed to the production objective and targets)

 (i) Area with improved irrigation and drainage services provided (new and existing): Revised target: 7,690
has; Actual: 9,312 has.; Actual as % of Target: 121%;

(ii) Framework for out grower scheme developed: Original target: Yes; Actual: Yes

(iii) National framework for out grower and contract farming arrangements: Target: Yes; Actual: Yes

(iv) Increased storage capacity (resulting from GCAP interventions): Revised Target: 11,700 tons; Actual:
15,340; % of target: 131%;

(v) Training activities for staff of Ghana Irrigation Authority (GIDA) and Irrigation Co. of Upper Region: 11,504
person hours; target training hours were not specified

(vi) Rehabilitation of Tono and Kpong Left Bank Irrigation Schemes (new and improved irrigation and
drainage): Revised target: 10,000 has.; “good progress” (ICR, para. 34);




                                                                                                   Page 15 of 31
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Ghana Commercial Agriculture (P114264)



(vii) Procurement progress of Kpong Right Bank Irrigation Schemes: overall “good progress” (ICR/para.
34);

(viii) Passage of Water Users Association Law: Approved in May, 2016; (note: ICR did not specify target).

Outcomes: (it is understood that productivity increases outlined above also contributed to increased
production):

(i) Production of Rainfed Maize (000s MT): Revised Target: 14; Actual: 7.5; % of Target: 54%;

(ii) Production of Rainfed Rice (000s MT): Revised Target: 4.3; Actual: 2; % of Target: 47%;

(iii) Production of Rainfed Soya (000s MT): Revised Target: 1.6; Actual:1; % of Target: 63%;

(iv) Production of Irrigated Rice (000s MT): Revised Target: 61.8: Actual: 79.9; % of Target: 129%;

(v) Prod. of Irrigated Fruits./Vegetables (000s MT): Revised Target: 54; Actual: 54; % of Target: 100%;

(vi) Overall Production (i - v) (000s MT): Revised Target: 135.7; Actual: 144.4; % of Target: 106%;

(vii) Gross Margins (maize in SADA zone): ($/ha.): Revised Target: 815; Actual: 2,785; % of Target; 342%;

(viii) Gross Margins (rice in SADA zone): ($/ha.): Revised Target: 1,436; Actual: 5,464; % of Target: 380%

(ix) Gross Margins (soya in SADA zone): ($/ha.): Revised Target: 3,201; Actual: 5,446; % of Target: 170%;

(x) Gross Margins (rice in Accra plains): ($/ha.): Revised Target: 1,874: Actual: in process;

(xi) No. of Direct Beneficiaries: Revised Target: 14,000; Actual (2021): 240,264;

Based on the achievement of the reduced targets (in 2015) for most of the indicators associated with
increased production, and consistent with the ToC, the project’s achievement of this objective is rated
Substantial.



Revised Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 5 REVISION 2
Revised Objective
To improve agricultural production of both smallholder and nucleus farms in selected project intervention
areas of the Recipient’s territory (Revised at the second restructuring for implementation period Nov. 2018-
Dec. 2021).

Revised Rationale


                                                                                                 Page 16 of 31
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Ghana Commercial Agriculture (P114264)



Theory of Change: The ICR did not highlight specific changes in the ToC arising from the second
restructuring, while making reductions in the scope of the original targets for production (and productivity)
increases of the major target crops, in both rainfed and irrigated areas (average decrease of original
production target of about 51%, ICR, Tables 3 and 4, para. 34), to reflect greater realism. The various
activities, outputs and outcomes specified in the ToC (ICR, Figure 1), including increased productivity and
increased area under production, including increased areas under irrigation, and the seed distribution
program partnered with the PFJ program, were assumed to contribute toward this objective of increased
production (and increased gross margins and incomes of beneficiaries). This ToC and expected outcomes
assumed there would be adequate technical expertise developed/applied effectively, sufficient investor and
community interest/demand and increased public and private sector investments.

Outputs (ICR, paras 29-40 and Annex 1): (ICR assumes these outputs contributed to the production objective
and targets)

This involved progress for the same outputs outlined above, under Objective 5/Revision 1.

Outcomes (ICR, paras 29-40 and Annex 1): (it is understood that productivity increases outlined above also
contributed to increased production, with further details provided in ICR, para. 39 and Annex 1):

(i) Increase in area under formal commercial arrangements (nucleus & out grower farms): (000s of has.):
SADA

Original Target (2017): 25; Revised Target: 5.5; Actual: 5.9; % of Revised Target: 109%;

(ii) Increase in area under formal commercial arrangements (nucleus farms): (000s of has.): Accra:

Original Target (2017): 3; Revised Target: 1; Actual: 1.2; % of Revised Target: 120%;

(iii) Increase in area under formal commercial arrangements (out grower farms): (000s of has.): Accra:

Original Target (2017): 4; Revised Target: 4; Actual: 4.8; % of Revised Target: 120%;

(iv) Farmers in GCAP intervention areas who applied improved agric. technologies (% of total farmer
beneficiaries):

Target (2017): 97%; Actual: 100%; % of Target: 103%;

(v) Annual net increase in production of targeted crops among beneficiaries (also arising from added
productivity):

annual incremental production increases (in 2021) in maize, rice, soybeans (SADA zone): Actual of 129,900
MT vs. target of 61,200 MT (or 212% of the target): maize: 43,000; rice: 79,400 MT; soyabean: 7,500 MT;

(vi) Improved seed financed under the project (under the PFJ program), and distributed to 226,000
smallholder farmers, resulted in additional production increases: 192,600 MT of maize; 83,300 MT of
soyabean; and 120,000 MT of rice;




                                                                                                 Page 17 of 31
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Ghana Commercial Agriculture (P114264)



                            (vii) Increased storage capacity of 15,000 MTs, resulting in reduced post-harvest losses;

                            (viii) Increased 800 has. of banana plantation (due to project’s bulk water supplies), resulting in additional
                            32,000 tons of banana per year;

                            (ix) Improved reliable water supply from rehabilitation of water conveyance system for 1,200 has.;

                            (x) Production of Rainfed Maize (000s MT): Revised: 14; Actual: 7.5; % of Revised: 54%;

                            (xi) Production of Rainfed Rice (000s MT): Revised: 4.3; Actual: 2; % of Revised: 47%;

                            (xii) Production of Rainfed Soya (000s MT): Revised: 1.6; Actual:1; % of Revised: 63%;

                            (xiii) Production of Irrigated Rice (000s MT): Revised: 61.8: Actual: 79.9; % of Revised: 129%;

                            (xiv) Prod. of Irrigated Fr./Vegetables (000s MT): Revised: 54; Actual: 54; % of Revised: 100%;

                            (xv) Overall Production (000s MT): Revised: 135.7; Actual: 144.4; % of Revised: 106%;

                            (xvi) Gross Margins (maize in SADA zone): ($/ha.): Revised: 815; Actual: in process;

                            (xvii) Gross Margins (rice in SADA zone): ($/ha.): Revised: 1,436; Actual: in process;

                            (xviii) Gross Margins (rice in SADA zone): ($/ha.): Revised: 1,436; Actual: in process;

                            (ix) Gross Margins (soya in SADA zone): ($/ha.): Revised: 3,201; Actual: in process;

                            (xx) Gross Margins (rice in Accra plains): ($/ha.): Revised: 1,874: Actual: in process;

                            (xxi) Passage of Water Users Association Law: Approved in May, 2016;

                            (xxii) No. of Direct Beneficiaries: Revised: 14,000; Actual (2021): 240,264;

                            Based on the achievement of the reduced targets (revised in 2015) for all of the indicators associated with
                            increased production, the efficacy of the objective is rated Substantial.



                            Revised Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The efficacy of the extent to which the original objectives were achieved was modest. Several of the activities
                            which lay along the critical path for attaining these objectives were completed during this initial phase,

                                                                                                                                Page 18 of 31
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            Ghana Commercial Agriculture (P114264)



        including: key frameworks were developed as envisioned (e.g., a model land lease agreement; community
        investor guidelines for large scale land transactions; a national framework for out grower and contract farming
        arrangements); some progress toward the PDO for the SADA zone; some initial progress toward several key
        targets (e.g., yields and gross margins). However, the envisioned PPP in the Accra Plains was not able to
        take off, and there was low progress on some of the other targets, especially with respect to the unrealistic
        targets which were reduced after the first restructuring. Therefore, the ICR reached a sound decision to show
        a Modest efficacy rating, with respect to the original objectives.

        Overall, the efficacy of the original objectives is rated modest.



        Overall Efficacy Rating                                    Primary Reason
        Modest                                                     Low achievement
OBJR1_TBL




        OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
        Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
        The overall efficacy of the two revised objectives after the first restructuring was Substantial, for several
        reasons (ICR, para. 34). First, good progress was achieved toward the productivity targets of the target crops,
        especially in the light of meeting or exceeding most of the yield targets, and of other associated targets
        indicated above. Second, significant progress was made on the production targets for rainfed farming in the
        SADA zone. Third, significant progress was made in irrigated farming, including good progress in
        rehabilitation and construction of existing and new irrigation schemes, as well as approval of the Water Users
        Association Law (2016), and provision of staff capacity building of key implementation entities (GIDA and
        ICOUR).

        Overall, the efficacy of the revised objectives (revision 1) is rated substantial.



        Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating
        Substantial

OBJR2_TBL




        OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 2
        Overall Efficacy Revision 2 Rationale
        By the end of the second restructuring, the targets for all of the PDO indicators (and other key intermediate
        indicators) for increased agricultural productivity and production had been fully attained or surpassed.
        Increased productivity was enabled by land development, dissemination and farmer adoption of improved
        agricultural technologies. Survey results showed that project participants achieved higher productivity levels
        vs. non-project participants for target crops (ICR, p. 17). Increased and improved irrigation areas,
        strengthened market linkages, expanded storage/warehouse facilities, coupled with the productivity
        increases, contributed to increased agricultural production in the target areas (SADA and Accra plains), gross
        margins (30 % above the target). The second restructuring involved modest reduction in the area under
        commercial arrangements (and with more realistic targets). The ICR, paras. 38 and 39 provide further
        details.


                                                                                                           Page 19 of 31
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Ghana Commercial Agriculture (P114264)



  Overall, the efficacy of the revised objectives (revision 2) is rated substantial.



  Overall Efficacy Revision 2 Rating
  Substantial



 5. Efficiency
Overall, the project performance and results demonstrated an efficiency rating of Substantial, based on the
various evidence-based tools applied and presented in the ICR (paras. 41 – 45, and Annex 4, also informed by
the Project’s Impact Evaluation Study). The project’s cost-benefit analyses demonstrated improved efficiency,
especially following the two project restructurings, compared to values at appraisal.

Financial Analyses: The objectives of the Project’s financial analysis presented in the ICR are: to assess the
financial viability of the project’s interventions; to assess the impact of project interventions on the incomes of
the beneficiary households targeted; and to provide a framework and building blocks for conducting the project’s
economic analyses. The ICR (Annex 4) provides details of this financial analyses. The main methodology used
is sound. The financial analysis concludes that the project provided substantial financial increases to project
beneficiaries; the financial analysis demonstrates that all project scenario models are profitable from a farmer
perspective. Based on an aggregation of financial incremental benefits and costs, the ICR’s estimated Financial
Internal Rate of Return (FIRR) is 19.5%, which confirms the financial viability of the investments. While the PAD
included a detailed financial analysis of component 3 (based on farm models, Annex 7), it did not generate an
overall FIRR.

Economic Analyses: Using sound assumptions and methodology, and generally reliable datasets, the economic
internal rate of return (EIRR) at completion was estimated in the ICR to be 26.9%, which compares favorably
with the EIRR estimated at appraisal, of 20%. When environmental benefits were considered in the ICR stage,
the EIRR was estimated at 28.1%. The Net Present Values (NPVs) in the ICR (based on assumed discount rate
of 5%) also compares favorably with the appraisal NPV (based on a discount rate of 12%) -- US$154 million vs.
US$36.7 million, respectively. The ICR shows that the economic returns are relatively robust – a decrease of 20
% in the incremental benefits corresponds with an EIRR of 19.5%, and a NPV of US$99 million.

With respect to cost-effectiveness measures, the ICR (para. 44) shows positive efficiency results attributed to
the project, including:

    a. Switching to irrigation “rehabilitation and modernization” capitalized on sunk costs from previous
       investments, equivalent to low hanging fruit;
    b. The project leveraged/mobilized US$13.7 million in private capital, mostly in irrigation development;
    c. Even before formalizing the shift to irrigation rehabilitation (1st restructuring in 2015), several activities
       pertaining to the anticipated irrigation rehabilitation already had been initiated or completed, thereby
       saving time;
    d. The cost per hectare for irrigation schemes (e.g., US$8,000/ha. – US$10,500/ha., for rehabilitated and
       new irrigation schemes, respectively) is comparable to similar schemes in Sub Saharan Africa (e.g.,
       $8,000 to $14,500);


                                                                                                         Page 20 of 31
         Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
         Ghana Commercial Agriculture (P114264)



The ICR (para. 43) recognized the following minor project inefficiencies incurred during design and
implementation phases:

    a. One year was “lost” between Board approval (March 2012) and Project Effectiveness (April 2013), due to
         the delays in establishing the Trust Fund for the USAID grant and preparing the project implementation
         manual;
    b.   Project implementation was extended because of the switch from the original design of the PPP to the
         new design (following the first restructuring in 2015);
    c.   Lockdowns in India and China, coupled with other COVID19-related challenges, disrupted the supply
         and certification of critical irrigation automation equipment purchased by the project;
    d.   The USAID Trust Fund reduction in commitments described in section 2.e. necessitated additional
         financing to the project, which also involved an exchange rate loss of US$11 million and disrupted
         programming;
    e.   There was a high turnover of the Bank’s Task Team Leaders during early years of the project, as
         described in section 8.a.; and

The ambitious rehabilitation timelines assumed during appraisal did not consider/factor adequately weather
events outside the client’s control, thereby delaying implementation and requiring extension of closing date.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                 Rate Available?            Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     90.00
 Appraisal                                                 20.00
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     93.00
 ICR Estimate                                              26.90
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The Outcome Rating is based on a split evaluation of the performance of the project’s objectives, for reasons
stated in Section 2.e., and influenced by the features and emerging results of the project’s two restructurings
during the project’s implementation period. These key changes involved changes in the project’s objectives,
reduced levels of ambition for many of the key indicators and their corresponding targets. Based on the project’s
high relevance, modest to substantial ratings for efficacy, and substantial efficiency, this ICRR concludes that
the project’s overall outcome is rated “Moderately Satisfactory”. Table 1 provides the basis for this assessment.




                                                                                                      Page 21 of 31
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Ghana Commercial Agriculture (P114264)



The overall evidence used for the ratings of the three core elements cited above for determining the project’s
overall outcome rating are as follows:

(1) High rating for relevance of PDO, based on the project’s strong alignment with (at appraisal and at
completion): (a) Government’s national, sectoral, regional policies and strategies for promoting increased
agricultural productivity and production, relying on effective PPPs and an expanded role of an inclusive private
sector; (b) IDA’s country assistance/partnership strategy, while building on the relevant lessons of relevant
previous and on-going analytical work and investments which focused on promoting increased agricultural
productivity, production and competitiveness;

(2) Modest and Substantial Ratings for efficacy, based on the evidence of the project’s achievements and
results toward meeting the two revised objectives, defined in Section 2a of the review, and in the light of the
performance indicators and, in most cases, exceeding their revised targets, which were amended by the
project’s two restructurings to be more realistic;

(3) Substantial Rating for Efficiency, considering the financial and economic achievements, as reflected in
positive financial and economic rates of return, coupled with other positive project efficiency results,
notwithstanding some of the project’s identified inefficiencies.

Table 1: Split Rating for Project Overall Outcome Rating

                                                                                     Objectives After
                                                            Objectives After First
 Rating Aspects/Dimensions          Original Objectives                                 Second
                                                               Restructuring
                                                                                      Restructuring
  1) Relevance of Objectives                               High
            2) Efficacy
 Objective 1: Increase access
                                       Modest
to land (dropped as objective)
 Objective 2: Increase access
    to private sector finance          Modest
     (dropped as objective)
 Objective 3: Increase access
 to input and output markets           Modest
     (dropped as objective)
Revised Objective 1: Improve
                                                              Substantial              Substantial
     agricultural productivity
Revised Objective 2: Improve
                                                              Substantial              Substantial
     agricultural production
         Overall Efficacy              Modest                 Substantial              Substantial
           3) Efficiency                                 Substantial
        Outcome Rating         Moderately Unsatisfactory      Satisfactory             Satisfactory
 Numerical Value of Outcome
                                           3                        5                       5
             Ratings
 Amount Disbursed (US$ M)               35.44                   32.46                     89.93
   Disbursement (% of total)           22.45%                  20.57%                    56.98%
  Weight Value of Outcome
                                         0.67                     1.03                    2.85
    Rating (Row 2 x Row 4)

                                                                                                        Page 22 of 31
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Ghana Commercial Agriculture (P114264)



    Final Outcome Rating                               4.55 (rounded to 5)
   Overall Outcome Rating                                Satisfactory (5)
 Note on Ratings: Highly Unsatisfactory = 1; Unsatisfactory = 2; Moderately Unsatisfactory = 3;
              Moderately Satisfactory = 4; Satisfactory = 5; Highly Satisfactory = 6
a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

There is Moderate risk to sustaining the project’s outcomes and contribution to the project’s expected
impacts. The ICR provides sound evidence of the project’s complementary risk mitigating actions with
respect to the following four main types of risks (ICR, para. 68):

(a) Technical Risks and Mitigation Actions:

      To help ensure sustainability of technical aspects of operation and maintenance (O&M) of irrigation
       schemes, farmers have been trained in on-farm water management practices and organized into 45
       Water User Associations (WUAs) (see below also);

(b) Financial Risks and Mitigation Actions:

      To help ensure proper billing to direct beneficiaries, and subsequent adequate O&M funding, two of
       the rehabilitated irrigation schemes had their canal gates automated using digital technology;
      To help ensure clear and updated sound cost recovery charges and the corresponding requirements
       for adequate O&M of the irrigation schemes, water billing mechanisms were operationalized;

(c) Risks Related to Institutional Support and Mitigation
Actions:

      To ensure adequate institutional support arrangements and mechanisms for ensuring sustainability of
       irrigation schemes, private management entities which will be responsible for the bulk water
       infrastructure were being recruited at the time of project closing. In the meantime, the Kpong Irrigation
       Scheme (KIS) and Kpong Left Bank Irrigation Scheme (KLBIS) were being managed by interim
       scheme management entities, comprised of staff from GIDA (Ghana Irrigation Development
       Authority), while awaiting completion of the recruitment procurement process.

(d) Stakeholder Ownership Risks and Mitigation Actions:

      To ensure adequate O&M and sustainability of the irrigation schemes, farmers have been trained in
       on-farm water management practices and organized into 45 WUAs with adequate training in WUA
       organization, group dynamics, farm record keeping and O&M of irrigation infrastructure; these actions
       also help address the above risks;
      To ensure sustained access to working capital, continued efforts to strengthen and sustain outgrower
       arrangements in the SADA zone will be made, building on the training provided by the project, and
       using the existing and enhanced institutional roles, arrangements and capacities supported by the
       project (i.e., Ministry of Food and Agriculture/MOFA, and its various directorates, the Savanah

                                                                                                    Page 23 of 31
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Ghana Commercial Agriculture (P114264)



       Agricultural Development Authority/SADA, and GIDA).The ICR implies that adequate budgets will be
       provided to these entities to help ensure sustainability of the schemes, although not assured.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The ICR (para. 65) provided evidence on the following positive aspects at project entry:

  (i) During design and appraisal stages, the project was strongly aligned with the Bank’s Country
  Partnership Strategy, FY08-FY12 (especially Pillar 1/Outcomes 2 and 3, focusing on improved
  agricultural productivity and enhanced enabling environment for agrobusiness), and with Ghana’s
  agricultural sector strategy (especially its Food and Agriculture Sector Development Policy: 2010-2015),
  regarding the project’s contribution to growth in incomes and increased competitiveness and market
  integration (priority areas 2 and 3);

  (ii) The project leveraged, and was well coordinated with, other ongoing Bank-supported activities (i.e.,
  namely Public Private Partnership Project for Ghana (P125595)) and the Land Administration Project
  (P120636)).

  On the other hand, the ICR appropriately highlighted five design shortcomings (para. 65):

  (i) the project development objective lacked precision, and was basically a list of project activities; (ii) the
  proposed Accra Plains PPP was ambitious, and no market test had been performed to assess investor
  interest; (iii) irrigation rehabilitation timelines were too optimistic; (iv) a couple of project results indicators
  had unrealistic targets (namely the increase in area under formal commercial arrangements, and the
  number of direct beneficiaries); and (v) the delayed establishment of the trust fund for the USAID Grant
  (along with preparation of the Project Implementation Manual) was critical in delaying project
  effectiveness.

  On balance, this review rates the project’s quality at entry as moderately satisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The quality of supervision support was satisfactory, based on the evidence provided in the ICR (para. 66),
 and other supporting project documentation especially Implementation Support Reports (ISRs) and project
 restructuring papers. The positive aspects during supervision included the following:




                                                                                                           Page 24 of 31
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Ghana Commercial Agriculture (P114264)



 (i) In addition to continuous ongoing support provided by the Accra World Bank Office staff, the Bank’s
 project team maintained an average of 1.8 times a year of formal implementation support missions, as well
 as periodic virtual interactions to resolve implementation issues as they arose;

 (ii) The Bank’s project team was proactive in addressing the project’s critical issues, including restructuring
 the project to accelerate implementation when the Accra Plains PPP did not materialize;

 (iii) The Bank’s project team consisted of adequate skills mix that reflected the wide range of the requisite
 expertise for the project’s requirements;

 (iv) When implementation support was handicapped by the COVID-19 travel restrictions, the project
 implementation support team intensified virtual interactions to make up for that shortcoming.

 However, it is notable there were frequent (five) task team leadership changes over the project’s nine-year
 implementation period, although transitions were handled with extended overlaps to lessen possible
 negative impact on continuity and to ensure consistent messages.

 Overall, the Bank performance is rated moderately satisfactory, based on the harmonized guideline
 between OPCS and IEG.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The ICR correctly noted the project’s M&E design provided a sound basis to guide implementation and was
 used as a tool to track and help generate expected results. Project documentation and the ICR (para. 57)
 provided adequate evidence that the project’s M&E system had sound arrangements for sound data
 collection methodologies, staffing, funding, timely baseline surveys, systematic and periodic project reviews
 and mid-term assessments to inform decision-making during project implementation, and end-of-project
 impact assessments to derive relevant lessons.

 At the same time, the design of the M&E system had some shortcomings: (i) the PDO had an undefined
 marketing arrangements indicator; (ii) the production objective lacked a target; (iii) the results framework
 misclassified some of the outcomes and outputs (e.g., adoption rates as outputs); (iv) some target values
 were overly optimistic (e.g., “areas under formal commercial arrangements” and number of “direct project
 beneficiaries”). It was appropriate that the Bank’s team, with its Government counterparts, carried out and
 used two restructurings to reformulate the PDO and revise the relevant indicators.




                                                                                                     Page 25 of 31
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Ghana Commercial Agriculture (P114264)



b. M&E Implementation
  The ICR provided adequate evidence that the M&E system/activities were implemented as planned
  (para. 58): (i) the PCU was staffed with qualified M&E specialist; (ii) monitoring and evaluation activities
  were generally well carried out, with a baseline survey to establish baselines of key output and outcome
  performance targets (albeit a shortfall in omitting some key indicators, such as “value of incremental
  sales”), good monitoring of project inputs, outputs, and performance indicators; (iii) the M&E system was
  adjusted at the first restructuring, and further modified at the second restructuring to reflect the project’s
  evolution since appraisal; (iv) at the first restructuring, the level of ambition was reduced, and new
  indicators were added to reflect the revised project focus; (v) the project achievements and lessons
  learned are captured in the government completion and project impact evaluation documents; (vi) project
  activity reports were produced in a timely manner; and (vii) an impact assessment and a detailed project
  review were carried out and demonstrated good quality.



c. M&E Utilization
  Overall, the project documents (ISRs and evaluations) show that there was good utilization of the M&E
  system by both the Bank and Government project teams, and in a consistent and complementary
  manner.

  The experience gathered from the first round of Matching Grant implementation informed the design of
  the second round, especially with respect to supporting Grantees in implementing environmental and
  social safeguards in which they had limited capacity. Also, project M&E data and analyses were used to
  adjust the project at the first restructuring and the Additional Financing (ICR, para. 59).

  Notwithstanding some shortcomings in the M&E system, during implementation it was retrofitted and
  used effectively to help track and assess the objectives and the links in the results chain, and used as a
  tool to help generate the project’s expected results.

  Overall, the M&E quality is rated substantial.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as environmental category B (partial assessment), and triggered the following
   environmental and social safeguard policies: Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01), Natural Habitats
   (OP/BP 4.04), Forests (OP/BP 4.36), Pest Management (OP 4.09), Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP
   4.11), Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12), Dam Safety (OP/BP 4.37), and International Waterways
   (OP/BP 7.50). The Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF), and the Pest Management
   Plan (PMP) were disclosed before appraisal. During project implementation, site-specific Environmental and
   Social Impact Assessments (ESIAs) and Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs) were
   publicly disclosed as required, although with some delay in the case of Matching Grants because of the

                                                                                                      Page 26 of 31
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Ghana Commercial Agriculture (P114264)



  initial low capacity at the PCU which was strengthened with additional staff. Environmental impacts were
  mainly local and of a temporally nature: noise, dust, and nuisance. Pumping water was negligible compared
  to the available resource. Training was provided on pesticide and farm waste management. Construction
  waste was handled appropriately. Trees were planted to replace those uprooted during civil works: 4,979
  trees covering 5.2 ha in Nasia Nabogo (northern Ghana), and 7,889 trees covering 18 Ha in the Accra
  Plains. Overall, the ICR provided evidence showing the project complied with the Bank’s various
  environmental and social safeguard policies, supported by the appropriate mitigation activities (ICR, para.
  10.a.).

  Social Compliance (ICR, para. 62): The project triggered OP/BP 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement.
  Government prepared a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF). During project implementation, there was
  one case that necessitated compensation to the affected persons, which was done. An Abbreviated
  Resettlement Action Plan was belatedly prepared, but otherwise satisfactorily implemented. Two zonal (i.e.,
  for Accra Plains and SADA zone) Grievance Redress Committees were established in 2014 and trained by
  the Judicial Training Institute in Alternative Dispute Resolution. Twenty-seven Community Grievance
  Redress Committees were also established and trained. In all, 114 varied grievances were expressed, all
  which were satisfactorily responded to by the Project Coordination Unit. The project established and
  implemented procedures to ensure health and safety of workers during the COVID-19 pandemic.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  (i) Financial Management (ICR, para. 63): By the project’s completion, the available evidence shows that
  the project’s financial management was satisfactory. Accounts were up to date, bank reconciliation
  statements regularly drawn up, and the quality of reporting, was good. Project audits were supplied within
  the timeframe under the Financing Agreement. The Project’s final audit concluded there were no
  outstanding financial audit issues, and with no qualified opinion from the external auditor.

  (ii) Procurement (ICR, para. 64). Notwithstanding some procurement delays, especially at start-up, the
  project’s overall procurement performance was satisfactory. There were no cases of mis procurement.
  Also, the PCU recruited and maintained competent procurement staff. COVID-19 related disruption
  contributed to procurement delays of irrigation automation equipment. Otherwise, there were no other
  major procurement issues.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  The ICR highlighted seven unintended positive outcomes and impacts, contributed by the project. While
  recognizing some attribution challenges with respect to the precise role, extent and contributions of this
  project, the nature/scope of these other results are summarized below for three unintended impacts which
  meet ICRR criteria for inclusion in this section, based on evidence from the ICR. Gender and institutional
  strengthening, and mobilizing private sector financing were actually planned project activities and benefits,
  with the ICR providing useful evidence (ICR, paras. 47 – 49).

  (i) Poverty Reduction and Shared Prosperity (para. 50): About 14,000 farming households directly
  participated in the project. Some 226,000 smallholder farmers benefited from improved seeds through the

                                                                                                  Page 27 of 31
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Ghana Commercial Agriculture (P114264)



   Planting for Food and Jobs (PFJ) program. In addition, there were several downstream and upstream
   direct beneficiaries, including input retailers, rice millers, aggregators, and other participants in the value
   chains supported by the project (maize, rice, soya, and vegetables). For each participating farming
   household of 4.4 members, per capita gross income increased by US$259, which was equivalent to an
   increase of 11 percent of the estimated national average per capita GDP of US$2,312 (in 2021).

   (ii) Effects of WUAs (para. 51): The establishment and operationalization of WUAs have strengthened
   social cohesion of participating communities. This effect has the potential to extend to other spheres of
   social and economic development beyond the explicit objectives of the project, serving as entry points for
   community initiatives, such as in health (e.g., sensitization on water borne diseases), and nutrition;

   (iii) Effects of Warehouses (para. 51): Although the rationale for including warehouses in the project was
   the reduction in post-harvest losses and facilitating commodity aggregation, women have found them to be
   effective means of retaining authority over their harvests, as grain stored in homes was found to be more
   subject to unauthorized sales by their husbands; and although linking Warehouses to the Ghana
   Commodity Exchange had not been envisaged initially, such linkages were established in two cases
   (Farmers Training Center, Akandem Farms), creating opportunities for market access and possible
   warehouse receipt financing.



d. Other
   Not applicable.



11. Ratings
                                                                                    Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                     IEG
                                                                                    Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                          Satisfactory           Satisfactory
                                 Moderately
Bank Performance                                        Moderately Satisfactory
                                 Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                   Substantial            Substantial

Quality of ICR                   ---                    Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR presents six relevant and sound lessons which have broader application beyond this
project. The section below consolidates key aspects of these lessons into three lessons, together
with their strategic implications (ICR, paras. 69 – 74).

Lesson 1: For large scale irrigation development, ensuring realistic implementation
timeframe and structuring PPPs with sequential investment outlays by the partners is likely
to succeed vs. being overly optimistic and using co-financing approaches.


                                                                                                       Page 28 of 31
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Ghana Commercial Agriculture (P114264)



First, teams often underestimate the time required to rehabilitate large irrigation schemes. At
appraisal, the timelines envisaged were too ambitious and did not consider the impact of the
procurement processes, climate change or extreme weather events. As a result, the client could not
have completed the rehabilitation of the irrigation schemes without extending the project's closing
date.

Second, because of the high cost of water conveyance structures, prospective investors are likely to
be attracted if the Government bears that responsibility and the private investors finance subsequent
land development and on-site infrastructure. However, such an approach needs a fallback position
in the event private sector demand falls below expectations. Under this project, water delivered
through the upstream conveyance infrastructure, and from which the private sector benefited, also
was serving smallholder farmers. The use of sumps for temporally water storage allowed for efficient
water use between smallholder farmers and private investors. In addition, it is important to
sufficiently assess private sector enthusiasm and evidence of commitment before designing a
project in which private sector participation is a critical element.

Lesson 2: It is important to identify design and financing challenges early during
implementation in order to undertake timely and effective remedial actions. During the
Implementation Support Mission of June 23-July 11, 2014 (only 11 months after project
effectiveness), the Bank’s implementation support team and the Government counterpart team were
already seriously concerned about the feasibility of the Accra Plains PPP as designed, and had
started exploring options. This early response resulted in the project’s re-orientation that
underpinned the first restructuring, thus ensuring a rapid turnaround in project implementation. This
experience of focused and sustained engagement with the Project Coordination Unit and all the
other project partners is critical for timely detection and correction of project implementation
challenges. Innovative aspects of project design (e.g., sound safeguard instruments for the project’s
matching grant scheme, and other innovations) will require appropriate and timely technical and
administrative support during implementation. Also, ensuring appropriate financing arrangements
will be vital to help ensure smooth and timely implementation. The funding arrangements for the
USAID grant and the IDA financing were initially joint (often times splitting the funding of certain
activities in stipulated proportions). Difficulties in the availability of the USAID grant handicapped
project activities and triggered a restructuring of the project.

Lesson 3: Out-grower schemes are effective when coupled with arrangements for working
capital for the participants. Anchor farmers had to mobilize working capital for themselves and for
their out-growers, which most found difficult to do, and when they did, they suffered losses from low
repayment rates. Such schemes could include financial literacy training, linkages with financial
institutions, revolving funds, and other mechanisms to ensure timely and sustainable access to
finance by the participants.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

                                                                                                  Page 29 of 31
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Ghana Commercial Agriculture (P114264)




Overall, the quality of the ICR is “Substantial”. The ICR was well written, consistent with ICR guidelines,
analytical (including a generally sound reconstructed Theory of Change, albeit some shortcomings, outlined
below, and solid economic and financial analyses), candid, sound and clear rationale for the project’s two
restructurings, results-focused and generally supported by adequate evidence to justify the assessment and
proposed ratings. The main evidence integrated and included in the ICR the results of the analyses of data
presented in the: Results Framework (Annex 1), with the corresponding components, indicators, targets,
revisions arising from the two restructurings (ICR, Tables 1 and 2); and from the Project’s Impact Evaluation
Study.; The ICR exhibited various shortcomings, although mostly presentational and absence of explicit
information. Subsequently, the ICR author provided to the IEG evaluator a very informative note providing
relevant clarifications (for items b – g), as indicated below (dated Feb. 13, 2023).; Given the project’s two
restructurings and reduced scope of many of the performance targets, it is appropriate that the ICR carried out
a split evaluation. Sound methodology requires a split evaluation to assess the project’s achievements across
the project’s entire lifetime, against both the original and revised project objectives and their corresponding
outcome targets. The ICR partially followed this procedure. In some tables in section II (outcome), the ICR
measured the actual achieved prior to restructuring, and compared the actual with the indicator and the target
used at the time of restructuring; Unclear role of the project in contributing to generating and disseminating
improved agricultural technologies, and to increased adoption by beneficiary farmers. The reconstructed theory
of change (ToC) outlined in the ICR (Figure 1) did not make explicit reference to project activities in providing
improved technologies, although the text made a general reference to improved technologies promoted by the
project which contributed to increased productivity (ICR, para. 38). Also, in the ToC there was no explicit
reference in outputs to improved technologies and in outcomes to farmer adoption of improved technologies. It
is recognized that the results framework (RF, Annex 1) did include an indicator on “farmers in target GCAP
intervention areas who have applied improved technologies or management practices”, with a 100% adoption
rate at completion. Subsequently, the TTL provided to IEG additional clarifications on various project activities
which promoted expanded dissemination and adoption of improved agricultural technologies, including support
from the grant from USAID and project-supported training activities, which contributed to spreading and using
improved technologies by beneficiaries; The TOC and RF lacked reference to the project contributing to
increased incomes of direct beneficiaries, especially considering the estimated high gross margins to
beneficiary farmers. Subsequently, the TTL provided to IEG additional clarifications on various project activities
which contributed to increased farmer incomes, including improved land development, access to inputs and
improved farmer technologies, strengthened farmer-market linkages, and documentation provided in the
project’s matching grant impact assessment report; While the ICR highlighted the outcome of mobilizing private
sector financing, the ICR was not clear on the role of the project in expanding access to private sector finance
by direct beneficiaries, and to the role of the project in expanding the role of the private sector, although implied
in the ICR. Subsequently the TTL provided useful clarifications, including: beneficiaries from the matching
grants provided a minimum of 20% of the cost of the investments; recipient farmers of matching grants use their
newly acquired assets as collateral to mobilize additional investment funding into their businesses; examples of
various businesses which mobilized additional investments catalyzed by project investments; mobilizing larger
scale commercial farmers who invested in their irrigation schemes and covered irrigation services charges to
help sustain project investments; The RF (Annex 1) showed a large increase in the final number of direct
beneficiaries (original target of 50,000 vs. actual of 240,264), but the text did not elaborate on the on the basis
for this large increased number, aside from a brief reference to 226,000 smallholders “benefitting from improved
seeds through the Planting for Food and Jobs Program” (ICR, para. 50). Subsequently, the TTL provided useful
clarifications, including: the project's subsequent (in 2017) engagement with a Planting for Food and Jobs
Programme, which promoted the distribution and adoption of seeds and fertilizers to a larger number of direct
beneficiaries, well beyond the numbers reached under the irrigation schemes; The RF/PDO presented “area
with improved irrigation and drainage services” as part of the PDO, rather than being an “intermediate outcome”

                                                                                                      Page 30 of 31
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Ghana Commercial Agriculture (P114264)



(or output); and; The developmental effects of various project actions and important indicators were not
discussed in the ICR, and rather, were presented in the RF (Annex 1) as achieved, "yes" or "no" (e.g.,
protocol/framework for dealing with investors at agricultural sector level established; framework for out grower
scheme developed; model lease agreement developed; GIDA reform completed). Even a brief summary
assessment would have been useful. Subsequently, the TTL provided useful clarifications, including: (i)
project-supported strategic plan implemented by the project to promote investors into the sector, including
investor start-ups, investor aftercare, investor screening; (ii) the project supported the development of an
Outgrower Framework”, used under the matching grants scheme, and subsequently adopted and used by the
Ministry of Agriculture; (iii) the use of the model lease agreement by various strategic stakeholders, including
investors, landowners, Ghana Investment Promotion Centre (GIPC), and Lands Commission; (iv)
reforming/restructuring/strengthening GIDA to make it more efficient and effective organization.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                    Page 31 of 31
