     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Youth Corps program (P127966)



                                                                                Report Number: ICRR0023253

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P127966                                   Youth Corps program

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Kazakhstan                                Education


 L/C/TF Number(s)                         Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-14174                                 29-Dec-2017                                         21,762,999.71

 Bank Approval Date                       Closing Date (Actual)
 26-Mar-2014                              31-Mar-2022

                                          IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           21,763,000.00                                  21,763,000.00

 Revised Commitment                            21,763,000.00                                  21,763,000.00

 Actual                                        21,762,999.71                                  21,762,999.71




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                 ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Katharina Ferl             Salim J. Habayeb            Eduardo Fernandez              IEGHC (Unit 2)
                                                        Maldonado




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Project Appraisal Document (PAD) (p. vi) and the Financing Agreement of September 10,
   2015 (p. 5), the objective of the project was to “to promote young people’s community engagement and life
   skills through a community-based service learning program, especially for vulnerable youth”.




                                                                                                Page 1 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Youth Corps program (P127966)




b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project included three components:

   Component 1: Support Community-Based Service Learning and Life Skills Development (appraisal
   estimate US$20.0 million, actual US$19.84 million): This sub-component was to finance the following
   sub-components:

   Sub-component 1.1: Subproject Grants and Subsistence Stipends for Community Based Service
   Learning: This sub-component was to finance sub-project grants for two sets of potential recipients: i) host
   organizations and ii) groups of young people. It was also to finance subsistence stipends to all youth
   beneficiaries. Following a community-driven development (CDD) model, organizations and young people
   were to be selected on a competitive basis based on proposals submitted in response to calls for proposals
   by the Coordinating Agency.

   Sub-component 1.2: Life Skills Development and Project Management Training: This sub-component was
   to finance life skills development and project management training to all participants (participating through
   host organizations and youth initiative approach) in the community-based service learning program.

   Sub-component 1.3: Outreach to Vulnerable Young People: This sub-component was to ensure that the
   project was to be demand-driven and help the government to identify where uptake is naturally strongest for
   community-based service learning programs.

   Sub-component 1.4: Coordination, Communication, and Accountability: This sub-component was to finance
   the activities that the Coordinating Agency was to carry out. In particular, the Coordinating Agency was to
   be responsible for developing two important frameworks before launching the first call for proposals: i)
   Information and Communication Campaign and ii) Feedback and Resolution Mechanism.

   Component 2: Support Institutional Development of the Committee on Youth Affairs for Youth
   Policy Implementation (appraisal estimate US$0.76 million, actual US$0.90 million): This sub-
   component was to finance the following sub-components:

   Sub-component 2.1: Support the Development of Institutional Framework for Youth Policy Implementation,
   Coordination, and Evaluation Activities: This sub-component was to finance technical assistance including:
   i) semi-annual capacity building (a total of seven workshops) for two staff each from the 16 regions on
   implementing and monitoring youth-focused volunteering programs; ii) sustained capacity building on the
   use of quantitative and qualitative data to produce the Ministry of Education and Science (MoES) annual
   report on youth development, ensuring improvements in research methodology, data analysis, and
   dissemination; iii) capacity building on the application of findings from data analysis to better integrate
   youth issues into national and regional programs, and iv) training and international exchange of experiences
   for the draft Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan on Volunteering (scheduled to be passed by 2020).



                                                                                                     Page 2 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Youth Corps program (P127966)



   Subcomponent 2.2: Support the Development of Training Program for, and Outreach to, Senior Secondary
   Students: This sub-component was to finance the provision of technical assistance, most likely by an
   experienced NGO, for training program development that targets senior secondary students and focuses on
   raising their awareness of community-based volunteering and service learning.

   Component 3: Project Management, Monitoring, and Evaluation Activities (appraisal estimate
   US$1.0 million, actual US$1.38 million): This component was to finance a small Project Management Unit
   (PMU) within the Committee on Youth Affairs (CYA) of the MoES to manage the fiduciary aspects of the
   project, supervise the Coordinating Agency, and ensure adequate project monitoring.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project Cost: The project was to cost US$21.76 million, which was also the actual project cost.

   Financing: The project was to be financed by a Trust Fund (TF-14174) of US$21.76 million which was
   completely disbursed.

   Borrower Contribution: The Borrower was not to make any financial contributions.

   Dates: The project was restructured three times:

         On June 7, 2017, the project was restructured to change the closing date from December 29, 2017,
          to December 29, 2020, to accommodate delays resulting from a lengthy government approval
          process and a restructuring of the implementing agency.
         On August 17, 2020, the project was restructured to: i) extend the closing date by 6 months from 29
          December 2020 to 30 June 2021, to give the MoES sufficient time to complete Round 4 of the Youth
          Crops Project (YCP), and ii) drop the reference to the control groups in two of the five PDO level
          indicators in view of difficulties in related measurements and to support the shift toward pre and post
          surveys commonly used in the international literature (ICR, p.6)
         On June 8, 2021, the project was restructured to extend the closing date by nine months to March
          31, 2022, to make use of cost savings that were to strengthen project results under component 2 -
          Institutional development for youth policy implementation, by closing the gap in current needs in
          state youth policy and helping central and local governments to put in place support measures that
          were to help youth in the post-COVID recovery period.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
According to the PAD (p. 1), Kazakhstan doubled its income per capita GDP from US$5,406 in 2000 to
US$11,568 in 2011. Kazakhstan’s growth was inclusive and strongly pro-poor, allowing the country to
reduce poverty and inequality substantially. The share of the population living in poverty fell from 41 percent
to 4 percent during 2001-2009. However, regional variations remained.



                                                                                                     Page 3 of 15
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Youth Corps program (P127966)



               At the time of appraisal, employment rates in Kazakhstan compared favorably at the international level,
               especially for female employment rates. However, the government was concerned about high rates of low
               productive self-employment. In order for Kazakhstan to achieve its development target of joining the top 30
               most developed countries by 2050, it needed to be able to sustain balanced and inclusive growth through
               the creation of highly skillful human capital, improving quality of physical capital, and strengthening
               institutional capital.

               According to the PAD (p. 3), even though youth unemployment was relatively low (6.1 percent in 2011)
               compared to other countries in the region, disparities between urban and rural youth existed. Rural youth
               faced lower quality education (including vocational education and training), less access to information about
               labor market demands and innovation know-how, and more reasons for spontaneous migration. Young
               women also faced specific constraints to employment, including fewer opportunities, especially for wage
               jobs, more health and safety concerns, and, for about a fifth of them, marriage before age 20.

               According to the ICR (p. 2) youth development was an important national issue and was reflected in the
               ratification of the first law on State Youth Policy in 2004. The government also developed the state Program
               for Education Development (2011-2020), the Strategic Plan of the Ministry of Education and Science (2011-
               2015), and the Employment Program 2020. In 2008, the Council of Youth Policy was established to serve
               as a coordination unit on youth affairs and policy implementation. The Committee on Youth Affairs (CYA) of
               the MoES was established in 2012. The CYA established the Concept of State Youth Policy 2020
               “Kazakhstan 2020: Path to the Future”, which was passed in 2013. The policy described the challenges and
               risks to positive youth development, including low social value of employment, paternalism, high social
               value placed on consumerism, and risk of radicalization among youth.

               The objectives of the project supported the government’s “Kazakhstan 2050” strategy which emphasized
               the importance of supporting youth development (skills, knowledge, and values) as part of its strategy to
               become one of the top 30 economies by 2050.

               The objectives of the project were in line with the Bank’s most recent Country Partnership Framework
               (2020-2025) and its objective 4 “enhanced relevance, quality and equity of education and skills
               development”. However, the formulation of the PDO had shortcomings. As acknowledged in the Task Team
               comments of March 20, 2023; the development problem was youth’s inadequate preparation for the labor
               market, with community engagement and life skills development being a mean to achieve that end. Thus, it
               would have been reasonably expected for the project objective to include that aspect, which would have
               elevated the objective to a more outcome-oriented formulation.




               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                                                                                                                  Page 4 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Youth Corps program (P127966)




OBJECTIVE 1
Objective
To promote young people’s community engagement through a community-based service learning program,
especially for vulnerable youth

Rationale
 “Vulnerable youth” in Kazakhstan was defined as: i) youth who is neither employed or studying; and ii) young
people who cannot live above subsistence level even if employed (“the working poor”).

Theory of Change: The project’s theory of change envisioned that project activities such as financing sub-
project grants for groups of young people and host organizations for community driven development
programs, providing stipends to participating youth in project grants programs as well as training mentors to
provide mentoring to young people, especially vulnerable youth, were to promote community engagement
and life skills.

Beneficiaries were targeted through: i) means testing (status “not working and not studying”) as the formal
process of studying an individual's income, based on official documents; ii) verification by indirect indicators,
data from a survey of households, labor force, and the initial survey of project beneficiaries.

Outputs:

      A total of 2,908 sub-projects were implemented. The selected sub-projects were all related to rural
         area development, education, culture and leisure, healthy lifestyle and sports, sewing and shoe
         workshops, knitting, confectionary, beauty and hairdressing salons, carpentry and metal processing,
         science and technology, and medical offices.
        725 mentors signed contracts, completed the mentorship program, and remained with the project until
         closure. Mentors were selected from a group of active citizens, representatives of public
         organizations, employees of educational organizations, social workers, and entrepreneurs who had
         experience working with young people, especially with socially vulnerable groups. The mentors
         conducted sessions on a monthly basis on: i) individualized mentoring on professional and personal
         goals; ii) linking young people with public services that were available in their communities (also with
         local employment and health centers); iii) reinforcing life skills development and assistance during
         project management training.
        The number of students benefitting from direct interventions to enhance learning increased from zero
         in 2013 to 9,802 students in 2021, exceeding the target of 8,500 students. The number of females that
         benefitted from direct interventions to enhance learning increased from zero in 2013 to 5,377 in 2021,
         exceeding the target of 4,655.
        The number of beneficiary agencies increased from the baseline of zero in 2013 to 98 agencies in
         2021, just falling short of the target of 100 agencies. The project allowed groups of young people to
         apply independently or through host organizations. The project received 239 applications from
         potential host organizations (civil society and public organizations specializing on working with youth)
         of which129 organizations were selected and 98 ended up participating in the project.
        An information and communication campaign was developed, implemented and updated, achieving
         the target of doing so. In 2018, the project developed a strategy for the engagement of young people
         from vulnerable groups that included a variety of media such as 190,000 information posters, 240,000


                                                                                                     Page 5 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Youth Corps program (P127966)



      step-by-step application brochures, 113 advertising sites such as billboards, 286 promotion activities
      in various locations, 3,998 advertisements on buses as well as advertising on radio, TV etc.
     In 2018, the MoES published, with the support of the project, an annual report on youth. The report
      included information about youth in Kazakhstan, such as demographic, social and employment trends.
     The share of host organizations reporting that they used skills they had obtained through project
      activities to improve youth programming in at least two ways increased from the baseline of zero in
      2013 to 77.5 percent in 2021, not achieving the target of 85 percent.

Outcomes:

     The share of youth project beneficiaries who felt they were able to make a positive contribution to their
        communities increased from a baseline of zero in 2013 to 71.21 percent in 2021, moderately short of
        the target of 80 percent. However, the 2022 synthesis report found that respondents indicated that
        their frequency of participating in community events increased by 30 percent.
       The percentage of youth demonstrating a significantly greater improvement in defined community
        engagement (see definition below) increased from a baseline of zero in 2013 to 57.4 percent in 2021,
        not achieving the target of 80 percent. According to the PAD (p. 28) important aspects of community
        engagement were to include: i) capacity to direct cumulative effort over time towards volunteering, ii)
        access to environments that are free from physical and mental hazards to engage in volunteering, iii)
        feelings of positive recognition, iv) understanding of the importance of providing services to the very
        poor, the elderly, migrants, or people with disabilities, and v) active participation as alumni of Youth
        Corps Project.
       The percentage of vulnerable youth that demonstrated an improvement in defined community
        engagement increased from a baseline of zero in 2013 to 59.39 percent in 2021, essentially achieving
        the target of 60 percent.
       The share of sub-projects rated satisfactory at completion increased from a baseline of zero in 2013 to
        91.75 percent in 2021, exceeding the target of 70 percent.
       A 2022 synthesis report found the following: i) 71 percent of participants in all regions reported that
        they were confident that they brought benefits to their communities and that it was important to
        participate in social projects in their communities/residences; ii) 58 percent of the beneficiaries
        believed that they had the opportunity to influence problem solving in their communities compared to
        only 9 percent in 2011; iii) 63 percent of participants reported improved capital contributions towards
        their village/city while 71.5 percent reported improved contributions of services; and iv) 73 percent of
        participants reported improved contributions towards a vulnerable population. Furthermore, a
        sustainability survey showed that 96 percent of youth from the 2018 cohort and 98 percent of
        youth from the 2019 and 2020 cohorts continued to support social events and charity following
        program completion.
       The project reached 9,796 beneficiaries, exceeding the target of 8,500 beneficiaries. 55 percent of the
        beneficiaries were female, achieving the target.
       The percentage of youth beneficiaries with disabilities, increased from zero in 2013 to 5.2 percent in
        2021, achieving the target of 5 percent.

Also, Task Team comments of March 20, 2023, included the following:

     The randomized control trial (RCT) assessment of the 2017 pilot round demonstrated that youth who
        received project interventions showed higher levels of community organization membership.


                                                                                                  Page 6 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Youth Corps program (P127966)



       Quantitative data from the RCT assessment of the pilot round showed a positive change in community
       organizations’ membership among youth in treatment group A who received the full package of
       support, including life skills training, mentorship, and financial support for subproject implementation
       (24 percent), group B who received only financial support (26.6 percent), and group C who received
       only training and mentorship support (26.4 percent) compared with youth in the control group D (21.7
       percent). Similar trends were observed in relation to donating behavior (Group B: 31.2 percent, Group
       D: 28 percent), and volunteering (Group B: 14.4 percent, Group D: 11.7 percent).

      According to the RCT assessment, rural youth reported higher community organization membership
       than urban youth even though urban areas are more likely to have community organizations. Twenty-
       seven percent of rural youth reported being part of at least one organization compared with 23.73
       percent of youth in urban areas. Overall, rural youth were 8 percent more likely to be members of
       youth organizations, including religious organizations (8.9 percent), sports organizations (7.5 percent),
       and NGOs.

      The pre-post self-assessment results (2018-2020) showed that by the end of subproject
       implementation, significant numbers of youth reported increased capital and service contributions to
       their village/city as well as to vulnerable populations, themselves, and their families. Sixty-three
       percent of youth reported improved capital contributions towards their village/city while 71.5 percent
       reported improved service contributions, and 73 percent reported improved contributions towards a
       vulnerable population.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To promote young people’s life skills through a community-based service learning program, especially for
vulnerable youth

Rationale
The ICR (p. 3) defined life skills as soft, non-cognitive, social-emotional skills that cover attitudes, values,
behaviors, knowledge, and specific field skills that help individuals to function and thrive through their life
journey.

Theory of Change: The project’s theory of change is the same as that of the first objective due to the multi-
dimensional nature and inter-linkages in measuring improvements in life-skills and community development.

Outputs:

      The outputs mentioned above also contributed to the second objective of this project.

Outcomes:



                                                                                                       Page 7 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Youth Corps program (P127966)




     The share of all youth project beneficiaries that demonstrated a significantly greater improvement in
      defined like skills increased from a baseline of zero in 2013 to 51.01 percent in 2021, not achieving
      the target of 80 percent, although progress toward the target was substantial.
     The share of vulnerable youth that demonstrated a significantly greater improvement in defined life
      skills increased from a baseline of zero in 2013 to 51.21 percent in 2021, not achieving the target of
      60 percent, although progress toward the target was substantial. Social engagement skills included:
      negotiation, team building and teamwork, community engagement, leaderships, public speaking,
      knowing and working with others and conflict resolution. Self-management skills included: self-
      organization, decision making, planning and time management, learning skills, and knowing yourself.
      Project management and business skills included: project management, business practices, marketing
      and promotion, social media, financial accountability and reporting. Additional life skills included
      vocational skills, digital skills, legal literacy and employment skills.
     The project developed, implemented, and kept up to date a Feedback and Resolution Mechanism,
      applicable to both objectives and achieving the target of doing so. The Mechanism was launched in
      May 2017 and gave beneficiaries the opportunity to provide feedback/launch complains through a toll-
      free call center, WhatsApp messenger, email and social media networks.
     Registered grievances related to the delivery of project benefits being addressed increased from the
      baseline of zero in 2013 to 100 percent in 2021, exceeding the target of 85 percent. When the project
      closed, there had been a total of about 110,000 inquiries and complaints related mostly to team
      leaders, mentors, and coordinators which were resolved by a special committee on grievances.

Also, Task Team comments of March 20, 2023, included the following:

     The RCT assessment of the 2017 pilot round demonstrated that participants who received the full-
       package support (life skills training, mentorship, and grants to implement subprojects) reported
       highest level of skills development and retention. The data shows the lasting value of YCP
       interventions for participants in Group A who received the full package of support (62 percent),
       followed by Group B who received only financial support (58 percent) and Group C who received only
       training and mentorship support (48 percent). The results were stronger for female participants from
       Group A (66 percent), compared to women in treatment Groups B (61 percent) and C (52 percent);
       and rural youth from Group A (64 percent), compared to Group B (62 percent) and Group C (46
       percent).

     The RCT assessment of the 2017 pilot round presents an interesting picture of behavior and attitude
       changes of participants in treatment groups and control group. This is reflected in terms of social
       confidence (preference to work in teams, confidence and assertiveness in social settings) and self-
       esteem (confidence to control own life, own future and ability to overcome difficulties). Groups A, B,
       and C demonstrate higher levels of social confidence (77 percent, 75 percent, and 74 percent
       respectively) compared to control Group D (73 percent).

     The following themes emerged from the qualitative data analysis. Females more often than male
       participants stated that communication skills helped them to overcome shyness and behave more
       openly with other people and strangers. Participants, especially women often cited the development of
       leadership and teamwork skills. Equal numbers of female and male participants were given leadership
       positions in subproject groups, with 30 percent of women and 30 percent of men holding formal
       leadership status in their respective groups. However, during the interviews and FGDs, more women
       than men indicated having developed leadership skills. Learning to adapt to changing circumstances

                                                                                                  Page 8 of 15
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               Youth Corps program (P127966)



                                   also became especially pertinent during COVID-19 when there were higher levels of insecurity and
                                   vulnerability during the pandemic. Round 4 participants, which was implemented during COVID, often
                                   cited the difficulties and insecurities they faced during quarantine and how Project helped them to
                                   develop adaptation and resiliency skills to persevere. Both participants and mentors reported that
                                   project experience and training motivated them to continue learning and pursue personal
                                   development.




                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The project almost fully achieved its objectives to promote young people’s community engagement and life
                            skills. Overall efficacy is rated substantial.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



   5. Efficiency
   Economic analysis:

   Both, the PAD and the ICR did not conduct a traditional cost-benefit analysis due to the lack of data that would
   have allowed for an estimation of the full benefits of the project in monetary terms. The PAD (p. 19) defined
   benefits of the project as enhancing community engagement and participation of young people at the community
   level and enhancing non-cognitive/life skills development on preparedness for life and work.

   The ICR (p. 16) stated that every effort was made to carry out a robust analysis with data that were publicly
   available “to support that the costs involved in achieving project objectives were reasonable in comparison with
   the benefits”. It stated that cost effectiveness could be assessed through projections of cost per beneficiary as a
   proxy. As such, the project was cost-effective with the cost of all activities under component 1 kept under
   budget. The cost per beneficiary declined from US$2,588 at project appraisal to US$1,989 in nominal terms at
   project closure. Costs were related to grants and subsistence stipends for community-based service learning,
   like skills development, and project management training as well as outreach activities to vulnerable youth etc.
   The ICR (p. 16) stated that while the total cost for the component had decreased from an original allocation of



                                                                                                                          Page 9 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Youth Corps program (P127966)



US$22 million to an actual cost of US$19.48 million, the project was able to reach more beneficiaries than
planned at appraisal.

Operational Efficiency:

Project effectiveness was delayed by 25 months pending the signing of required decrees and Parliament
approval. By February 2016, MoES still needed to establish the PMU with adequate staffing and to contract the
Coordinating Agency. The project’s implementation period was extended three times (an additional total period
of four years and three months) as a result of lengthy processing cycles, restructuring of the implementing
agency, and to give MoES sufficient time to complete Round 4 of the YCP.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                    0
 Appraisal                                                 0
                                                                                     Not Applicable
                                                                                    0
 ICR Estimate                                              0
                                                                                     Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of objectives was rated Substantial. Efficacy was also rated Substantial, as objectives were almost
fully achieved. Efficiency was rated Modest in view of insufficient economic analysis and negative
implementation aspects that significantly reduced efficiency. The aggregation of these ratings is consistent with
a Moderately Satisfactory overall outcome.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

According to the Bank team (November 23, 2022), the government continues to be committed to the
objectives of the project as demonstrated through the implementation of the Zhas project 2.0. The Zhas
Project 2.0 is a follow up of Zhas 1.0, the local name of the Youth Corps Program. The Zhas Project 2.0 is to
be funded from the central and local budget financing and is to be managed by the Ministry of Information

                                                                                                   Page 10 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Youth Corps program (P127966)



and Public Development (MIPD). The first pilot round of the Zhas Project 2.0 is taking place in Almaty,
Karagandy, Turkestan and Mangystau regions from September 2022 to February 2023 with 250 grants for
groups of young people. The MIPD will review the results to scale up activities in other regions of
Kazakhstan. As a result, there is little risk to the sustainability of outcomes made under this project.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  According to the PAD (p. 18), the Bank team identified several risks including: i) potential delays in
  project implementation due to the limited experience financial management, procurement and monitoring
  of the CYA in managing similar projects; and ii) contracting the Coordinating Agency (which was to
  implement the vast majority of project activities) was to take time given the large contract size and
  possible dearth of organizations with sufficient capacity and availability to carry out the work. The Bank
  tried to mitigate these risks by providing financing to hire supplemental staff in the CYA for financial
  management, procurement, and monitoring; close interaction between the Bank and the implementing
  agency; and a detailed Project Operations Manual (POM) approved by MoES that was to clarify roles,
  responsibilities, and procedures for project implementation. However, these mitigation measures were
  not sufficient resulting in implementation delays. The Results Framework had a few shortcomings (see
  section 9a ).




  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 According to the ICR (p. 20), the Bank team conducted a total of 15 supervision missions. The Bank team
 included education and fiduciary specialists. The ICR (p. 23) stated that the Bank team continuously
 reported on financial management, procurement and safeguard issues and worked with the PMU and other
 implementing agencies to build capacity in these areas.

 The Bank team restructured the project three times to accommodate implementation delays and revise the
 Results Framework to delink two PDO indicators from the Impact Evaluation. In 2016, when the project
 experienced issues related to procurement, the Bank team provided training to MoES to ensure
 compliance with the Bank's procurement rules (see section 10b for more details). According to the ICR (p.
 24) the Bank team was proactive and used cost savings to implement an additional round of grants and
 provided technical assistance to strengthen MoES and MIPD. Also, during lockdowns related to the
 COVID-19 pandemic, the Bank team worked closely with the government to hold all trainings online to
 ensure that the fourth round of grants was fully implemented.



                                                                                                  Page 11 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Youth Corps program (P127966)




  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 Measuring improved community participation and life skills was challenging overall due to their subjectivity
 and multi-dimensional nature, and measuring achievements relied on self-assessments which might have
 led to overestimation of skills and community interactions by beneficiaries. According to the PAD (p. 16),
 the CYA was responsible for project monitoring. M&E design also included an Impact Evaluation. Two PDO
 indicators that were related to community engagement and life skills were linked to the Impact Evaluation.
 (Subsequently, in view of delays in data collection and analysis, the results of the Impact Evaluation only
 became available in 2020 when the implementation of project activities was almost complete. As a result,
 during the August 2020 restructuring, the definitions of two PDO indicators were modified to delink them
 from Impact Evaluation activities. The ICR (p. 21) stated that the Impact Evaluation did not provide specific
 recommendations for improvement).




b. M&E Implementation
  According to the ICR (p. 21), the indicators included in the Results Framework were tracked on a regular
  basis and the continuously updated Results Framework was used to support supervision missions and
  the Mid-Term Review (MTR). Also, the project collected and analyzed feedback data from beneficiaries
  and mentors through focus group discussions. It conducted surveys of beneficiaries and host
  organizations at the beginning and at the end of the grant program. Furthermore, the project conducted
  assessments of the sustainability of sub-projects.

  During project implementation, several studies were conducted to assess the impact of the project on
  beneficiaries including: i) a report on the findings of the impact evaluation; ii) 2020 study by the Paper
  Lab Research Center on reviewing the implementation of all four rounds and identifying lessons learned
  and recommendations for the potential iteration of the project by the government using state funding; and
  iii) Bank supported synthesis report on the impact of the project. According to the ICR (p. 6) it was
  recognized that self-reporting includes reference bias, that can differ by individuals according to their
  social group norms, and social desirability bias.



c. M&E Utilization


                                                                                                  Page 12 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Youth Corps program (P127966)



  According to the ICR (p. 22), data and findings from all the studies were used to inform the government’s
  follow-on Zhas project 2.0. The Feedback and Resolution Mechanism was used as a critical mechanism
  for quickly identifying and addressing risks, allowing the project team to improve procedures if needed,
  and establishing a robust monitoring system and feedback loop mechanism.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as category C and did not trigger any of the Bank's safeguard policies.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management:

   According to the ICR (p. 22), a civil society report from 2018 raised concerns about the implementation of
   the project as well as about the selection of the Coordinating Agency. In order to address these concerns,
   the Bank conducted a detailed review. The review did not find any significant, material deviations from
   procurement rules and project-specific guidelines. The ICR (p. 22) stated that the review found that the
   grant selection process complied with the project operations manual (POM), financial management
   practices followed agreed implementation arrangements, and internal controls and external audit
   arrangements were appropriate. The project's financial management performance was Satisfactory
   throughout implementation. Except in March 2020, the rating was downgraded to Moderately Satisfactory
   due to challenges related to unaccounted sub-project grants. By the time of the next Implementation
   support mission in August 2021, the issue had been addressed and the financial management rating was
   upgraded to Satisfactory again.

   According to the ICR (p. 23) the external auditor's opinions were unqualified.



   Procurement:

   The ICR (p. 23) stated that the project's procurement performance was continuously rated Moderately
   Satisfactory except in June 2016, when it was downgraded to Moderately Unsatisfactory. This was a result
   of the submission of an incomplete evaluation package for the selection of PMU staff and the lack of
   submission of relevant shortlisting documents for the Coordinating Agency. Other issues included: i)
   establishment of an effective contract management process for the Coordinating Agency; ii) ensuring that
   cost estimates were based on current market prices prior to launching the selection process; and iii)
   ensuring that terms of references had reasonable cost estimates. The Bank team addressed these issues
   by providing training to the MoES to ensure compliance with the Bank's procurement rules. Improvements

                                                                                                  Page 13 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Youth Corps program (P127966)



   resulted in an upgrading to Moderately Satisfactory and by the time the project closed, the procurement
   rating was upgraded to Satisfactory.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   The ICR (para. 51) reported on unintended benefits resulting from the project, but these unquantified
   benefits did not fit with the criteria for inclusion in this section of the ICR Review.



d. Other
   NA



11. Ratings
                                                                               Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                    IEG
                                                                               Disagreements/Comment
                               Moderately
Outcome                                              Moderately Satisfactory
                               Satisfactory
                               Moderately
Bank Performance                                     Moderately Satisfactory
                               Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                 Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                 ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR (p. 24-25) provided several lessons learned, which were adapted by IEG:

      Measuring community engagement and life skills can be challenging due to
       measurement tools relying on self-reporting and the lack of benchmarking. This project
       developed a synthesis report to provide additional data and allow for triangulation of
       evidence. However, even the synthesis report had to heavily rely on self-reporting.
      Including commercial activity in sub-project grants for community support may
       increase the likelihood of sustainability. Although project grants were not intended to
       include commercial activities, approximately one third of sub-projects continued after project
       closure. This finding generated an ICR recommendation suggesting that future operations
       can include sub-projects with both commercial and non-commercial activities to increase the
       sustainability prospects of sub-projects.




                                                                                                 Page 14 of 15
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Youth Corps program (P127966)



        Developing a rigorous targeting mechanism is critical for ensuring that the most
         vulnerable beneficiaries are being reached. This project used a targeting mechanism that
         reduced the possibility of a selection committee influencing the selection outcomes.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provided an adequate overview of the project experience and was candid. It presented sufficient
evidence and analysis to assess project achievements, that were further complemented by additional
information offered by the Task Team. Lessons were derived from project experience. The ICR lacked
conciseness and was repetitive. Its overall quality was rated Substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                Page 15 of 15
