     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SECOND GLOBAL PARTNERSHIP FOR EDUCATION (P149130)



                                                                                   Report Number: ICRR0023275

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P149130                                    SECOND GLOBAL PARTNERSHIP FOR EDUCATION

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Lao People's Democratic Republic           Education


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                 Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-18969                                   15-Jul-2019                                           16,574,227.92

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 14-Apr-2015                                31-Dec-2021

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                       Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            16,800,000.00                                     16,800,000.00

 Revised Commitment                             16,574,227.92                                     16,574,227.92

 Actual                                         16,574,227.92                                     16,574,227.92




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator           Group
 Denise A. Vaillancourt      Judyth L. Twigg              Eduardo Fernandez                IEGHC (Unit 2)
                                                          Maldonado




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   As stated in Schedule 1 (p. 4) of the June 4, 2015 Global Partnership for Education (GPE) Grant Agreement
   between Lao People’s Democratic Republic (Lao PDR) and the International Bank for Reconstruction and
   Development/International Development Association (IDA), acting as Supervising Entity of the GPE Fund,
   “The objective of the Project is to assist the Recipient in improving pre-primary and primary education quality.”
   The design document presents the same statement (Project Appraisal Document, PAD, pp. vi, 10, and 25).



                                                                                                     Page 1 of 28
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SECOND GLOBAL PARTNERSHIP FOR EDUCATION (P149130)



   The PDO did not change throughout the project’s life. However, PDO-level indicators and
   targets were revised as a part of the project’s three restructurings, approved, respectively in June 2018,
   November 2020, and June 2021.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  26-Jun-2018

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   Original Components:

   Component 1: Strengthening School-Based Management (SBM) (original estimate: $12.7 million;
   actual cost: $14.01 million) was to support the development of a SBM framework and the strengthening of
   SBM nationwide, based on a capacity development strategy that encourages improved quality, monitoring
   and evaluation (M&E), reporting, and accountability. To this end, this component was to finance:

         i. technical assistance for the development of the SBM framework, harmonization of SBM materials,
             training of the national SBM team (to be coordinated by the Department of Pre-Primary and Primary
             Education/DPPE, and including a cross-departmental team from the Ministry of Education and
             Sports (MoES) and provincial focal points), monitoring quality of training of SBM teams at the district
             level, improvements in the existing financial monitoring and reporting system at the school level, and
             support for the Inclusive Education Center (IEC, addressing gender, in complement to disability and
             inclusion issues);
         ii. a system of monitoring and quality control of capacity development efforts;
        iii. financing of travel and subsistence costs incurred by the District Education and Sports Bureau
             (DESB) and Provincial Education and Sports Service (PESS) to carry out coaching, mentoring, and
             monitoring of schools; and
        iv. three annual payments of complementary school-based Grants (SBGs) in phase 1 (targeted to 80
             public primary schools in the most disadvantaged districts) and one annual payment for schools in
             phase 2 (targeted to disadvantaged districts under phase 1, and adding the remaining school
             districts in Lao PDR) to be used in line with the SBG manual. These payments were designed to
             complement government of Laos (GoL’s) contributions on a matching basis. At design, GoL
             committed to providing annual SBG grants amounting to at least LAK 20,000 (approximately $2.50)
             per primary student and LAK 15,000 (approximately $1.88) per pre-primary student. The project
             SBGs were to be disbursed after GoL SBGs would be disbursed. In light of GoL’s ambitious goal of
             providing LAK 100,000 per student per year (as expressed in its Education Sector Development



                                                                                                       Page 2 of 28
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  SECOND GLOBAL PARTNERSHIP FOR EDUCATION (P149130)



       Plan), the project left room for adjusting its SBG contribution in the event GoL would increase its
       SBG amounts, with Bank agreement.

Component 2: Improving Reading Outcomes and Assessment Capacity (original estimate: $2.5
million; actual cost: $0.84 million) was to promote evidence-based approaches to the teaching and
learning of early grade reading in Lao language in primary schools, focused on Grades 1 and 2. This was to
be undertaken through two subcomponents.

Subcomponent 2.1: Reading Development Intervention for Grades 1 and 2 in Lao language aimed to
support Research Institute for Educational Science (RIES) and MoES to develop, pilot, and evaluate a new
pedagogical approach for teaching and learning of reading in Grades 1 and 2. The interventions included:
(i) the development of the pedagogical approach and instructional materials for teachers and students and
simple classroom-based assessments; (ii) teacher training on pedagogical approach and monitoring
strategies to track changes in teaching practice; (iii) capacity building of school principals and pedagogical
advisers to promote and sustain strategies for better teaching and learning environments in primary
schools; (iv) mixed-method evaluation of this pilot (see Section 9 on M&E); and (v) RIES capacity building
in survey design, data analysis, student assessment, and the design of evidence-based instructional and
curriculum materials.

Subcomponent 2.2: Studies to support instructional approaches to ethnic students aimed to
strengthen evidence on effective approaches to reading development in the context of ethno-linguistic
diversity to inform MoES of policy options and decisions to address learning gaps and possibly to inform a
program for slow readers. Analytical products to be supported were: (i) a review of country experiences with
significant ethno-linguistic diversity in advancing effective approaches; (ii) a study on the orthographic and
linguistic features of the main ethnic languages in Lao PDR; (iii) an analysis of policy options and costs to
address reading deficits among non-proficient Lao speakers; and (iv) an evaluation framework of programs
for instruction in Lao languages.

Component 3: Project Management and Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) (original estimate: $1.6
million; actual cost: $1.58 million) was to support project planning and execution, financial management,
procurement, internal audit, safeguards management, and M&E. Support was to include the development of
government-wide systems for financial management, including the use of school bank accounts for
managing all funds from GoL and the GPE. Project financing was to cover logistics and operational costs of
the MoES Education Coordination Unit (ECU), responsible for project coordination. Financing was also to
cover launch and annual review workshops and required financial audits. M&E of project activities and
sector wide indicators were also a focus of technical and financial support.

Revisions to Components

Under the June 2018 restructuring:

Component 1 (Strengthening SBM) underwent three changes. First, a new, more reliable set of eight
indicators was used to identify the most disadvantaged districts (targeted under phase 1), replacing the
original indicator, which produced more volatile, less consistent results. This resulted in an increase in the
number of priority districts from 80 to 88, adding 418 primary schools, 163 kindergartens, and 39,500
children and students supported under phase 1. Second, in response to GoL’s increased annual spending
on SBGs, from LAK 20,000 ($2.5) to LAK 70,000 ($8.85) per primary student, and from LAK 15,000
(US$1.9) to LAK 50,000 ($6.25) per pre-primary student, the GPE funding was increased from LAK 20,000


                                                                                                  Page 3 of 28
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  SECOND GLOBAL PARTNERSHIP FOR EDUCATION (P149130)



($2.5) to LAK 30,000 ($3.75) per primary student, and from LAK 15,000 ($1.9) to LAK 50,000 ($6.25) per
pre-primary student. This increase, combined with the coverage of eight additional disadvantaged districts,
increased the GPE’s initial investment in SBGs by a net amount of $3.91 million, for a revised total of $8.95
million. Third, significant efficiency gains in SBG training due to GoL’s decision to consolidate the length
and nature of training allowed for the reallocation of $4.9 million in achieved savings: $3.91 million to cover
above-cited increments in SBGs, and $1 million to support implementation of a new reading readiness
program under Component 2.

Component 2 (Improving Learning Outcomes and Assessment Capacity) was changed for two
reasons. In its March 2, 2023 email to IEG, the task team explained that there was a lack of consensus,
among partners, around the reading development program. In addition, the Australian Department of
Foreign Affairs and Trade (DFAT) decided to fund Grades 1 and 2 curriculum after the development
partners had agreed that the GPE II would finance it (DP consensus, being necessary for a GPE-funded
project). In the end, to avoid duplication of efforts with the national primary education curriculum activities
in DFAT's Best Education Quality and Access in Lao PDR (BEQUAL) program, the following changes were
made, with the consensus of development partners:

      a refocus of the reading development intervention, initially targeted to Grades 1 and 2, to the final
       year of pre-primary preparation of five-year-olds, through the design and implementation of a
       reading readiness program;
      an increase in the target communities from 80 to 127 to implement to include the Bank’s early
       childhood education (ECE) project convergence districts. The 127 remote, mountainous, mostly
       ethnic communities are located in the project’s priority districts.
      an increase in the funding for Component 2 from $2.5 million to $4.0 million using savings from
       Component 1 ($1 million) and 3 ($0.5 million) to support the increase in program beneficiaries and to
       cover technical assistance; and
      improved arrangements to recruit reading readiness technical advisors and a literacy program
       supervisor for capacity building, supervision, coordination, and quality assurance.

Component 3 (Project Management and M&E) activities were mostly unchanged. Because of
implementation delays, however, the number and scope of workshops were reduced, and a savings of $0.5
million was reallocated to Component 2. Additionally the project, at the recommendation of the Laos
Education Sector Working Group (ESWG), initiated the selection of a project coordinator.

Under the November 2020 restructuring:

Component 1 received an increment of $1.32 million (reallocated from Component 2) for SBGs, which
were urgently needed by schools to keep them safe and hygienic, following COVID-19.

Component 2’s original plans for an Early Grade Reading Assessment (EGRA) were assessed by MoES to
be premature, given delays in rolling out the new curriculum for Grades 1 and 2. Delays were not foreseen
during the 2018 restructuring and were exacerbated by the March-June 2020 school closures due to
COVID-19.

Component 3 received an increment of $0.5 million, reallocated from Component 2, for the purchase of
information and communications technology (ICT) equipment for provincial and district education offices to



                                                                                                   Page 4 of 28
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SECOND GLOBAL PARTNERSHIP FOR EDUCATION (P149130)



   complement face-to-face meetings, workshops, and trainings in the event of unforeseen circumstances
   such as COVID-19 restrictions.

   Under the June 2021 restructuring:

   Component 1 received an increment of $95,820 for additional SBGs.

   Component 2 was unable to conduct monitoring visits and lessons learned workshops between April and
   June 2022, and so these were reprogrammed for a follow-on (GPE III) project. As a result, $0.2 million was
   reallocated to Components 1 and 3.

   Component 3 received an increment of $104,000 to be used towards ICT and furniture upgrades for MoES.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Cost. The total actual cost of the project at closing is reported at $16.43 million (ICR p. 47), or 98 percent
   of the original estimate of $16.80 million. Because of component revisions and shifts in allocations
   introduced during restructurings (see Section 2d above), the actual cost of Component 1 ($14.01 million)
   was 110 percent of the original estimate ($12.7 million), while the actual cost of Component 2 ($0.84 million)
   was only one third of the original estimate ($2.5 million). The cost of Component 3 ($1.58 million) was very
   close to its original estimate of $1.6 million.

   Financing. The project was fully financed by a $16.8 million GPE Grant, which was 98 percent disbursed.

   Borrower Contribution: While not factored into the project cost, the GoL financed annual SBGs during the
   project life at a rate of LAK 70,000 ($8.85) per primary school student, and LAK 50,000 ($6.25) per pre-
   primary student, with the first several years focused on 88 disadvantaged districts, and the remaining years
   extended to all 148 school districts in Lao PDR. According to supplemental data provided by the task team
   to IEG in an email dated March 2, 2023, for the six school years overlapping with the project (2015/16
   through 2020/21), the government disbursed SBGs to the pre-primary and primary levels for a total of LAK
   438,397 million ($54.8 million equivalent, using the ICR exchange rate of LAK 8000 =$1). Of this amount:
   LAK 43,964 million was for 745,548 kindergarten students; LAK 21,075 million was for 272,745 pre-primary
   classroom students; and LAK 373,358 million was for 4,507,303 primary students.

   Key Dates. The project was approved on April 14, 2015 and became effective on June 4, 2015, and its
   mid-term review took place in May 2018. The project was restructured three times in June 2018, November
   2020, and June 2021. Prompted by delays in Component 2 implementation and school closings due to
   COVID, progressive restructurings involved scaling back of activities under Component 2, reallocation of
   funds for additional SDGs under Component 1, and three extensions of the closing date by a total of 2.5
   years (from July 15, 2019 to December 31, 2021).




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale


                                                                                                    Page 5 of 28
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    SECOND GLOBAL PARTNERSHIP FOR EDUCATION (P149130)



The PDO is highly relevant to current country conditions. As stated in Lao PDR’s Education and Sports
Sector Development Plan (ESSDP) 2021-25 (October 2020), the quality of early childhood/pre-primary
education is insufficient. There is a need to develop teaching standards and fundamental quality standards
for ECE and to have a specialist ECE Pedagogical Advisor at each DESB. At the primary education level,
the curriculum in early grades is too crowded and there is no extra support for students with diverse
learning needs. There is limited focus on the knowledge and tracking of students’ levels of understanding of
the curriculum and on the tailoring of teaching to address gaps in understanding. Multi-grade teachers lack
adequate support and training, and textbook and other learning material needs are not being met. All of this
culminates in inadequate learning outcomes at the primary level. While significant progress was made in
SBGs provision and in strengthening SBM, important shortcomings in financing and capacity remain, with
disparities across schools and districts. The 2017 Systematic Country Diagnostic corroborates these issues
several years prior to the ESSDP. The low quality of basic education and the very low access to ECE,
especially among ethnic groups and disadvantaged communities, are key constraints to learning in Lao
PDR. Very low literacy among primary students leads to high dropout rates, particularly among adolescent
girls.

The PDO is also highly relevant to the current development priorities of the country. Laos PDR’s
ESSDP 2021-25 articulates a number of policy objectives supportive of continued efforts to increase the
quality of pre-primary and primary education, including a renewed focus on primary education as a priority,
especially to improve content knowledge and pedagogical skills of primary teachers. This will require: a
significant budget; the expansion of access to ECE to improve the quality of primary school graduates; a
realignment of the skills and competencies of MoES staff in order to meet the current and foreseen needs
of the system (doing more with the same through improved human resource systems); institutional
strengthening of provincial and district education offices and schools to enhance their efficiency,
effectiveness, and accountability; improved allocation and management of financial and human resources;
and continued focus on the most disadvantaged districts.

Moreover, the PDO is relevant to the Bank’s Country Partnership Framework (CPF, 2017-2021),
whose timeframe, as confirmed by the task team in its March 2, 2023 email to IEG, had been extended
through early 2023. (The ICR based its analysis of relevance on the 2017-2023 CPF, given that the new
2023-2026 CPF was approved by the Board on January 24, 2023, four months after the publication of the
ICR.) The 2017-2023 CPF supported three focus areas: (1) supporting inclusive growth; (2) investing in
people; and (3) protecting the environment, essentially supporting the three outcomes articulated in Lao
PDR’s Development Program and Medium-Term Strategy: (1) continued, firm, and inclusive growth; (2)
human resources development; and (3) protection of natural resources and the environment. In support of
the human resources development outcome, the CPF Objective 2.2 aimed to improve the quality of primary
and pre-primary education, keep girls in school, and address deficiencies in equitable access to ECE.

The Bank’s previous experience in supporting Laos PDR’s education sector rendered it well
equipped to undertake the project. As noted in the CPF, at the project’s outset, the Bank was already
supporting pre-primary and primary schooling through the ongoing Second Global Partnership for
Education Project (P149130) and the IDA-funded Early Childhood Education Project (P145544). The CPF
envisioned follow-up to this support, with continued focus on investing in early years. The Bank was also
supporting at the time of preparation the National School Feeding program with the World Food Program to
supplement children’s nutrition intake and keep them in school. The Bank’s education sector support
complemented education activities of several development partners, including the European Union (primary




                                                                                                  Page 6 of 28
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      SECOND GLOBAL PARTNERSHIP FOR EDUCATION (P149130)



               education support); Australia/Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade (primary education support); and
               German GIZ and Asian Development Bank (vocational training).

               It is not clear why the PDO did not include the objective of improving pre-primary and primary equity, in
               addition to quality improvements, given that the project, along with the GoL and the Bank’s development
               priorities for Lao PDR, highlighted and sought to address issues of inequities in the education sector.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Support the Government of Lao PDR in improving pre-primary education quality

                             Rationale
                             As laid out in the PAD (Sections II and III) and the June 2018 restructuring paper, and reflected in the ICR (p.
                             8), the project sought to improve pre-primary education quality through the achievement of two intermediate
                             outcomes.

                             The first intermediate outcome (strengthened school-based management through increased financing for
                             pre-primary classrooms and kindergartens) was expected to contribute to the achievement of minimum
                             education quality standards in those classrooms and kindergartens, especially those located in
                             disadvantaged districts, which received extra support under the project. Key outputs supporting this
                             intermediate outcome included: annual SBGs received (government-financed and matching grants from the
                             project), and public disclosure of budget information to communities. The PAD specifies beneficiaries under
                             Component 1 as encompassing both pre-primary and primary students; the PDO aimed to improve pre-
                             primary as well as primary education quality; and the theory of change (ICR p. 8) also specifies the aim to
                             improve quality at both pre-primary and primary levels. Given that SBGs and capacity building support are
                             targeted to public primary schools (as clarified in the June 2018 restructuring), it is assumed that (some of)
                             these schools include pre-primary teachers, classrooms, and students. But there is no itemization (or
                             mention) of the breakdown of actual support between pre-primary and primary levels, and there are no
                             output, intermediate outcome, or outcome indicators specified for the pre-primary level. At design, GoL
                             committed to providing annual SBG grants for pre-primary education amounting to at least LAK 15,000
                             (approximately $1.88 per pre-primary student). Under the June 2018 restructuring this amount was increased
                             to LAK 50,000 (($6.25 per pre-primary student). The GPE funding for the pre-primary level was also
                             increased under the June 2018 restructuring to match GoL’s funding, from LAK 15,000 ($1.88) to LAK 50,000
                             ($6.25) per pre-primary student.

                             The second intermediate outcome (enhanced teaching and learning environment to support reading
                             readiness among five-year-olds enrolled in pre-primary programs), added during the June 2018 restructuring,

                                                                                                                                Page 7 of 28
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   SECOND GLOBAL PARTNERSHIP FOR EDUCATION (P149130)



was expected to contribute to improved education quality at the pre-primary level through the establishment
and support of a new reading readiness program. Key outputs supporting this intermediate outcome included:
the training of master coaches and teacher training college faculty to train and coach pre-primary teachers in
applying this new reading readiness program, the provision of instructional materials to pre-primary
classrooms, and the production of an evaluation framework for reading instruction in Lao language of non-Lao
Tai speakers. The proper application of these outputs was expected to enhance teachers' capacities and
culminate in improved reading readiness of pre-primary students, as measured by enhanced awareness of
print material and improved scores in a letter-sounding task in the Lao alphabet.



Outputs and intermediate outcomes supporting strengthened financing and management of pre-
primary level:

While Component 1 indicates that annual grant amounts – and capacity building to support the management
of these funds – would be provided to pre-primary schools and kindergartens on a per capita (pre-primary
student) basis, along with capacity building to support the management of these funds, there are no project
indicators to track outputs or outcomes for these investments. The ICR provided no information on the
delivery of grants and capacity building to the pre-primary level, or on the use of these funds with
strengthened capacity, and whether they contributed to improvements in pre-primary education quality, as
originally envisaged under Component 1.

The design and intent of the SBG/SBM component (Component 1) did not change at the 2018 restructuring,
except to increase the number of disadvantaged districts covered from 80 to 88 and to increase the annual
per capita levels of both GoL-financed and project-financed SBGs, over initially committed levels. The
increased commitments, as presented in the June 2018 restructuring, were expressed in terms of different
per capita amounts for pre-primary and primary students, an indication that this support was indeed still
channeled to both levels of education. However, as under the initial design, there were no pre-primary-
specific output or outcome indicators. The only mention of SBG support to the pre-primary level in the ICR is
in Annex 7 (p. 57), which notes that two tranches of SBGs were provided to all schools (11,493 kindergarten
schools, 2,923 pre-primary classrooms, and 8,570 primary schools) under the second (October 2020) and
third (June 2021) restructurings to support the purchase of sanitation toolkits, including soaps, alcohol gels,
and masks during the first and second waves of COVID. In an email of March 2, 2023 addressed to IEG, the
task team provided additional information on SBG and SBM support to the pre-primary level as follows:

      Based on the aide memoire and documented record, the first tranche (88 districts) of SBG for the pre-
       primary level was sent to 1,552 kindergartens. This represents 21 percent of the SBG amounts
       disbursed that year, the remaining 79 percent having been sent to 5,760 primary schools.
      The third tranche (distributed to schools in all 148 districts in the country) was sent to 2,540 pre-
       primary classes (kindergarten is not reported, but the share of disbursements to pre-primary level was
       23 percent, the remaining 77 percent having been sent to 8,496 primary schools) (Source: December
       2018 and February 2019 aide memoires).

In this same email, the task team stated that “the project did not track the use of funds actively, since this was
(considered) beyond the scope of GPE II.” But this ICRR notes that the PDO is clear in its intent to achieve
improved quality. Overall, support to pre-primary classrooms and kindergarten schools in response to COVID



                                                                                                    Page 8 of 28
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   SECOND GLOBAL PARTNERSHIP FOR EDUCATION (P149130)



was reported in the ICR, but there was limited reporting on the SBG disbursements, and no reporting on the
management or use of these grants.

Outputs and intermediate outcomes supporting the new reading readiness program for five-year-old
children in pre-primary preparatory groups and kindergartens, added during the 2018 restructuring:

      A total of 48 master coaches were trained to develop instructional materials, train coaches and
         teachers, and supervise program implementation, almost five times the original target of 10
         (Project data). The number of coaches trained was increased due to changes in the training design.
        A total of 27 Teacher Training College faculty were trained to coach and train teachers in applying the
         reading readiness approach, surpassing the target of 24 (Project data).
        In total, 183 teachers were trained by coaches/master coaches on the application of the reading
         readiness approach, exceeding the target of 127 (Project data). This overachievement was due to
         some of the 127 target schools having more than one pre-primary teacher.
        The project provided 142 classrooms implementing the reading readiness program with a kit of
         instructional materials, exceeding the target of 127 (Project data). This overachievement was due to
         some of the 127 schools having more than one pre-primary classroom.
        An evaluation framework for reading instruction in Lao language to ethnic students was developed
         and submitted to MoES, achieving the target (Project data). The ICR notes (p. 19) that this
         achievement marks an important foundation from the social inclusion perspective that children from
         ethnic minority groups can benefit through developed reading instruction.

Outcomes

      Taking into account (1) the absence of any evidence on the meeting of minimum standards of quality
         at the pre-primary level, as a result of SBGs and SBM support to the pre-primary level (not quantified
         in the ICR or in the task team's email to IEG of March 2, 2023), and (2) the provision of COVID
         support to all pre-primary classrooms and kindergartens through the second and third restructurings to
         provide a safe environment in schools, there is overall limited evidence of achievement of improved
         quality at the pre-primary level as a result of SBGs and SBM capacity building.

      However, the project’s successful implementation of the new reading readiness program for five-year-
         olds in pre-primary preparatory groups and kindergartens, introduced during the June 2018
         restructuring, did contribute to improvements in the learning environment and capacities for the
         teaching and learning of early reading skills, as detailed below:

      90 percent of teachers trained in the reading readiness program were found to implement the
       approach with high fidelity, as ascertained through classroom observations based on rigorous
       methodology. This level exceeded the target of 75 percent.
      The following learning outcomes among the first cohort of pre-primary children participating in the
       reading readiness program (exposed to 10 months of intervention) were documented in the project’s
       impact evaluation (IE) study. These results cannot be compared to the original baselines and targets,
       because the target groups and baselines are different than what the IE measured. The original target
       group was composed of children who were slated to attend the reading readiness program after
       having already benefited from an ECE intervention supported under another Bank project. But
       procurement delays led to a new IE design in 2019, comparing the baseline and endline of new
       cohorts, within the IE timeline, who did not reside in villages benefiting from ECE

                                                                                                   Page 9 of 28
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   SECOND GLOBAL PARTNERSHIP FOR EDUCATION (P149130)



       interventions. Original baselines and targets of ECE-exposed children are provided in parentheses,
       just to provide context and an indication of anticipated gains.
             o The share of children in target classrooms with awareness of print increased by 1.9
                percentage points, from a baseline of 2.2 percent to 4.1 percent (IE results). No target is
                reported. (The original intent was an increase of 20 percentage points, from 35 percent to 55
                percent). In the absence of targets for the IE cohort, a comparison of actual percentage points
                gained with originally expected percentage point gains, along with the small size of the actual
                gains, indicate limited achievement. Disaggregated results are as follows:
                       A modest increase of 4 percentage points in the share of Lao Tai-speaking children in
                        target classrooms, from 2.7 to 6.7 percent. (The original intent was an increase of 15
                        percentage points from 45 percent to 60 percent.)
                       A slight decrease of 1.9 percentage points in the share of non-Lao Tai-speaking
                        children in target classrooms, from 1.6 to 1.5 percent. (The original intent was an
                        increase of 25 percentage points, from 25 to 50 percent.)
                       A modest increase of 0.6 percentage points among boys in target classrooms, from 2.3
                        to 2.9 percent. (The original intent was an increase of 20 percentage points from 35 to
                        55 percent.)
                       An increase of 4.5 percentage points among girls in target classrooms, from 2.2 to 6.7
                        percent. (The original intent was an increase of 20 percentage points, from 35 to 55
                        percent.)
             o The share of children in target classrooms scoring 0 in a letter-sounding task in the Lao
                alphabet declined by 20 percentage points, from 25.7 to 5.7 percent (IE results). No target is
                reported. (The original intent was a decrease of 20 percentage points from 100 percent to 80
                percent. This applied to the aggregate group and to all disaggregated groups. The initial 100
                percent baseline had been established because the ECE curriculum had focused on learning
                letter names vs. sounds.) In the absence of targets for the IE cohort, a comparison of actual
                percentage points gained with originally expected percentage point gains, along with the
                substantial size of the actual gains, indicate clear progress. Disaggregated results are as
                follows:
                       A decrease of 12.6 percentage points in the share of Lao Tai-speaking children in
                        target classrooms, from 15.5 to 2.9 percent.
                       A decrease of 27.5 percentage points in the share of non-Lao Tai-speaking children,
                        from 35.9 to 8.4 percent.
                       A decrease of 20.3 percentage points among boys in target classrooms from 25.6 to
                        5.3 percent.
                       A decrease of 16.7 percentage points among girls in target classrooms from 22.1 to 5.4
                        percent.

Overall, this objective was (barely) substantially achieved. There was inadequate evidence of the channeling
of funding and capacity building to pre-primary education and especially of their use in achieving minimum
standard service quality. Nevertheless, the ICR does report that the project, during its last two
(extended) years, did provide two annual SBGs to all pre-primary classrooms and kindergartens in the
country to improve the safety and quality of pre-school environments to improve hygiene and protect against
COVID transmission. Moreover, pre-primary education quality was improved with the implementation of a
reading readiness program for five-year-olds in pre-primary classrooms and kindergartens, which culminated
in improved teaching and some improvements in learning of pre-reading skills.



                                                                                                Page 10 of 28
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   SECOND GLOBAL PARTNERSHIP FOR EDUCATION (P149130)




Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Support the Government of Lao PDR in improving primary education quality

Rationale
As laid out in the PAD (Sections II and III), and reflected in the ICR (p. 8), the project sought to improve
primary education quality through the achievement of two intermediate outcomes.

The first intermediate outcome (strengthened school-based management through increased financing for
public primary schools and for education offices at district and provincial levels, and capacity building for the
management and effective use of resources) was expected to contribute to the achievement of minimum
education quality standards in public primary schools, especially those located in disadvantaged districts,
which received extra support under the project. Key outputs supporting this intermediate outcome included:
annual SBGs received (GoL-financed and matching grants from the project), regular meetings and enhanced
capacity of village education development committees (VEDCs), strengthened management capacity of
principals and school heads, districts equipped with annual, costed district education development plans, use
of financial reporting systems, and public disclosure of budget information to communities. The financing of
school-based grants was also expected to lower dropout rates, because they would lower out-of-pocket
payments made by parents to compensate for the chronic underfinancing of school expenses.

The second intermediate outcome (establishment, support, and study of a reading development program
for Grades 1 and 2) was expected to improve teachers' capacities, in-class teaching and learning materials,
and teachers' supervision and oversight, all ultimately contributing to improved reading outcomes among
early grade students.

Outputs supporting Strengthened School-Based Management (at primary level):

At the district level:

       148 school districts had annual, costed district education development plans, fully achieving the
        target of 148 (DESB data).
       100 percent of DESBs use the government’s financial reporting system for managing and reporting on
        their education funds, fully achieving the target of 100 percent.

At the school and community level:

       100 percent of the (8,900) public primary schools in Laos received annual SBGs from both the
        government and the project, fully achieving the target (Project data and Bank verification
        mechanism), in amounts greater than estimated at project approval.
            o Government block grants:
                    for primary students increased from the original commitment of LAK 20,000 ($2.5) to
                      LAK 70,000 ($8.85) per student per year; and

                                                                                                    Page 11 of 28
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
SECOND GLOBAL PARTNERSHIP FOR EDUCATION (P149130)



                   for pre-primary students increased from LAK 15,000 ($1.90) to LAK 50,000 ($6.25) per
                    student per year.
          o Complementary block grants provided under the project:
                for primary students increased from the original commitment of LAK 20,000 ($2.5) to
                    LAK 30,000 ($3.75) per student per year; and
                   for pre-primary students increased from LAK 15,000 ($1.90) to LAK 50,000 ($6.25) per
                    student per year.
          o A total of 916,007 primary students in 8,900 primary schools benefited from SBM spending
             (provided in five tranches).
    The System Approach for Better Education Results (SABER) study revealed some of the ways in
     which the project supported schools’ progress in approaching the minimum quality of service delivery:
          o School and classroom resources: There was a significant change in the share of schools
             providing classroom reading corners (from 19.4 percent in 2017 to 49.6 percent in the endline),
             with schools benefiting from the reading readiness program faring better than schools that did
             not. In short, almost half of intervention schools provided comfortable places to sit and read, as
             well as grade-appropriate reading materials, which may have impacted children’s reading
             outcomes.
          o SBG implementation: Forty-four percent of the SBGs was spent on teaching and learning,
             meeting the threshold of 40 percent set at appraisal, but falling short of the 60 percent
             minimum threshold defined in the SBG manual during implementation. One-third of
             SBGs was spent on basic repairs, maintenance, utility costs, and expenses associated with
             meetings and travel. The remaining 23 percent financed other expenses, including
             consumables like water and COVID-related items. Two additional annual SBGs were provided
             to all public primary schools in the last two years of the project's (extended) life to support and
             equip schools to promote hygiene and prevent the spread of COVID.
          o School and teacher support: School principals reported that Pedagogical Advisers (PAs) had
             reviewed or observed 76 percent of the teachers in their schools, providing feedback
             on teaching methods (89 percent), teacher attendance (36 percent), teacher knowledge (29
             percent), and classroom management (24 percent). No baselines were provided to indicate
             trends. The PAs provided only oral feedback in 34 percent of the schools, and written (or a
             combination of written and oral) reports in the remaining schools.
    DESB staff made regular monitoring visits to schools and school principals.
    80 percent of public primary schools in the project’s 88 priority districts had school development
     plans (SDPs) meeting minimum quality requirements, fully achieving the target of 80
     percent (SABER-Service Delivery surveys). Under the original project design 80 priority districts
     were targeted, increased to 88 during the June 2018 restructuring when more reliable criteria were
     applied.
    Of the public primary schools that received grants, only 22 percent made budget information
     publicly available to communities, falling far short of the target of 80 percent (DESB, DPPE and
     ECU). The ICR Results Framework (Annex 1) notes that failure to achieve the target was partly due to
     COVID lockdowns (limited visits to schools) and partly because of shortcomings in school principals’
     performance.
    SBM capacity building activities were delivered to:
          o principals and heads of school in 100 percent of the 8,900 public primary schools, fully
             achieving the target of 100 percent (Project data); and
          o 100 percent of VEDCs, fully achieving the target of 100 percent (Project data).


                                                                                                 Page 12 of 28
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   SECOND GLOBAL PARTNERSHIP FOR EDUCATION (P149130)




      88 percent of VEDCs met at least twice per school year, almost achieving the target of 100
        percent. While high, this level was lower than the (2017) baseline of 99.4 percent, the slight decline
        attributable to disruptions caused by COVID-19 lockdowns and restrictions (SABER-SD surveys).

At the central level:

      In a March 2, 2023 email to IEG, the task team confirmed that support to the IEC, addressing gender
        in complement to disability and inclusion issues, envisaged under Component 1, was indeed
        provided. But it also noted that “the team raised issues of overall insufficiency of the Ethnic Group
        Development Plan monitoring and reporting on social inclusion through aide-memoires,” sensitizing
        the client about the importance of addressing this issue.

Outputs supporting a reading development program for Grades 1 and 2: Activities supporting the
design, piloting, and evaluation of a reading development program for Grades 1 and 2, as originally conceived
under Component 2, were delayed and then dropped during the project’s restructuring in 2018. As a
consequence, none of the following output targets was supported or achieved under the project.

      80 percent of trained principals and pedagogical advisors in pilot schools observe lessons and provide
       feedback to teachers;
      400 Grades 1 and 2 teachers trained as a part of project interventions;
      80 pilot schools receive a kit of instructional materials for Grades 1 and 2; and
      120 pedagogical advisors and school principals trained to oversee this program.

Nevertheless, an evaluation framework for reading instruction in Lao language to ethnic students was
developed and submitted to MoES, achieving the target set in the original project. This evaluation
framework target was retained and incorporated into the reading readiness program for pre-primary students,
which replaced the reading development program for Grades 1 and 2 at restructuring.

Intermediate Outcomes:

Strengthened School-Based Management, with Community Involvement, and Financial Management:

Thanks to the substantial achievement of most of output indicators, the project was successful
in strengthening public primary school-based management capacity and practice, and providing needed
financial resources directly to public primary schools (and to districts) to enable them to carry out their due
diligence (school plan development, implementation, oversight, monitoring and evaluation; reporting; financial
management; and collaboration with communities).

Strengthened School Environment, Approaches and Capacities for Improving Early Grade (Grades 1
and 2) Literacy:

Because the 2018 project restructuring dropped the Grades 1 and 2 Reading Development Program from its
activities, this intermediate outcome was not supported or achieved under the project.

Outcomes




                                                                                                  Page 13 of 28
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   SECOND GLOBAL PARTNERSHIP FOR EDUCATION (P149130)




      From a 2017 (Year 2) baseline of 71 percent, 75.5 percent of public primary schools met the minimum
       quality of service delivery by the project’s end (Year 6), an increase of 4.5 percentage points,
       achieving only half the 9 percentage point increase needed to reach the target of 80
       percent (SABER SD baseline and endline surveys). As noted in the PAD, this indicator was focused
       on three dimensions of school quality that have a direct impact on sector challenges and are aligned
       with existing quality standards; (i) students; (ii) teaching and learning; and (iii) school environment and
       community participation, reflecting the necessary conditions for learning to take place in a
       school. However, as specified in the ICR (endnote xvi on page 62), the SABER questionnaire
       consisted of 10 modules, although two modules (teacher and student) were removed from the endline
       survey because, due to COVID restrictions, the survey firm enumerators could not conduct in-person
       interviews with teachers and students, and it was difficult to verify the teachers' and principals' records
       over a phone interview. The SABER SD was conducted in a representative sample of schools in
       priority districts and in non-priority districts.
             o While falling short of the target, progress was greater among priority district schools, whose
                minimum quality standards increased by six percentage points, from 68.7 to 75.3 percent,
                compared with non-priority schools, whose standards increased by 1.4 percentage points, from
                74.2 to 75.6 percent.
      The primary education dropout rate decreased from a (2015) baseline of 5.2 percent to 4.1 percent by
       the project’s end, exceeding the target of 4.5 percent (Education Management Information System,
       EMIS). In its March 2, 2023 email to IEG, the task team provided this data disaggregated by gender,
       indicating that the decrease of 1.2 percentage points for girls (from 4.8 to 3.6 percent) was slightly
       larger than the decrease of 1.0 percentage point for boys (from 5.6 to 4.6 percent). The ICR (Annex 1)
       notes that this is attributable, at least in part, to the significantly larger than planned school block
       grants provided under Component 1, given that a root cause for dropouts is parents’ inability to pay
       fees to compensate for inadequate non-wage school expenditures. While this indicator had also been
       considered a proxy for education quality, the ICR (p. 12) noted difficulty in finding strong correlation
       between quality improvement and dropout rates within the project scope and timeline.
      Because of the 2018 project restructuring, the following two outcome indicators were not
       supported or achieved under the project:
             o A decline in the share of Grade 2 students in pilot schools who cannot read a single word
                (disaggregated by gender); and
             o The share of Grades 1 and 2 teachers in pilot schools who show improvement in teaching
                practices (measured through objective classroom observations). It is possible that these
                indicators may have been achieved under DFAT support to primary school curriculum, which
                caused the GPE support to be redirected to pre-primary children, but this was not reported in
                the ICR.

Direct Project Beneficiaries:

      The ICR reports a total of 953,208 direct project beneficiaries at the end of the project, of which 58
       percent are female (EMIS, Department of Inspection). This falls short of the original target of
       1,200,000 beneficiaries, but exceeds the target of half being female.

As was the case for the first objective, this objective was (barely) substantially achieved. Use of SBGs and
strengthened SBM capacity did contribute to increases in the minimum quality of service delivery in public
primary schools, especially among disadvantaged schools, although the target was not fully
achieved. Investment in Grades 1 and 2 reading development was dropped at restructuring. Two additional

                                                                                                   Page 14 of 28
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   SECOND GLOBAL PARTNERSHIP FOR EDUCATION (P149130)



rounds of SBGs for public primary schools, provided during the last two years of the project's (extended) life,
provided materials and support to improve public primary school hygiene and protect against the spread of
COVID, after the onset of the pandemic. The surpassing of the target for reduced drop-out rate is attributed,
in part, to the SBGs and their positive effect on school affordability to parents of the most vulnerable children,
but this is likely more an indicator of affordability than quality.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 2 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
Support the Government of Lao PDR in improving primary education quality

Revised Rationale
The rationale of investments in SBGs and SBM capacity building for primary schools culminating in schools'
abilities to achieve minimum quality service standards remained the same as for Original Objective 2. The
rationale for investment in Grades 1 and 2 reading development is dropped from this revised objective, since
the reading development program for this age group, and associated outcome indicators, were dropped at
restructuring.

Outputs supporting Strengthened School-Based Management:

These are the same as those reported under Original Objective 2.

Outcomes

      From a 2017 (Year 2) baseline of 71 percent, 75.5 percent of public primary schools met the minimum
       quality of service delivery, by the project's end (Year 6), an increase of 4.5 percentage
       points, achieving only half the 9 percentage point increase needed to reach the target of 80
       percent (SABER Service Delivery baseline and endline surveys). As noted in the PAD, this indicator
       was focused on three dimensions of school quality that have a direct impact on the sector challenges
       and are aligned with existing quality standards: (i) students; (ii) teaching and learning; and (iii) school
       environment and community participation, reflecting the necessary conditions for learning to take
       place in a school. However, as specified in the ICR (endnote xvi, p. 62), the SABER questionnaire
       consisted of 10 modules, although two modules (teacher and student) were removed from the endline
       survey because, due to COVID restrictions, the survey firm enumerators could not conduct in-person
       interviews with teachers and students, and it was difficult to verify teachers' and principals' records
       over the phone. The SABER Service Delivery survey was conducted in a representative sample of
       schools in priority districts and in non-priority districts.
            o While falling short of the target, progress was greater among priority district schools, whose
               minimum quality standards increased by six percentage points, from 68.7 to 75.3 percent,
               compared with non-priority schools, whose standards increased by 1.4 percentage points, from
               74.2 to 75.6 percent.
      The primary education dropout rate decreased from a (2015) baseline of 5.2 percent to 4.1 percent
       by the project's end, exceeding the target of 4.5 percent (EMIS). In its March 2, 2023 email to IEG,

                                                                                                    Page 15 of 28
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                SECOND GLOBAL PARTNERSHIP FOR EDUCATION (P149130)



                                    the task team provided this data disaggregated by gender, indicating that the decrease of 1.2
                                    percentage points for girls (from 4.8 to 3.6 percent) was slightly larger than the decrease of 1.0
                                    percentage point for boys (from 5.6 to 4.6 percent). The ICR (Annex 1) notes that this is attributable,
                                    at least in part, to the significantly larger than planned school block grants provided under Component
                                    1, given that a root cause for dropouts is parents' inability to pay fees to compensate for inadequate
                                    non-wage school expenditures. While this indicator had also been considered a proxy for education
                                    quality, the ICR (p. 12) noted difficulty in finding strong correlation between quality improvement and
                                    dropout rates within the project scope and timeline.

                            Direct Project Beneficiaries:

                                   The ICR reports a total of 953,208 direct project beneficiaries, of which 58 percent are female (EMIS,
                                    Department of Inspection). This exceeds the revised target of 900,000 beneficiaries, of which half
                                    are female, modified at the time of the 2018 restructuring.



                            Revised Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The achievement of Objective 1 (improving pre-primary education) was (barely) substantial. There was
                            inadequate evidence of the channeling of funding and capacity building to pre-primary education and
                            especially of their use in achieving minimum standard service quality. Nevertheless, the ICR does report that
                            the project did provide two annual SBGs to all pre-primary classrooms and kindergartens in the country to
                            improve the safety and quality of the pre-school environments to improve hygiene and protect against COVID
                            transmission during the last two (extended) years of the project. Moreover, pre-primary education quality was
                            improved with the implementation of a reading readiness program for five-year-olds in pre-primary
                            classrooms and kindergartens, which culminated in improved teaching and some improvements in acquisition
                            of pre-reading skills. Original Objective 2 (improving primary education quality) was modestly
                            achieved. Minimum standard quality was only 50 percent achieved, though the dropout rate did decline more
                            than the target, with girls' decline in dropout rate greater than that of boys. But there is no evidence that
                            Grades 1 and 2 outcome targets under the reading development program (improved teaching and learning)
                            were achieved. Targets were neither supported nor assessed.

                            Project Attribution/Contribution. In its March 2, 2023 email to IEG, the task team noted that the reported
                            outcomes, primarily funded by the project, can be fully attributed to the project. In areas of overlap with other
                            development partners (e.g., on the potential duplication of efforts for the reading development program), the
                            project worked alongside other partners and interventions to coordinate and maximize impact.

                            Project Counterfactual. In its March 2, 2023 email to IEG, the task team pointed to the economic
                            analysis, which explored the counterfactual, showing improved lifetime wage earnings, number of years of



                                                                                                                                Page 16 of 28
             Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
             SECOND GLOBAL PARTNERSHIP FOR EDUCATION (P149130)



         formal schooling completed, and improved quality of education, over a scenario of no project/higher dropout
         rates.




         Overall Efficacy Rating                                   Primary Reason
         Modest                                                    Low achievement
 OBJR1_TBL




         OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
         Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
         As detailed above, Objective 1 (improving pre-primary education quality) was (barely) substantially
         achieved. The achievement of Revised Objective 2 was also substantially achieved, albeit on the low end of
         substantial. Use of SBGs and strengthened SBM capacity did contribute to increases in the minimum quality
         of service delivery in public primary schools, especially among disadvantaged schools, although the target
         was not fully achieved. Two additional rounds of SBGs for public primary schools, provided during the last
         two years of the project, provided materials and support to improve public primary school hygiene and protect
         against the spread of COVID after the onset of the pandemic. The surpassing of the reduced dropout rate is
         attributed, in part, to the SBGs and their positive effect on school affordability to parents of the most
         vulnerable children. But this is more an indicator of affordability than quality.

         Project Attribution/Contribution. In its March 2, 2023 email to IEG, the task team noted that the reported
         outcomes, primarily funded by the project, can be fully attributed to the project, though they did note that the
         project worked alongside other partners and interventions to coordinate and maximize impact (the Grades 1
         and 2 reading development program, cited as an example).

         Counterfactual. In its March 2, 2023 email to IEG, the task team pointed to the ICR's economic analysis,
         which explored the counterfactual, showing improvements in lifetime wage earnings, years of formal
         schooling completed, and quality of education over a scenario of no project and (consequent) higher dropout
         rates.



         Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating
         Substantial



 5. Efficiency
A cost-benefit analysis (CBA) was undertaken at the time of appraisal, analyzing three scenarios: high impact
(gaining the equivalent of one full year of additional education), medium impact (half a year), and low impact
(two months). Under the three scenarios, using current returns to education of 10 percent per year completed,
the net present value (NPV) of the benefits under the three scenarios would be, respectively, almost 20 times,
10 times, and two times larger, respectively, than the cost.



                                                                                                            Page 17 of 28
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      SECOND GLOBAL PARTNERSHIP FOR EDUCATION (P149130)



The ICR undertook an end-of-project CBA, also exploring three scenarios of learning outcomes for the SBG
program (learning outcomes of children in the reading readiness program were assumed to be the same across
the three scenarios at 0.61 years). The ICR’s learning outcome estimates were less ambitious than those
assumed in the PAD’s analysis. Under the ICR’s low estimate scenario (assuming no improvement in learning
outcomes), using actual component costs and a real discount rate of 5 percent, the NPV of the project at
completion is estimated at $15.35 million, and the corresponding internal rate of return (IRR) is estimated at 6.85
percent. Under its intermediate scenario (assuming that improvement in learning outcomes for the SBM program
would be equivalent to 0.125 years of schooling), the NPV increases to $79.48 million and the IRR to 11.23
percent. The optimistic scenario (assuming that improvement in learning outcomes for the SBM program would
be equivalent to 0.25 years of schooling), the NPV increases to $144.07 million and the IRR to 13.73 percent. All
three scenarios assumed improvement in the learning outcomes of children under the reading readiness
program by 0.61 years. The present values of the benefits of the two components (SBGs and reading readiness
program access) are greater than the present values of the investments across all three scenarios (ICR p.
52). The ICR notes that implementation delays were factored into the CBA, employing a conservative
assumption that the first cohort of student beneficiaries started to enter the program three years after the project
was initiated.

There were implementation efficiencies that facilitated achievement of outcomes. Virtually all (98 percent) of the
GPE funds were utilized. Savings achieved under revised Component 2 (pre-primary reading readiness
program) were reallocated to SBGs, allowing considerably more financing for schools during the project’s
life. Refinement of project targeting criteria increased the total number of disadvantaged districts from 80 to 88,
all of which benefited from higher levels of government- and project-financed grants than originally planned.

However, spending of these grants (at 44 percent of total grants) on learning materials by these schools
fell short of the 60 percent threshold specified in the SBG manual. There were also moderate implementation
inefficiencies. As noted in the ICR (p. 24), the project experienced delays during the first two years of
implementation. It took a full year to get a consensus among development partners to agree on SBM training
material, and the delivery of SBM training took four months longer than anticipated. Procurement of technical
advisors to develop and implement the reading development pilot intervention took approximately two
years, and the reading pilot design was changed in December 2017. Ultimately, project restructuring in June
2018 was undertaken to avoid duplication of efforts with the national primary education curriculum activities of
the DFAT’s BEQUAL program. With the agreement of GoL, the Bank, and the LAO PDR ESWG, the project
moved its reading development focus away from primary school Grades 1 and 2, and instead developed a
reading readiness program for five-year-old children in pre-primary education. The onset of the COVID
pandemic and the consequent closing of schools, along with severe limits on the ability to conduct project
activities, supervision, and monitoring caused by the pandemic, resulted in unavoidable implementation delays,
despite efforts to mitigate them. The closing date was extended three times for a total of 2.5 years.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)

                                                                                                     Page 18 of 28
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SECOND GLOBAL PARTNERSHIP FOR EDUCATION (P149130)



                                                                                    0
Appraisal                                                   0
                                                                                     Not Applicable
                                                                                    100.00
ICR Estimate                                               11.23
                                                                                     Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Under the project's original outcome targets: The relevance of the PDO is rated high; efficacy in achieving
Objective 1 (improvement of pre-primary education quality) is rated (barely) substantial, efficacy in
achieving Objective 2 (improvement of primary education quality) is rated modest; and efficiency is rated
modest. These ratings produce an Outcome rating under the original outcome targets of Moderately
Unsatisfactory.

Under the project's revised outcome targets: The relevance of the PDO is rated high; efficacy in achieving
Objective 1 (improvement of pre-primary education quality) is rated (barely) substantial; efficacy in achieving
Revised Objective 2 (improvement of primary education quality) is also rated (barely) substantial; and
efficiency is rated modest. These ratings produce an Outcome rating under the revised outcome targets of
Moderately Satisfactory, the efficacy ratings for both objectives were on the low end of substantial, with
moderate shortcomings.

The overall Outcome of the project, weighted by disbursements made before and after restructuring,
is Moderately Satisfactory. (See Table below).

Rating                               Original outcome targets             Revised outcome targets
Relevance of PDO                     High
Efficacy:

Achievement of Objective 1           (barely) Substantial                 (barely) Substantial

Achievement of Objective 2           Modest                               (barely) Substantial
Efficiency                           Modest                               Modest
1. Outcome                           Moderately Unsatisfactory            Moderately Satisfactory
2. Numerical value of outcome
                                     3                                    4
ratings
3. Disbursement                      $5.47 million                        $11.10 million
4. Share of disbursements            33%                                  67%
5. Weighted value of the outcome
                                     0.99                                 2.68
rating
                                     Moderately Satisfactory
6. Final outcome rating
                                     (3.68 rounded up to 4)




                                                                                                   Page 19 of 28
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      SECOND GLOBAL PARTNERSHIP FOR EDUCATION (P149130)




a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The GoL’s budget for education is low in international terms and inadequate to support the ambitious agenda
of Laos PDR’s Education Sector Plan (2021-25). Moreover, the seriously constrained fiscal situation in Laos
PDR leaves slim prospects for allocating more public resources to the sector. Financial
sustainability therefore poses a high risk to development outcomes. The government’s ability to sustain the
school grants provision (averaging LAK 55,000, or $5 per student) is of great concern. In the meantime, the
SGB program is continuing with the support of the Learning Equity and Acceleration Project.

All 8,390 school principals in the country received SBM training by the project’s end, and all schools had
received funds, meaning that this training had been applied. This bodes well for institutional sustainability. If
interested donor partners provide support, the GoL’s prospects to institutionalize the SBM and SGB will be
considerable.

The substantial training of coaches, master coaches, and college faculty trainers, undertaken to establish the
reading readiness program, is assessed by the ICR to be a significant contribution to the sustainability of
quality improvement activities at the pre-primary level. Master coaches and faculty trainers were fully
equipped with the technicality of teaching reading in the early grades for future intervention and are in a
position to continue support and oversight. Nevertheless, the reading readiness pilot and its IE findings are
not ready to scale up, and it is not clear that learning gains will be sustained without further support, the
Learning Equity and Acceleration Project notwithstanding. Children’s exposure to the program was cut short
(to less than a school year) because of implementation challenges and school closures due to
COVID. Another IE is warranted to gain a deeper understanding of the program, and a phased
implementation, starting with priority districts, would be a way of building sustainability, in sync with limited
funding.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  During the course of project development, the 2012 Lao PDR EGRA and 2013 Programme for Analysis
  of Education Systems provided sound assessments of primary and pre-primary education that facilitated
  alignment of the project with the Sustainable Development Goals. The prioritization of disadvantaged
  districts supported the higher-level objectives of GoL’s poverty reduction and ethnic development. The
  project design was built on the principles of (1) using and strengthening existing mechanisms of the EMIS
  of the Ministry of Finance and MoES, and (2) promoting MoES collaboration with strong community
  groups like VEDCs in the implementation of SBM and reading development program. The project was the
  first of its kind in Lao PDR, with its strong focus on improving quality in primary and pre-primary

                                                                                                       Page 20 of 28
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SECOND GLOBAL PARTNERSHIP FOR EDUCATION (P149130)



  education. Earlier projects had supported enrollment and language of instruction. Another strong feature
  of project design was that it was built around strong partnerships with other development partners. The
  project’s evidence base was strong, drawing on both local and international evidence on what works for
  improving reading skills. Nevertheless, no consensus was reached within the sector during
  implementation on the reading development program design. The SBM design seemed sound in its aim
  to improve teaching practices and to increase incentives to this end.

  The appraisal stage involved the assessment of risks on environmental, social, financial management,
  and procurement systems and capacities, and the development of proposals for risk mitigation and risk
  management. To this end, the Bank team developed an Implementation Support Plan detailing project
  supervision, technical oversight, fiduciary oversight, external audit, procurement training, and donor
  coordination. Supervision missions were planned to take place twice a year, properly staffed with
  fiduciary and procurement specialists, task team members, and relevant Bank consultants.

  As detailed in Section 9 on M&E below, the design of the results framework revealed weaknesses in
  the project's results chain and in the choice of outcome indicators to measure PDO achievement,
  especially the absence of indicators to assess the results chain of SBGs and SBM capacity building for
  pre-primary education quality improvements.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The first restructuring was an appropriate response to the decision by DFAT to fund Grade 1 and Grade 2
 curriculum work, which the project was initially designed to support. Although the task team, in its March 2,
 2023 email to IEG, notes that it took some time, the reaching of consensus among development partners to
 avoid a duplication of efforts was well founded. The replacement of the reading development program for
 Grades 1 and 2, under the project, with the reading readiness program for five-year-olds preserved the
 project’s potential to contribute to improved reading skills of young children. The monitoring scheme
 designed to measure the impact of the reading readiness program was technically sound, but
 complex. The two subsequent restructurings were effective and important responses to the large, external
 shock of the COVID-19 pandemic. They supported the safe re-opening of schools and increased direct
 project support to schools to address this emergency. A shortcoming of the supervision and restructuring
 work was the missed opportunity to further refine the PDO and theory of change.

 Supervision and implementation support missions took place at least twice annually, as planned. Aide-
 memoires conveyed key findings, including implementation gaps and challenges, and prompted key
 discussions with MoES counterparts and recommendations for follow-up activities. Supervision of financial
 management, procurement, and environmental and social safeguards was carried out once a year,
 jointly by relevant technical specialists. While safeguards and fiduciary specialists were based in the
 country office, providing day-to-day and continuous support, the task team, in its March 2, 2023 email to
 IEG, does note shortcomings in the integration of social safeguards monitoring during implementation and,
 in retrospect, the necessity of twice-yearly supervisions and reporting on social safeguards. Over and



                                                                                                  Page 21 of 28
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SECOND GLOBAL PARTNERSHIP FOR EDUCATION (P149130)



 above supervision missions, the task team members and MoES team met regularly, every month, to
 discuss implementation issues and find solutions to issues and challenges.

 In retrospect, M&E issues, raised in Section 9, might have been mitigated had the Bank’s supervision of
 the reading readiness program IE and SABER-Service Delivery study been stronger and had the Bank
 provided more guidance during the IE design phase. More attention of the Bank team to the consistency of
 the IE survey design and more proactive management of the data collection timeline may have enabled
 reporting on PDO indicators 3 and 4 measuring learning outcomes.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 There was an issue with the clarity of the PDO, “to assist the GoL in improving pre-primary and primary
 education quality,” which remained unchanged throughout the project’s life. While the PAD specified that
 beneficiaries included both pre-primary and primary students, and the ICR’s presentation of the theory of
 change includes both pre-primary and primary cohorts, there were no indicators to measure or track pre-
 primary outcomes (e.g., pre-primary education quality) or outputs (e.g., grant financing, capacity building
 for managing funds), nor was there specific mention in the project description of how pre-primary education
 quality would be supported.

 Project restructuring included additional indicators to measure outputs and outcomes of the new pre-
 primary reading readiness program, improving linkages between outputs, intermediate outcomes of that
 program, and PDO achievement. But there were no indicators added to clarify the support to pre-primary
 education quality, under Component 1 of the original project. Learning outcome measures for the reading
 readiness program could be measured only through highly sophisticated and rigorous technical surveys,
 which may have been too challenging in the context of Lao PDR, even through qualified forms.



b. M&E Implementation
  Procurement delays and COVID lockdowns ultimately caused the (already challenging) targeted surveys
  of pre-primary learning outcomes not to be carried out.

  An impact evaluation (IE) of the reading readiness program was conducted to assess its impact on
  children’s development and early literacy skills in pre-primary and kindergarten classrooms. Household-
  level measurements explored the social demographics of the children’s family, ethnicity, and parenting
  skills, and school-level measurements assessed the learning environment and teacher efficacy. The
  COVID-19 pandemic disruptions (school closures, field work interruptions), combined with procurement

                                                                                                 Page 22 of 28
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SECOND GLOBAL PARTNERSHIP FOR EDUCATION (P149130)



  delays, undermined the baseline data collection for Cohorts 1 and 2 prior to program start. Endline data
  collection was completed in April 2021. Despite the shortening of the data collection period due to the
  second round of COVID restrictions and school closings, sufficient data was collected to evaluate the
  program impact. Still, school closures made it hard to detect an impact. The first cohort of pre-primary
  children were exposed to the pre-primary reading readiness program for 10 months, while the second
  was exposed to the program for only four months. Reported results were confined to the first cohort.

  The SABER-Service Delivery data collection provided a 2017 baseline and 2021 endline to assess
  school service delivery quality outcomes. The endline data collection exercise was undertaken to
  determine school autonomy, accountability, and accessibility in 205 sampled primary schools and was
  completed in November 2021. Due to school closures during 2021, the scope of endline data collection
  was reduced, curtailing the ability to measure all the same indicators as collected for the 2017
  baseline. The data collection firm was unable to include student assessment and classroom observation
  in the survey questionnaire. The team did provide additional questions and modules exploring: (i) school
  block grants; (ii) the new primary curriculum rollout; and (iii) the COVID pandemic and measures taken by
  schools. Travel restrictions undercut visits to schools. But the completion of phone interviews (in October
  2021) enabled the project to report on PDO indicator 1 (schools reaching minimum quality standards).

  Sector monitoring: The project supported the building of M&E capacity of MoES. It supported two
  workshops on the use of tools for M&E of activities against the ESSDP and on reporting protocols: (1) a
  workshop for provincial staff, conducted in July 2020; and (2) a workshop for central staff, conducted in
  December 2020. Due to the COVID-19 situation, planned follow-up visits to PESS and DESBs to provide
  additional support for the application of the tools had to be cancelled.

  In its March 2, 2023 email to IEG, the task team noted that the project M&E responsibilities set out in the
  original design were fulfilled or restructured. The Department of Finance monitored the SBG transfers
  and spending, but not other components. Restructuring in 2018 changed M&E data sources, DPPE’s role
  was dropped in several activities, and the data source was replaced by SABER Service Delivery baseline
  and endline surveys. The Department of Inspection was responsible for sector monitoring, including the
  reporting of project progress to the Education Sector Development Plan’s annual review, which was done
  in a timely manner.



c. M&E Utilization
  The findings and lessons from the IE on the (GPE II) reading readiness program made an important
  contribution to the upcoming surveys and the implementation design of the follow-on (GPE III) Learning
  Equity and Acceleration project. The IE design was primarily anchored in the ECE project’s midline
  survey and served as a baseline for the GPE III project. IE results, shared with GoL, are expected to
  have potential influence on policy, and to be acted upon under GPE III. The findings of the SABER-
  Service Delivery survey are also expected to contribute to the design and implementation of the national
  rollout of additional SBGs and serve as an evidence base for further improvement of the GPE III project.




                                                                                                   Page 23 of 28
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SECOND GLOBAL PARTNERSHIP FOR EDUCATION (P149130)




  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   During appraisal, the project was classified as Environmental Assessment Category “B.” The SBG program
   did not allow new construction, extension, or major rehabilitation of facilities. No major environmental and
   social safeguards issues were anticipated in the project; and no land acquisition, loss of lands, and/or
   resettlement concerns were expected. The Bank’s Environmental Assessment policy OP 4.01 was triggered
   due to the need to address the environmental, health, and safety requirements for carrying out minor school
   maintenance and repair works, and to assess and take into account the social aspects of the project,
   particularly any impacts on Indigenous Peoples communities. An Environmental Code of Practice was
   prepared as a guide for the schools and communities to put in place mitigating measures in carrying out
   minor works in line with their regular building maintenance practices, and was disclosed on August 20, 2014
   at the InfoShop, and in-country on MoES’ website in both Lao and English on August 22, 2014.

   During project preparation, MoES undertook a social assessment and produced an Ethnic Group
   Development Plan for the project. The project was designed to focus on priority districts (80 in the original
   design, 88 after the first restructuring), centered on the most disadvantaged populations and socio-
   economically deprived households, and diverse non-Lao-Tai ethnicities, whose educational outcomes were
   poor. As noted in Section 4, the IE results showed that children from Khmer and Hmong ethnic groups
   benefited most in terms of learning outcomes from the reading readiness program.

   Social Safeguards. The ICR (p. 22) notes that, although social inclusion and safeguards monitoring were
   not highlighted in the project implementation Status and Results Reports (ISRs), social inclusion was
   embedded in the project design, selection of priority districts, and the learning outcome of ethnic
   minorities. There was a shortcoming in the integration of social safeguards monitoring during project
   implementation. Experience under the project pointed to the importance of more regular (twice-yearly)
   supervision of social safeguards, the full integration of social safeguards reporting in the Bank’s internal
   reporting system (ISRs), and a designated safeguards team in the ECU to improve implementation,
   oversight, and reporting (task team’s March 2, 2023 email to IEG). All of these lessons were incorporated
   into the follow-on (GPE III) project. There were no independent reviews of safeguards implementation. SBG
   spending was for very minor repair of school furniture, and so the mitigation measure was not a requirement
   (task team’s March 2, 2023 email to IEG).




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management

   At the time of appraisal, an assessment of financial management (FM) capacity was based on the
   assessment of the same implementing agency (ECU and Department of Finance of the MoES), carried out
   in 2013 for the Early Childhood Education Project, which had successful FM implementation. The
   assessment was updated for activities and arrangements specific to the proposed project. The overall FM

                                                                                                   Page 24 of 28
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  SECOND GLOBAL PARTNERSHIP FOR EDUCATION (P149130)



risk was assessed to be Substantial. The main risks identified included: the decentralized and participatory
nature of the financing and activities involving school/community, district, and provincial levels where FM
capacity was low; the inability to liquidate advances in a timely manner and to monitor and provide timely
information on commitments; and potential delays in the transfer and shortage of funds. Risk mitigation
measures were put into place, including: an acceptable operational manual for SBG, including a
school/community guide; increased transparency in the use of funds through periodic public disclosure at
the local level; an acceptable finance and administration manual and systems to improve timely liquidation
of finances and recording of commitments; an increase in the number of skilled staff at the central level;
improvement of semi-annual expenditure projections; and training of school/community beneficiaries and
MoES finance staff at all levels. Fulfillment of these mitigation measures made FM arrangements compliant
with OP/BP 10.00 on Financial Management.

In its March 2, 2023 email to IEG, the task team noted that FM supervision was undertaken roughly every
six months and recorded in the FM system. During the last two years of implementation, monthly and
sometimes weekly check-ins with the implementation team, coupled with a lower/more moderate project
risk, allowed for less frequent implementation support missions (once vs. twice a year). Throughout the life
of the project, FM performance reflected good practice. Interim Financial Reports and audits were
submitted mostly on time. Late submissions of the FY20 and FY21 audits were due mainly to COVID-19
lockdown restrictions. The auditor’s opinion was unqualified throughout implementation (task team’s March
2, 2023 email to IEG). Improvements in the liquidation of the outstanding advances were made, and, at the
time of the ICR preparation, there was no pending, unliquidated outstanding advance, according to the
advance monitoring report.

Procurement

Procurement of goods and works under the project was carried out in accordance with the Bank’s
procurement guidelines. During appraisal the Bank carried out an assessment of the ECU’s procurement
capacity. The unit’s performance was deemed fully satisfactory under the previous (EDP II) project and the
ongoing EFA-FTI program, with no major procurement issues at the central level. However, there were
issues with filing and implementation at the provincial, district, and community levels, indicating a need to
strengthen capacity at these levels. Procurement risk was rated as Substantial. An action plan was agreed
with MoES -- and ultimately implemented -- to improve procurement capacity, including: the retention of
a national procurement consultant experienced in Bank procedures; the assignment of qualified
government staff to coordinate and follow up on procurement activities, supported by the procurement
consultant; the delivery of intensive procurement training for provincial and district staff within one month
after effectiveness and periodically during implementation; the training of school staff; and the updating of
the existing SBG manual to include simple procurement procedures, forms, and record keeping
procedures for provinces, districts, and communities. The ECU, at appraisal, had also prepared a detailed
procurement plan for the four-year implementation period, discussed and agreed with the Bank in March
2015, which provided the basis for the selected procurement procedures, to be updated as required to
reflect changes in implementation needs and capacities.

Despite risks identified at the project’s outset and the implementation of a risk mitigation plan, along with
semi-annual checks and implementation support provided by the Bank team, procurement delays
constrained smooth and timely implementation. The reading readiness program endline report (on the
undertaking of the IE) noted that there were significant variations in the terms of the contract. Specifically,
while the endline data collection and analysis involved the same study design and the same schools as the
baseline study, the recruitment of a second cohort of students incurred an increase in costs and an

                                                                                                  Page 25 of 28
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SECOND GLOBAL PARTNERSHIP FOR EDUCATION (P149130)



   extension of time. In short, originally one cohort of students was envisaged for the reading readiness
   program, with baseline and endline data collection and analyses planned, respectively, for October 2019
   and April/May 2020 (based on 7-8 months of exposure to the program). But actually, due in part to COVID
   delays, two cohorts of children were exposed to the program at different times, requiring the undertaking of
   separate baselines and endlines for each cohort: (1) the baseline and endline for the first cohort were,
   respectively, November/December 2019 and December 2020 (based on 10 months of program exposure);
   and (2) the baseline and endline for the second cohort were, respectively, December 2020 and April/May
   2021 (based on 4 months of program exposure). The task team noted that all procurement activities were
   completed before the project’s closing date (March 2, 2023 email to IEG).




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   In response to the onset of COVID and its impact on school closings and safety, the project was extended
   by 2.5 years, and two additional rounds of school-based grants were provided to 11,493 kindergarten
   schools, 2,923 pre-primary classrooms, and 8,570 primary schools, enabling them to purchase sanitation
   toolkits including soaps, alcohol gels, and masks. The project's original aim for SBM and SBG was to
   invest 76 percent of the total project value, but this reached 83.2 percent due to additional tranches for
   COVID response.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                   IEG
                                                                                Disagreements/Comment
                                                                                A split rating against original and
                                                                                revised outcomes under
                                                                                Objective 2, weighted by share
                                                                                of disbursements before and
Outcome                         Satisfactory         Moderately Satisfactory    after the June 2018
                                                                                restructuring, coupled with a
                                                                                modest efficiency rating,
                                                                                culminated in a Moderately
                                                                                Satisfactory rating.
                                Moderately
Bank Performance                                     Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                  Modest               Modest

Quality of ICR                  ---                  Modest


12. Lessons



                                                                                                   Page 26 of 28
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       SECOND GLOBAL PARTNERSHIP FOR EDUCATION (P149130)



The following lessons were presented in the ICR, slightly reworded by IEG to be more succinct:

        Failure to explore the innovative use of information technology can be a missed opportunity
         to overcome monitoring challenges in the context of a pandemic. Regular school inspections
         and monitoring visits were not carried out due to travel restrictions, leaving the project with
         considerable difficulty in obtaining monitoring data. The use of smart phone-based Open
         Data Kit (ODK) or Kobo Collect Apps could have helped the implementers obtain school-
         level data, and would be useful to consider in future interventions.
        The opening of school bank accounts for school-based grant implementation enables
         transparent flow of funds and budget execution at the school level. The project was able to
         mainstream this practice into the national system, complemented with financial management
         training for school principals. The school bank accounts were capable of receiving other
         financial resources in addition to the funding under the project, a practice that might be
         applied to other school funding projects in the region.
        In the event that pilot projects are not ready, by an operation’s completion, to provide firm
         evidence upon which to recommend revisions and/or scaling up, the continuation of those
         pilots, rather than their termination, could be a way to ensure the collection of needed
         evidence to ensure sound decisions about whether or not to scale up.
        Delays in reaching consensus by development partners and the government on the
         approach to school-based management and financing (and related training materials) can
         cause implementation delays and a lack of coordination of various sources of support. The
         clear articulation of the Grant Agent’s role can ensure that it is in a position to make technical
         decisions independently.

IEG’s review offers an additional lesson:

        Failure to establish clear outcome indicators (and supporting output and intermediate
         indicators) for all dimensions of a PDO statement can lead to the inability to assess
         unequivocally the achievement of all of the project’s intended outcomes. In the case of this
         project, achievement of the objective to improve pre-primary education quality, through the
         provision of school-based grants and accompanying capacity building to manage and use
         these resources effectively, could not be fully assessed.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

As indicated in IEG’s suggested lesson, above, the Quality of Evidence was lacking for exploring the
improvement of quality of pre-primary education. It is not clear from the ICR whether the task team has
additional evidence about the channeling of grant resources and training to pre-primary classrooms and
kindergartens, and the extent to which these may have supported the achievement of minimum standards of


                                                                                                       Page 27 of 28
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      SECOND GLOBAL PARTNERSHIP FOR EDUCATION (P149130)



quality. The evidence that was cited for public primary schools did provide sufficient information about the use
of funds and strengthened capacity for quality improvements.

The Quality of Analysis was deficient. The analysis was not tightly woven around a solid results chain or
theory of change. This issue is grounded in the modest M&E rating, which did not include indicators or
measures to track the project's provision of SBGs to the pre-primary level, or their use in improving quality of
pre-primary education. The reporting on the provision of SBGs during the project's last two years (of its
extended life) to provide materials and support to prevent the spread of COVID-19 was an exception, as it
itemized the number of pre-primary classrooms and kindergartens that received this support.

The Quality of Lessons was mixed, providing some insights from the project, but needing some clarification in
their articulation and links with the ICR’s storyline.

The ICR's Results Orientation was not sufficiently strong. More effort in delving into the pre-primary quality
improvement storyline and results chain may have shed more light on the extent to which this objective was
achieved and why (or why not).

Internal Consistency/Adherence to Guidelines. There were shortcomings in the reporting on Safeguards
and on Financial Management, which were corrected and incorporated into this ICRR during a meeting with the
TTL.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Modest




                                                                                                     Page 28 of 28
