     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PA Strengthening SP and Inclusion System (P155097)



                                                                                Report Number: ICRR0023274

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P155097                                   PA Strengthening SP and Inclusion System

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Panama                                    Social Protection & Jobs


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-85320                                28-Feb-2022                                         59,670,395.53

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 23-Sep-2015                               28-Feb-2022

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           75,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                            60,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Actual                                        60,000,000.00                                              0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator        Group
 Basab Dasgupta             Judyth L. Twigg               Eduardo Fernandez             IEGHC (Unit 2)
                                                          Maldonado




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The project's original objectives, as stated in the Loan Agreement of 2015 (p. 5), were "to increase the
   efficiency of the Social Protection System and improve the income generation capacity of the poor and
   vulnerable." At a 2021 restructuring, the objectives were revised: "to provide economic support to poor
   households affected by the COVID-19 pandemic, and to improve the income generation capacity of the poor
   and vulnerable."



                                                                                                 Page 1 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PA Strengthening SP and Inclusion System (P155097)



   During the 2021 restructuring, the original PDO 1, “to increase the efficiency of the social protection system,”
   was eliminated; PDO 2, “to improve the income generation capacity of the poor and vulnerable,” remained;
   and a new PDO, “to provide economic support to poor households affected by the COVID-19 pandemic," was
   introduced as PDO 3. Also at the 2021 restructuring, activities and indicators were redefined under PDO 2
   with a reduced scope.

   Due to elimination of PDO 1, reduced scope of PDO 2, and introduction of PDO 3, a split rating is used for this
   Review.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  05-Jan-2021

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   According to the original project description (Project Appraisal Document, PAD, p. 5), the following three
   components were proposed with their respective subcomponents.



   Component 1 – Strengthening and efficiency of the social protection system (Original US$25 million,
   Actual US$ 2.2 million) aimed to strengthen the capacity of the government to improve the harmonization,
   transparency, accountability, and follow up mechanisms of Ministry of Social Development‘s (MIDES)
   Conditional Cash Transfer (CCT) programs by financing the following subcomponents:

   Subcomponent 1.1 – Social protection system instruments aimed at supporting the development of a
   single registry to serve as the social information system and to facilitate analysis of program eligibility,
   reduction of system duplications, and design of new programs addressing other social risks. This sub-
   component was originally expected to finance consultancy and non-consultancy services, training,
   equipment, and operating costs, and to carry out the design of a unified information collection form (Ficha
   Única de Registro, FUR). The intent was to carry out the FUR for each individual household across MIDES
   CCT programs; design, pilot, and operationalize a Proxy Means Test (PMT) instrument; and design census
   and inclusion processes that use the FUR to register new households and enroll new beneficiaries on an
   ongoing basis.

   Subcomponent 1.2 – Social program management tools aimed to support strengthening of management
   of MIDES CCTs through revision of operational processes and manuals to update registration, eligibility,
   and targeting tools, and achieve expected levels of coverage; design of recertification strategies to
   strengthen the targeting of MIDES CCTs; development and revision of co-responsibility verification

                                                                                                    Page 2 of 20
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  PA Strengthening SP and Inclusion System (P155097)



strategies and monitoring indicators for MIDES CCTs to ensure beneficiary compliance; strengthening of
management information systems (MIS) to ensure transparency; and strengthening of the government’s
administrative and fiduciary capacity to carry out project activities.

Subcomponent 1.3 – Monitoring and evaluation (M&E) capacity was proposed to strengthen
MIDES capacity to monitor and evaluate its social protection programs through the provision of training and
capacity building activities for MIDES staff; the acquisition of software for statistical analysis; and the design
and implementation of process assessments of CCTs. Through enhanced capacity, MIDES aimed to
coordinate M&E efforts by other government agencies via the Social Cabinet, an inter-ministerial entity for
social policy coordination, with MIDES as the technical coordinator.



Component 2 – MIDES territorial structure and direct family support (Original US$17 million, Actual
US$ 0.17 million) aimed to support the strengthening of MIDES territorial structures to operationalize
outreach and registration, management of non-compliance, transparency and accountability, and
information collection processes, including implementation of feedback mechanisms. This component
included activities to enhance the role of provincial and regional coordinators, social workers, and family
sponsors (promoters) to connect the beneficiaries to social programs offered by MIDES and other relevant
institutions.

Subcomponent 2.1 – MIDES territorial coverage of promoters and social workers was proposed to
design and implement a MIDES territorial strategy to ensure regular support and prompt response to
beneficiaries' potential problems related to their participation in MIDES social protection programs. This
subcomponent emphasized design and implementation of training programs for promoters and social
workers for the provision of direct family support under MIDES CCTs, including the preparation of training
materials and the evaluation of training activities. It was also to finance the provision of direct family
support-related operating costs under MIDES CCTs.

Subcomponent 2.2 – Social feedback mechanisms aimed to finance the design and implementation of a
citizen feedback mechanism for MIDES CCTs. The aim was to support the development of an institutional
mechanism to provide MIDES with constant inflow of up-to-date geo-referenced user feedback data on the
quality, coverage, and reliability of the health and education services. The subcomponent was structured to
finance operating costs, consulting and non-consulting services, training, and equipment to carry out
diagnostics, design of feedback mechanisms, development of user protocols, development and
implementation of awareness campaigns for CCTs, financing of operating costs, and monitoring of feedback
data for future development.



The original Components 1 and 2 remained through the end of the project, but the scopes of these
components were significantly changed, with several areas of support eliminated, during the first
restructuring in 2018. In 2019 a new MIDES administration decided to use other financing resources for an
additional subcomponent 2.3, which financed activities to modernize MIDES centers for infants and
seniors.




                                                                                                     Page 3 of 20
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  PA Strengthening SP and Inclusion System (P155097)



Component 3 – Productive inclusion services for the poor and vulnerable (Original US$33 million,
Actual US$ 3.03 million) sought to complement the activities of CCT programs to support investments in
human capital that enhance income-generating capacity. This component aimed to institutionalize and scale
up productive and training activities for poor and vulnerable populations registered in the single registry with
the help of the following subcomponents. Originally, only two subcomponents, 3.1 and 3.2, were included in
this component. Subcomponent 3.3 was added during the 2018 restructuring.

Subcomponent 3.1 – National Professional Training Institute (INADEH) training services aimed to
finance non-consulting services, INADEH training, operating costs, equipment, and materials to carry out
assessment of local training needs; preparation and implementation of local training plans; provision of
stipends to MIDES staff participating in INADEH training activities; and evaluation of INADEH training
activities related to MIDES participants.

Subcomponent 3.2 – Ministry of Labor (MITRADEL) intermediation services aimed to facilitate the
participation of MIDES participants in MITRADEL-managed labor insertion programs, such as ProJoven and
the Program to Support Labor Insertion (PAIL). This sub-component was expected to finance associated
costs to carry out identification of labor insertion opportunities for MIDES participants; update National
Employment Service (Servicio Nacional de Empleo) records for the registration of MIDES participants;
assess requirements for inclusion of MIDES participants into labor insertion programs; and evaluate labor
insertion programs.



The 2018 restructuring proposed significant reduction of training and labor intermediation activities to be
implemented through INADEH and MITRAEL and added support for productive inclusion programs under
MIDES. For instance, a pilot on vocational training was included in subcomponent 3.1, and an ongoing
apprenticeship program was included in subcomponent 3.2. In addition, a completely new subcomponent
3.3 was introduced to carry out training and capacity building related to asset-transfer programs; it was to
support two asset-transfer productive inclusion programs by carrying out training and capacity-building
activities and providing technical assistance, goods, and services to the participants.



During the restructuring in 2021, the scope of Components 1, 2 and 3 were further reduced, and the
following new Component 4 was added to provide support for MIDES CCT beneficiaries during the COVID-
19 pandemic.

Component 4 – Conditional Cash Transfers for Poor Households Affected by COVID-19 (Original US$
0; Actual US$ 54.6 million) included provision of financing under MIDES CCTs.



It is important to note that the 2018 restructurings made adjustments without changing the overall vision of
the original project. By contrast, the changes under the 2021 restructuring significantly altered the project's
approach and theory of change.




                                                                                                   Page 4 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PA Strengthening SP and Inclusion System (P155097)



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   The original cost at appraisal in September 2015 (PAD, 2015) was estimated at US$75 million, financed by
   an International Bank for Reconstruction and Development loan to the Republic of Panama. Afterwards, the
   changes in country context triggered three restructurings to adjust the project's scope. During the first of a
   two-stage restructuring in 2018, the total cost was reduced to US$60 million. There was no further change
   in cost in subsequent restructurings, and total actual cost at project closing was US$ 59.7 million.

   To facilitate project implementation, the 2018 restructuring was carried out in two stages. Stage l in June
   2018 cancelled US$15 million from the loan and reallocated the remaining US$60 million across
   expenditure categories and components. The total allocation to the first component was increased from
   US$25 million to US$31 million, while the allocations for the second and third components decreased from
   US$ 17 million to US$13.5 million, and from US$33 million to US$15.5 million, respectively. All other
   changes were processed under a second stage of restructuring approved in November 2018, which added
   new activities under Components 1 and 2 and expanded activities under Component 3. The restructuring
   also included the revision of the project's environmental category (see Section 10a) and results framework.

   The third restructuring in 2021 responded to the government's request to finance MIDES CCT programs.
   PDO 1 was dropped and a new PDO 3 was introduced, as discussed above, to align the project with the
   activities financed under this restructuring. The results framework was adjusted by adding indicators on the
   number of MIDES CCT beneficiaries receiving economic support financed by the project, as well as more
   specific indicators to capture the extent of economic support to poor households affected by the COVID-19
   pandemic. The loan amount under this restructuring remained unaltered at US$60 million and did not
   include any change in the closing date. The restructuring, however, proposed further reallocation of funds
   across components. Component 1 costs were reduced from US$31 million to US$2.2 million; component 2
   costs from US$13.5 million to US$0.17 million; and component 3 costs from US$15.5 million to US$3.03
   million. A new fourth component was added, with the remaining US$54.6 million allocated to it, to provide
   economic support to poor households affected by the COVID-19 pandemic. The project closed as planned
   on February 28, 2022.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The PDOs were highly relevant to country context. Despite sustained economic growth, Panama faced
efficiency and effectiveness challenges in social protection prior to the project because of important
targeting errors in social protection benefits. Sustained growth had improved the job scenario in the country,
but still certain marginalized groups (including youth, social protection beneficiaries, and women)
faced challenges in accessing job markets. Similarly, some segments of the population in remote areas
were not covered. An estimated 40 percent of the benefits of the 120/65 Program that targeted the poor and
vulnerable elderly went to higher income quintiles (PAD, p. 2). These efficiency and effectiveness
challenges, due to targeting errors, had created extra pressure on government capacity to address real
issues in social protection and, hence, created a need for increased efficiency of the social protection
system to improve the income generation capacity of the poor and vulnerable.

The objectives were also strongly aligned with Bank strategy, including the World Bank Group’s
Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for Panama 2015-2021, which had a second pillar objective of

                                                                                                    Page 5 of 20
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                       Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      PA Strengthening SP and Inclusion System (P155097)



               ensuring inclusion and opportunities for marginalized and indigenous groups to complement social
               assistance with productive inclusion and improved access to basic services. The project
               complemented policy reforms supported by Bank-financed development policy loans, including the First
               Programmatic Shared Prosperity Development Policy Loan (P151804) which aimed to strengthen social
               transfer programs through the expansion of inclusion policies and opportunities.

               The relevance of the revised PDOs remained high at project completion. The original PDOs were
               revised during the third restructuring of the project in 2021 to veer its priorities from a broader agenda of
               improving efficiency of the social protection system to providing economic support to poor households
               affected by the COVID-19 pandemic and improve the income generation capacity of the poor and
               vulnerable. The revised PDOs, with the introduction of PDO 3, were well aligned with the World Bank
               COVID-19 Crisis Response Approach under Pillar 2 – protecting the poor and vulnerable for the relief and
               restructuring phases. The operation was highly relevant to ensure continuous income support during the
               COVID-19 health emergency and protect the human capital of the poor and extreme poor.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To increase the efficiency of the social protection system

                             Rationale
                             The implicit theory of change envisioned that support to MIDES to improve the CCT program (through
                             Component 1), and its own territorial structure (through Component 2), would increase the efficiency of social
                             protection system in Panama through creation and use of a single registry form for identification of
                             beneficiaries, and provision of training, recertification, and improvement in M&E for the CCT program.

                             PDO 1 remained unaltered in the first two restructurings in 2018 but was dropped during the third
                             restructuring in 2021. As the rationale for deletion, the third restructuring paper (2021, p. 9) stated that
                             increased efficiency of the social protection system could not be achieved due to implementation delays. The
                             restructuring suggested that reallocation of those resources to support the government's COVID-19 response
                             instead would be more beneficial to provide economic support to poor households affected by the COVID-19
                             pandemic. In other words, the opportunity cost of continuing with PDO 1 instead of reallocating the fund to
                             respond to the COVID 19 pandemic was high.

                             The performance of PDO1 through the closing of the project was assessed based on evidence collected till
                             2021, since no evidence was collected for this PDO after the 2021 restructuring was introduced.



                                                                                                                              Page 6 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   PA Strengthening SP and Inclusion System (P155097)




Outputs and intermediate outcomes

      A Single Registration Form was partially adopted for three MIDES CCT programs, reaching the target.
      Co-responsibilities were partially verified in two MIDES CCT programs, short of the target of three
       programs.
      80 percent of MIDES CCT beneficiary households received program information as of December
       2021, short of the original target of 90 percent of beneficiary households.
      49 percent of promoters completed the annual training plan in December 2019, short of the target of
       90 percent of promoters.
      Citizen Feedback Mechanisms were made operational, consisting of a free MIDES phone line.



Outcomes

Outcomes were mostly output-oriented for PDO 1. Overall, most of the outcome indicators for PDO 1,
associated with Component 1, fell short of their respective targets, while those associated with Component 2
exceeded their targets. Beneficiaries were certified, but targeting inefficiencies were not addressed.

      54 percent of all beneficiaries, and 72 percent of female beneficiaries, of MIDES CCT program were
       re-certified as of December 2021, exceeding the targets of 50 percent of all beneficiaries and 50
       percent of female beneficiaries.
      Only 33 percent of the bottom quintile benefited from MIDES CCTs as of December 2018, short of
       both the 50 percent target and the 38 percent baseline.
      Only 57 percent of the bottom quintile benefited from MIDES CCTs in indigenous territories as of
       December 2018, short of both the 75 percent target and the 65 percent baseline.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To improve the income generation capacity of the poor and vulnerable

Rationale
The government’s desire to include new activities for urban areas in the project's design required coordination
and synergies with other institutions since MIDES was not in charge of training or labor intermediation. This
plan required connecting MIDES with the MITRADEL and INADEH to support these additional activities.

The project’s implicit theory of change suggested that support to INADEH and MITRADEL to provide training
and intermediation services, such as ProJoven and PAIL, would lead to increased income generation
capacity of the poor and vulnerable households in the bottom two quintiles. The theory of change predicted

                                                                                                 Page 7 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   PA Strengthening SP and Inclusion System (P155097)



that these intermediation services would reach the desired outcome through expanded productive inclusive
services for the poor in the intermediate period. This objective sought to complement the activities of CCT
programs with support to investments in human capital that enhance income generating capacity.

While the objective remained, the result indicators and targets changed for this PDO during the 2021
restructuring. Subcomponents 3.1 and 3.2 related to vocational training and apprenticeship programs to
improve the employability of MIDES CCT beneficiaries and vulnerable youth were not implemented until the
2018 restructuring, and they were dropped in the third restructuring in 2021. Activities on capacity building
and provision of goods to support the economic activities of MIDES asset transfer production inclusive
programs under Subcomponent 3.3, however, remained.



Outputs and intermediate outcomes

Until the 2021 restructuring was in place, most of the output or intermediate outcome targets were not
achieved under PDO 2 because components 3.1 and 3.2 were not implemented (due to non-availability of
funds from the Ministry of Economy and Finance, MEF). The specific achievements under this PDO
through 2021 restructuring suggested no enrollment of eligible MIDES participants in:

      INADEH trainings, against the target of 20,000. A target of female beneficiaries of 10,000 was also not
        achieved.
      the ProJoven program (in collaboration with MITRADEL), against the target of 5,000. A target of
       female beneficiaries of 2,500 was also not achieved.
      the PAIL program (in collaboration with MITRADEL), compared to the target of 2,500. A target of
       female beneficiaries of 1,250 was also not achieved.
      National Employment Exchange, compared to the target of 3,000. A target of female beneficiaries of
       1,500 was also not achieved.
      MIDES vocational training program, compared to the target of 1,660.

After the 2021 restructuring, all outputs and intermediate outcomes were dropped except for the following,
which were associated with two asset-transfer productive inclusion programs. These two were continued by
carrying out training and capacity building activities and providing technical assistance, goods, and services
to the participants. For both, the targets were revised, albeit in opposite directions. Through the end of the
project:

      3,090 eligible MIDES CCT beneficiaries (equivalent also to MIDES households) were enrolled in the
       Cohesión Social program as of December 2021, which exceeded both the 2018 target of 900
       beneficiaries, and the 2021 upward revised target of 2,600 beneficiaries.
      2,758 eligible MIDES CCT beneficiary households were enrolled in the Redes Territorial program,
       which was short of the 2018 target of 3,600 households but exceeded the 2021 downward revised
       target of 1,400 households.

In addition,

      96 percent of Cohesión Social beneficiary households attended group training sessions, attending 3.6
        training sessions on average. Also, 73 percentage of households received personalized TA visits.

                                                                                                  Page 8 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   PA Strengthening SP and Inclusion System (P155097)




      92 percent of Cohesión Social beneficiary households received seeds; 77 percent received fertilizers;
         and roughly 50 percent received tools or a biological control kit. In addition, a third of the surveyed
         households reported receiving animals.



Outcomes

Based on the evidence provided on the Redes Territorial program and Cohesión Social program as of end
2021, achievements under PDO2 were overall modest. The outcomes were mostly output-oriented, and
evidence on income generation capacity of the poor and vulnerable was weak. Results from the impact
evaluation, as reported in the ICR, underscored that agriculture production among beneficiaries of Cohesión
Social increased considerably as compared to their peers in the control group. However, it also reported that
the percentage increase could be undetermined due to lack of adequate precision in reporting.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
To provide economic support to poor households affected by the COVID-19 pandemic

Rationale
Panama was one of the hardest hit countries in the region by the COVID-19 pandemic, and its pandemic
containment measures affected growth drivers significantly with severe social and poverty impacts. The
project restructuring in 2021 revised the PDOs by introducing PDO 3 and the associated Component 4 to
address the impact of COVID-19.



Outputs and intermediate outcomes

      171,339 direct beneficiaries of MIDES CCTs received economic support financed by the project during
         2021, almost achieving the 2021 target of 181,500 beneficiaries.
        109,877 female direct beneficiaries of MIDES CCTs received economic support financed by the
         project during 2021 (i.e., 64 percent of CCT beneficiaries), slightly short of the 2021 target of 119,800
         beneficiaries.
        There were 183,294 total beneficiaries of social safety net programs supported by the project, almost
         reaching the end target of 186,000 beneficiaries.
        There were 122,847 female beneficiaries of social safety net programs supported by the project, just
         reaching the 122,758 end target.
        There were 62,320 indigenous beneficiaries of social safety net programs supported by the project,
         slightly short of the 63,238 end target.


                                                                                                      Page 9 of 20
                                 Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                 PA Strengthening SP and Inclusion System (P155097)




                                    There 34,836 Afro-descent beneficiaries of social safety net programs supported by the project,
                                     roughly in line with the 35,338 end target.



                              Outcomes

                              Outcomes were output-oriented and, as found above, they have either just fulfilled or closely fulfilled their
                              targets. In addition, the ICR estimated that the monthly poverty of MIDES CCT households would have
                              increased from 32.2 percent to 43.3 percent in 2020 in the absence of MIDES CCTs. Overall, the
                              achievement under PDO 3 was substantial.



                              Rating
                              Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The overall efficacy was based on the performance of all three PDOs through the end of the project. In the
                            2021 restructuring, since PDO1 was dropped, PDO 2 remained, and PDO 3 was introduced, we rate efficacy
                            separately for the original and revised PDOs.

                            In terms of their achievements under the original objectives, PDO 1 and PDO 2 were modestly achieved
                            mostly because of delayed or almost no implementation of Components 1 and 2 due to lack of funding from
                            the government. Overall efficacy under the original objectives (Objectives 1 and 2), across the project's
                            lifetime, is therefore rated Modest.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating                                     Primary Reason
                            Modest                                                      Low achievement
                  OBJR1_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
                            Achievement of PDO 3 was substantial. Achievement of PDO 2 (again, measured across the project's full
                            lifetime) is rated modest. This produces an overall efficacy rating under the revised objectives (PDO 2 and
                            PDO 3) of substantial.

                            The project helped expand the coverage of MIDES’ two asset transfer programs—Redes Territoriales and
                            Cohesión Social -- that expanded access to productive inclusion programs in rural areas and among
                            indigenous populations. In addition to the expanded coverage, the ICR noted that operation helped introduce
                            important innovations and improvements in these programs (ICR, p. 25).


                                                                                                                                 Page 10 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      PA Strengthening SP and Inclusion System (P155097)




  Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating
  Substantial



 5. Efficiency
The project likely produced important economic benefits, though the ICR did not attempt to quantify
these benefits due to lack of appropriate data. An impact evaluation for the Social Cohesión program (ICR, p.
22) indicated that the productive inclusion programs supported by this operation, especially Cohesión Social,
have had direct economic benefits resulting from increased productivity among beneficiaries. Similarly, better
targeting of MIDES CCTs, and continuous CCT payments during COVID-19, contributed to strong indirect
economic benefits by reducing poverty among beneficiaries.

There were, however, important implementation inefficiencies. Throughout the life of the project,
implementation was delayed several times due to multiple factors that affected efficiency significantly. The
operation was effectively stalled for the first four years of implementation (ICR, p. 23). The project team later
added that there were mainly four key factors behind this lack of progress.

      The first factor was a lack of sufficient budgetary allocation from the MEF. As per the National Budgetary
       Law of Panama, the project had to wait to receive funds until it was signed. The project received less
       than 2 million dollars between 2017 and 2018, and such low budget allocation was mostly due to fiscal
       consolidation in the country during that time.
      Second, there was internal reorganization in MIDES. Between 2016 and 2017, MIDES had gone through
       an internal reorganization. A new Directorate was created to oversee all CCT programs. The Project
       Implementation Unit was moved under this new directorate. Project coordinators were changed several
       times, and decisions were stalled for a long period of time due to these changes, including significant
       revisions in the project's operation manual.
      The third factor was the delay in signing of an inter-institutional agreement among MIDES, MITRADEL,
       and INADEH, all of which were responsible for implementing Component 3 activities. The project team
       noted that it took almost a year and a half to get this inter-institutional agreement signed.
      The fourth factor was the shift in governmental priorities towards addressing extreme poverty. The
       government initially wanted to focus more on urban areas by adding training and intermediation through
       MITRADEL and INADES. However, when the government changed, the focus shifted again to rural and
       indigenous areas. The change in government also affected the implementation of Component 2 in a
       significant way. The new government converted all temporary social workers to staff in 2016 and created
       a hold in implementation of activities.

Soon after the first restructuring, the fiscal situation in Panama deteriorated. Despite its commitment to support
the project with US$15 million, the MEF could disburse only US$4 million in the 2019 budget cycle. This was
more than the previous year's disbursement but significantly less than the requirement to implement all
components as planned. Between 2019 and 2020, the fiscal situation was the key challenge that affected project
implementation adversely.

The 2021 restructuring helped improve implementation efficiency, despite some initial challenges due to
the COVID-19 pandemic. Even after the cancellation of US$15 million during the 2018 restructuring, the Bank

                                                                                                       Page 11 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      PA Strengthening SP and Inclusion System (P155097)



was able to rapidly provide financial support to the country when the COVID-19 crisis hit. The ICR (p. 32)
mentioned that MIDES CCTs were at risk due to the tight fiscal situation after the initial months of the pandemic,
but project implementation picked up speed after the third restructuring in 2021. The Bank was able to
restructure the project and provided the needed financial resources to secure payment for MIDES CCTs.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      0
 Appraisal                                                   0
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      0
 ICR Estimate                                                0
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

       Relevance of objectives across the entire project is rated High, as there was full alignment between the
        objectives, country context, and Bank strategy.
       Efficiency is rated Modest across the entire project due to delays of implementation.
       Efficacy: Efficacy is rated separately for the original PDOs and the revised PDOs. The overall efficacy
        rating of the original PDOs was Modest, as the project did not achieve its aggregated original objectives.
        The overall efficacy of the revised PDOs was Substantial, as the project almost fully achieved its
        aggregated revised objectives.

According to IEG/OPCS guidelines, when a project’s objectives are revised, the final outcome rating is
determined by the weight of Bank disbursements under each set of objectives (7 percent, and 93 percent).

With High relevance and Modest Efficiency,

       the outcome is rated Moderately Unsatisfactory (rating value: 3) under the original objectives because of
        Modest efficacy. With this outcome rating, the weight value of the original objectives is 0.21 (3 x 0.07).
       the outcome is rated Moderately Satisfactory (rating value: 4) under the revised objectives because of
        Substantial efficacy. With this outcome rating, the weight value of the revised objectives is 3.72 (4 x
        0.93).

The weighted outcome values, before and after revision, add up to 3.93 (rounded to 4), which corresponds to an
overall outcome rating of Moderately Satisfactory. The following table illustrates the split rating calculations:


                                                                                                      Page 12 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      PA Strengthening SP and Inclusion System (P155097)



Rating Dimensions                                              Original Objectives Revised Objectives
Relevance of Objectives                                        High
Efficacy
Objective 1: To increase the efficiency of the social
                                                               Modest                ---
protection system
Objective 2: To improve the income generation capacity of
                                                               Modest                Modest
the poor and vulnerable
Objective 3: To provide economic support to poor
                                                               ---                   Substantial
households affected by the COVID-19 pandemic
Overall Efficacy rating                                        Modest                Substantial
Efficiency                                                     Modest
                                                               Moderately
Outcome Rating                                                                       Moderately Satisfactory
                                                               Unsatisfactory
Outcome Rating Value                                           3                     4
Amount disbursed (US$ million)                                 4.2                   55.8
Disbursement %                                                 7%                    93%
Weight Value                                                   3 X 0.07 =0.21        4 X 0.93 =3.72
Total weighted value                                           3.93 (rounded to 4)
Overall Outcome rating                                         Moderately Satisfactory
a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

According to the ICR, the project took several measures to ensure sustainability of the development
outcomes, in particular the full implementation of the Single Beneficiary Registry, which was well established
within the government's social protection strategy. The project expects that it can help replenish the shrinking
pool of eligible beneficiaries and make the CCT program sustainable. Similarly, the significant economic
impact of the Cohesión Social program and high levels of satisfaction reported by beneficiary households
shows great potential for future scaling up.

There are, however, some foreseeable risks that can affect sustainability of the project outcomes in
the longer run. For example,

      Complicated and unwieldy fiduciary procedures under Panama’s national constitution can adversely
       affect sustainability of the programs. These features are intrinsic to Panama’s country systems and
       outside the control of the project.

                                                                                                      Page 13 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PA Strengthening SP and Inclusion System (P155097)



     Lack of capacity and commitment from the government is another challenge that may affect the
      sustainability of the development outcomes in the long run.
     The government’s shifting priorities can also pose some risks to the sustainability of the development
      outcomes.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project's design had several strengths, but it was laden with some critical weaknesses that adversely
  affected its achievements. Among its strengths were:

  The project development objectives and proposed project activities were aligned with country
  priorities, and with World Bank strategies at appraisal. The project development objective of
  improving employment and income generation for the poor directly supported the CPF’s second Pillar
  objective of Ensuring Inclusion and Opportunities for Marginalized and Indigenous Groups to complement
  social assistance with productive inclusion and improving access to basic services. The activities under
  the three project components were adequately designed to support the country to overcome these
  challenges. The first component of the project sought to improve the efficiency and management of social
  programs by supporting the development of social protection system instruments, such as a single
  registry to serve as a platform for designing and monitoring social programs. The second component
  aimed to support the strengthening of MIDES’ territorial structure and put in place feedback mechanisms
  to strengthen grievance redress processes. The third component sought to complement social assistance
  programs by providing access to productive inclusion programs for the target population.

  The design at appraisal incorporated lessons learned from previous projects. The design reflected
  lessons from the previously closed Social Protection Project in Panama, regarding the need to build on,
  and scale up, activities previously implemented by other agencies and the use of tested contracting
  mechanisms. It also made use of the community network of Family Committees to ensure cultural
  pertinence.

  Decision making and implementation arrangements were clearly defined at appraisal. The Bank, at
  entry, assigned decision making at the central level to the Secretariat of the Social Protection System,
  which was expected to make all decisions on issues regarding project implementation while the Social
  Cabinet was expected to play an advisory role for social development policies and facilitate discussions
  of social policy, programs, and strategic evaluation among government agencies. The Bank proposed
  that MIDES implement the project through its existing institutional structures at the central, regional, and
  local levels. MIDES was responsible for implementing the project in accordance with the Bank’s
  operational manual to ensure coherence of institutional arrangements, administrative, budgeting,
  accounting, auditing, reporting, financial, procurement and disbursement procedures, monitoring of
  indicators, inter-institutional coordination, verification of compliance of independent auditors, establishing
  of a methodology to calculate unit costs of INADEH training program payments and MITRADEL
  intermediation payments, and adoption of the operation manual by the government prior to effectiveness.
  MIDES was also responsible for coordinating social policies at two different levels: horizontal and vertical.



                                                                                                     Page 14 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PA Strengthening SP and Inclusion System (P155097)



  Despite these strengths, design weaknesses were significant. Procurement risk was identified and
  rated ‘Substantial’ due to weak implementation capacity of the Administrative Financial Executing Unit in
  comparison with the expected high workload. Similarly, potential delays caused by the intervention of the
  General Comptroller’s Office prior to signature of contracts, and stringent local procurement regulations
  practices, were also identified as potential sources of implementation risk. However, assessment of
  capacity and commitment risks from the government at the design stage were not well specified at entry.
  Looking back, it can be said that despite the project design being technically sound, implementation of
  some of its components was not institutionally feasible in Panama given institutional, financial, and
  capacity constraints. According to the project team, Panama’s implementation capacity, in terms of
  institutional and budgetary factors, was somewhat overestimated by the Bank and the government. The
  Bank included additional activities in urban areas as per the government's request but failed to
  adequately assess the ability of the government to fund the additional activities as well as the social
  development ministry’s changing priorities. The Bank also overestimated MIDES’ capacity towards inter-
  agency cooperation. In general, MIDES’ focus was more on rural and indigenous areas rather than on the
  urban areas where most poor people lived. The government’s desire to include new activities for urban
  areas in the project's design was therefore quite ambitious, requiring coordination and synergies with
  other institutions since MIDES was not in charge of training or labor intermediation. The ambitious goal of
  reforming ministries was also not matched by the design of appropriate incentive mechanisms to link
  staff recruitment to specific agency-level actions and results. Similarly, at the preparation stage, a realistic
  size of the project in line with the country’s annual budget allocation was also not assessed correctly. The
  Bank somewhat failed to critically assess and ensure active involvement of MEF during project
  preparation to identify realistic budget allocation projections within the time frame of the project and the
  budget cycle process.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Throughout the project’s life, the Bank's task team provided close supervision of the operation. The
 task team conducted regular supervision missions and adequately documented implementation progress
 and challenges. The task team also provided ongoing technical support to the government in both social
 protection and implementation of fiduciary and safeguards aspects of the operation. Despite frequent
 change of task team leaders, the project team maintained institutional memory and continuation in
 communication with the government.

 Three restructurings have shown the Bank’s flexibility to respond to the government’s changing
 priorities and to optimize the impact of the loan proceeds. The project was severely delayed in the
 initial years due to low budget allocations from MEF, changes in the government’s priorities, and other
 factors such as complex approval processes. Reorganization of MIDES’ internal structure also put the
 operation on hold for more than a year. The 2018 restructuring, processed in two steps, involved a
 cancellation of US$15 million, and reallocation and adjustments to the project's institutional arrangements
 to reflect changes in MIDES’ organizational structure. The second restructuring in the same year added
 new activities under Components 1 and 2 and expanded Component 3 along with the revision of the
 environmental category and related revisions to the results framework. The third restructuring in 2021 was
 approved to align the project with the World Bank’s COVID-19 Crisis Response Approach. New

                                                                                                       Page 15 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PA Strengthening SP and Inclusion System (P155097)



 components were added to guarantee income support and protect the human capital of the poor and
 extreme poor during the ongoing emergency.

 Despite the restructurings, project implementation remained a challenge along several fronts,
 especially in its initial years. Progress towards achievement of the PDOs and overall implementation
 progress remained moderately unsatisfactory in the initial years due to very limited progress on the
 implementation of Components 1 and 2 and a change in government priorities for Component 3. Lack of
 funding from the government contributed to this slow progress in implementation. Procurement issues,
 particularly Panama’s complex approval processes, also posed significant challenges. The rating for
 procurement performance was downgraded from Satisfactory to Moderately Unsatisfactory in June 2017 to
 reflect lack of execution in the activities included in the procurement plans. Safeguards implementation
 arrangements and reporting on project implementation, and safeguards compliance, were not always
 clearly documented or maintained throughout the life of the project (ICR, p. 33). The 2020 Implementation
 Status and Results Report rated Bank performance as moderately unsatisfactory. Allocated funding during
 the third restructuring in 2021 improved the speed of implementation and helped the project to rebound.
 According to the task team, accelerated progress with support in response to the COVID-19 pandemic was
 possible because the required infrastructure to implement CCTs was already there. The project efficiently
 used the newly reallocated fund to speed implementation of revised activities.

 Assessing the strengths and shortcomings discussed above, the Bank’s performance at supervision is
 rated Moderately Satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The M&E design at appraisal bestowed results monitoring responsibility to MIDES. The project was
 expected to provide technical assistance and support to the Secretariat of the Social Protection System to
 enhance its capacity to monitor implementation of activities, and the re-design of the MIDES MIS to
 consolidate data on project-related activities. The monitoring of activities was designed to be supported
 through MIDES’ MIS system, annual operational audits, World Bank implementation support missions, and
 surveys on specific programs. The Project Operational Manual was expected to be used as a guide.
 MIDES was responsible for producing and publishing semiannual monitoring reports on intermediate
 results on government websites.

 MIDES was also responsible for implementing and assessing the MIDES implementation of CCT programs
 and for the planning and implementation of key evaluations. Project design included a process evaluation
 to assess the operational functioning of both social programs and social protection system instruments
 related to accuracy of eligibility, verification of co-responsibilities, and participation in productive and

                                                                                                  Page 16 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PA Strengthening SP and Inclusion System (P155097)



 employability programs. It also included an impact evaluation of CCTs on relevant variables, which was to
 be designed and contracted with technical support from the World Bank.



b. M&E Implementation
  The changes in the results framework in the 2018 and 2021 restructurings affected M&E implementation.
  The 2018 restructuring, for example, changed the operational definition of a key outcome indicator, the
  percent of households in productive inclusion programs from the bottom two quintiles, which implicitly
  reduced the expected coverage of inclusive production programs by roughly half in absolute numbers.
  The 2021 restructuring eliminated the same indicator and replaced it with a new indicator to capture the
  operation’s impact on improving the income generation capacity of the poor and vulnerable. The
  operational definitions for the Redes Territoriales and Cohesión Social programs were modified to
  enhance precision without affecting the baseline. Due to mobility restriction under COVID-19, the planned
  household survey for the Cohesión Social program was also modified. While the modifications of
  intermediate result indicators helped track implementation progress, ICR (p. 29) pointed out that
  eliminating indicators and adding new ones— rather than introducing changes to their operational
  definitions -- would have facilitated tracking changes in coverage end targets. The ICR (p. 33) also noted
  that the beneficiaries lacked proper training on basic accounting, creating challenges for data collection
  on agricultural production as part of the Cohesión Social impact evaluation. Lack of these skills hindered
  producers in identifying and monitoring the effects of changes in practices on production and adoption of
  more efficient strategies.



c. M&E Utilization
  The revised monitoring indicators helped track progress in implementation without major difficulties. The
  impact evaluation of the Cohesión Social program was effective in providing evidence on both
  intermediate and longer-term factors contributing to the beneficiaries’ income generation capacity. It also
  provided critical inputs for the ICR.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project triggered OP/BP 4.10 due to the inclusion of indigenous peoples as one the project’s
   beneficiary populations. The project consulted with the indigenous congresses of Panama to prepare an
   Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF). It also disseminated the report both in-country and on the
   Bank's website before appraisal. The IPPF included the potential impacts of the programs on indigenous
   people, and informed consultation with the affected indigenous peoples’ communities at each stage of
   project preparation and implementation, institutional arrangements for preparing Indigenous Peoples Plans
   (IPPs) for each indigenous community, and monitoring and reporting arrangements and disclosure
   arrangements for IPPs to be prepared during implementation. These IPPs, during implementation, were

                                                                                                   Page 17 of 20
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    PA Strengthening SP and Inclusion System (P155097)



  prepared by MIDES in coordination with delegates from indigenous communities by each indigenous
  congress, in consultation with indigenous women’s networks and program beneficiaries. IPPs included
  specific actions for MIDES CCTs to mitigate potential risks and negative impacts and to ensure cultural
  appropriateness. A draft social assessment, included in the IPPF, was prepared, describing demographic
  data as well as knowledge gaps on indigenous peoples.

  During 2018 restructuring, the project’s environmental assessment category was upgraded from C to B.
  Despite negligible potential impact of the project on the environment, two new safeguards policies --
  umbrella Environmental Assessment (OP/PB 4.01) and Pest Management (OP 4.09) -- were triggered due
  to the inclusion of the distribution of various assets in asset-transfer programs, including livestock and
  seeds, to beneficiaries. According to the ICR (p. 30), the safeguard instruments were also updated to reflect
  the risks posed by the COVID-19 pandemic as well as the potential risk of exclusion of beneficiaries from
  accessing and benefiting from project activities. The ESMP updated during the 2021 restructuring included
  COVID-19 contingency plans designed to prevent the risk of infection to beneficiaries and key actors during
  implementation and to temporarily adapt the design and operational procedures of project activities due
  to the pandemic.

  Beyond safeguards, the project also aimed to enhance its mainstreaming of gender dimensions in response
  to beneficiary feedback, documented by a previous project’s qualitative impact assessment.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  There were no significant issues in the project’s financial management (FM) performance throughout its
  life. Delays and shortcomings downgraded its performance rating, but provision of information required to
  manage and monitor project implementation was reliable and timely. The ICR (p. 30) reported that the
  rating for procurement performance was downgraded in 2017 to reflect the lack of execution in the
  activities included in the procurement plans during the first half of the operation’s lifetime. Performance
  improved during the 2020-2021 period, mainly because of the implementation of activities under
  Component 3 and increased capacity within the Project Implementation Unit. In the last year of project
  implementation, procurement performance was satisfactory, with the total amount of the loan proceeds
  being committed and disbursed, and the Project Implementation Unit exhibiting adequate procurement
  capacity and proactive performance.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  As a positive unintended impact, the ICR (p. 25) reported that MIDES, with the operation’s support, put in
  place a 311 phone line to channel redress and complaints from beneficiaries or potential beneficiaries of
  MIDES programs.



d. Other
  N/A


                                                                                                  Page 18 of 20
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       PA Strengthening SP and Inclusion System (P155097)




11. Ratings
                                                                                   Reason for
 Ratings                          ICR                    IEG
                                                                                   Disagreements/Comment
                                  Moderately
 Outcome                                                Moderately Satisfactory
                                  Satisfactory
                                  Moderately
 Bank Performance                                       Moderately Satisfactory
                                  Satisfactory
 Quality of M&E                   Substantial           Substantial

 Quality of ICR                   ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

        At the appraisal stage, realistic assessment of the size of the project in line with the
         country’s annual budget allocation can avoid critical implementation challenges. It is
         important to ensure active involvement of the MEF during project preparation to identify
         realistic budget allocation projections within the timeframe of the project and the budget cycle
         process. Despite full commitment, project implementation was practically stalled for
         almost four full years due to lack of financial support from the government.
        Adequate consideration of overall portfolio challenges at the project design stage can
         improve implementation. Cumbersome fiduciary procedures under Panama’s national
         Constitution and frequent staff turnover, even at the technical and fiduciary levels, affected
         implementation severely. These features are intrinsic to Panama’s country systems and
         outside the control of the project. At the preparation stage, it is critical to ensure that other
         financial instruments are considered, such investment projects with disbursement against
         results, that may reduce the burden of fiduciary procedures.
        Additional support from the Bank can help achieve positive results when
         implementation capacity is limited. In the case of this operation, provision of support for
         the design and implementation of the impact evaluation of the Cohesión Social
         program yielded significant positive results.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

This is a concise and results-based ICR. The quality of analysis is adequate, with occasional shortcomings. For
example, the description of quality at entry is very short; the ICR identified key issues in quality at entry but did
not sufficiently explain how they affected project implementation. Additional context for these issues, as clarified


                                                                                                      Page 19 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      PA Strengthening SP and Inclusion System (P155097)



by the task team, could have strengthened the ICR's arguments. The ICR candidly reports the project’s
achievements and shortcomings during implementation and provides insightful explanations for important
elements of the implementation experience. Lessons learned are adequately based on project experience.
There is internal consistency overall, with occasional lapses. It would have been useful if the ICR had offered
more clarity and specificity on how frequent changes in the results framework during multiple restructurings
affected monitoring of project performance, and how these challenges were overcome. Overall, the quality of
the ICR is Substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                    Page 20 of 20
