     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Social Welfare Development and Reform II (P153744)



                                                                                Report Number: ICRR0023341

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P153744                                    Social Welfare Development and Reform II

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Philippines                                Social Protection & Jobs


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-85840,IBRD-89670                     31-Dec-2019                                        750,000,000.00

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 19-Feb-2016                               30-Jun-2022

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                          450,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                           750,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Actual                                       750,000,000.00                                              0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator        Group
 Salim J. Habayeb           Eduardo Fernandez             Eduardo Fernandez             IEGHC (Unit 2)
                            Maldonado                     Maldonado




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The objective of the project was to support the National Program Support for Social Protection of DSWD to
   improve the use of health and education services of poor children (Loan Agreement, April 29, 2016, p. 5).

   Note: DSWD stands for the Department of Social Welfare and Development.

   An additional financing on June 27, 2019, modified the PDO statement as follows: "to support the conditional
   cash transfer (CCT) program of DSWD to improve the use of health and education services by poor children"

                                                                                                 Page 1 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Social Welfare Development and Reform II (P153744)



   (Loan Agreement, Additional Financing, November 28, 2019, p. 5). The modified statement was made for
   clarity reasons (ICR, p. 9) although the original statement was always meant to support the CCT program
   (known as the ‘Pantawid Pamilyang Pilipino Program’, or ‘4Ps’ program, which means ‘Bridging Program for
   the Filipino Family’).




b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  27-Jun-2019

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   I. Support to the Pantawid Pamilya (IBRD: Appraisal US$450 million; Actual: US$750 million)

   Component I aimed at supporting continuous delivery of the CCT Program to poor households with children.
   It would continue to contribute to financing health and education grants given to CCT beneficiaries
   nationwide. Beneficiary households -- poor households with children 0-18 --would continue to be selected
   using the national household targeting system, known as Listahanan, that follows a standardized targeting
   mechanism with a rigorous quality control process.

   Scope: The CCT Program was expected to directly benefit approximately 4.2 million poor beneficiary
   households with 11 million children and with about 22 million members (PAD, p. 13).

   II. Strengthening CCT Implementation, Monitoring and Evaluation (Borrower: Appraisal: US$5.2
   million; Actual: US$5.2 million)

   The second component aimed at enhancing the CCT Program. It would allow DSWD’s National Program
   Management Office to enhance implementation of CCTs by strengthening capacities for monitoring,
   evaluation and data analysis; delivery mechanisms of the CCT program (payment, communication,
   Grievance Redress System (GRS); and by streamlined and improved family and youth development
   sessions, and faster compliance verification and beneficiary data systems. The component would use
   Government to undertake institutional and capacity development, monitoring and impact evaluation
   activities, including: (a) strengthening policy analysis and M&E capacity, including conducting a CCT
   Program impact evaluation and annual CCT Program implementation spot checks; (b) training of central,
   regional and municipal staff to deliver the CCT Program; (c) developing content for, and strengthening
   capacity to deliver, strategic communications, including strengthening the beneficiary feedback mechanism;
   and (d) training for the development and delivery of family and youth development sessions (PAD, p. 9).


                                                                                                 Page 2 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Social Welfare Development and Reform II (P153744)




e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   At appraisal, the IBRD cost was estimated at US$450 million that represented 7.3 percent of the CCT
   scheme within a larger national program whose overall cost was projected at US$5.85 billion between 2016
   and 2019. The loan included provisions for retroactive financing up to US$90 million for eligible
   expenditures under Category 1 for Conditional Cash Transfer Grants starting on March 1, 2015.

   On June 27, 2019, an additional IBRD financing (AF) of US$300 million was provided to continue CCT
   support. The AF also aimed at supporting: (i) improvement of business processes, including the adoption of
   NHTS-PR new data for targeting and updating 4Ps Operations Manual; (ii) upgrading the Pantawid
   Information System – including its link with the Learners Information System of the Department of Education
   (for tracking enrollment and attendance status of students) and the new Philippine Identification System; (iii)
   strengthened capacity for monitoring and evaluation; and (4) expansion of digital payments instead of over
   the counter cash delivery (ICR, p. 10).

   The AF increased the total IBRD commitment to an aggregate of US$750 million, that was also the actual
   IBRD cost, including a front-end fee of US$1.1 million. In addition to financing the larger part of the CCT
   program, the Borrower fully financed Component II (Strengthening CCT Implementation and M&E) for
   US$5.2 million.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The World Bank had previously supported the government in the first phase of the Social Welfare and
Development Reform Project (SWDRP) during 2009-2015 for an amount of US$505 million. The PAD (p. 3
and p. 7) explained that this project was a follow-on phase that would continue to consolidate the gains
previously made under the CCT Program. The country had a well-established national system to target
poor households, and the Pantawid Pamilya CCT Program was recognized as a flagship poverty reduction
program that aimed to break intergenerational transmission of poverty by incentivizing poor households to
invest in their children education and health. According to the PAD (p. 3), the program covered 4.2 million
households by June 2015. At entry, objectives were aligned with the strategies of the Country Partnership
Strategy FY15-18 to promote inclusive growth, reduce poverty, and support shared prosperity (ICR, p. 12).

At project closing, objectives continued to be relevant to Philippine Development Plan (PDP 2017-2022)
and to CPF 2019-2023, specifically to CPF Focus Area 1 on Investing in Filipinos and its three objectives:
(1) improved access to quality education services; (2) increased access to affordable health services; and
(3) improved efficiency of social protection coverage for the poor and vulnerable.

However, there were some weaknesses in development expectations related to the historical Bank
experience in the sector. Although the project originally envisioned various technical assistance (TA) areas

                                                                                                     Page 3 of 14
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                       Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Social Welfare Development and Reform II (P153744)



               such as linkage to graduation, economic inclusion, and adaptive social protection, the government decided
               to largely limit the scope of the project to CCT grants and to use counterpart financing for implementation
               support activities under Component 2 (ICR, p. 21). This approach differed from the first phase of SWDRP
               that included and financed substantial TA, including for institutional capacity building and for the National
               Household Targeting System for Poverty Reduction. The ICR reported that the government decision was
               made mainly to avoid dual approval processes: one for budget support under Component 1 and the other
               for TA activities under Component 2. The ICR (p. 21) reported that not having a strong TA component in the
               project significantly undermined the quality of 4Ps implementation.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective

                             Improve the use of health and education services by poor children under the conditional cash transfer
                             program


                             Rationale
                             The theory of change held that financing conditional cash grants, and strengthening its monitoring would
                             encourage behavioral change among beneficiary parents to invest in the human capital of their children, thus
                             plausibly leading to improved utilization of health and education services by poor children.

                             Note: In terms of long-term outcomes that were highlighted by the theory of change (improved human capital
                             and lower incidence of poverty, ICR, p. 12), the presumed human capital improvement remains dependent on
                             the quality of education and health services that are beyond the control of the operation. In this context, the
                             CPF noted that significant challenges remain in learning outcomes that are more prevalent among the poor
                             and in conflict affected areas, and that ensuring high-quality of health services for all was challenging, and
                             with health indicators and the quality of care worse in poorer areas.

                             Outputs and intermediate results

                             The total number of household beneficiaries who received cash grants increased from a baseline of
                             4,178,985 to 4,404,634, achieving the target of 4,400,000 household beneficiaries.

                             The share of households receiving over the counter grant payments improved from a baseline of baseline 48
                             percent in 2018 to 8.1 percent in 2022, exceeding the target 19 percent.



                                                                                                                              Page 4 of 14
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Social Welfare Development and Reform II (P153744)



The share of eligible children 6–14 years old in poor CCT beneficiary households attending school at least 85
percent of the time increased from a baseline of 84.9 percent in 2018 to 92 percent in 2022, achieving the
target of 91.7 percent. The patterns of improvement were largely similar for the four subgroups (males,
females, indigenous, and non-indigenous).

The share of CCT beneficiary households with updated information in the national household targeting
system could not be measured because of delays in collecting and verifying data for Listahanan 3 resulting
from the COVID-19 pandemic. The validation of updated information was still ongoing as of June 2022 (ICR,
p. 32).

The percentage of grievance cases that were addressed in a timely manner increased from a baseline of 94
percent in 2018 to 98.9 percent in 2022, essentially achieving the target of 99 percent.

The project was gender responsive. It supported the government in developing Conditional Cash Transfer
Gender Action Plan. It supported monthly Family Development Sessions that included, in addition to
parenting roles, modules on gender equality and empowerment. The project promoted the role of female
heads of households as grantees. The information system allowed all indicators to be disaggregated by
gender. Also, the GRM system included category and special referral pathways for complaints related to
gender-based violence, including grievances on sexual harassment and sexual exploitation and abuse.
According to the ICR, the project contributed to a reduction in emotional non-partner domestic violence by 11
percentage points.

Importantly, the World Bank (ICR, p. 21) mobilized trust fund resources throughout the implementation period
to provide complementary TA support using Bank-executed activities, although such support did not fully
mitigate the consequence of not having sufficient leverage in Component 2 (Task Team
clarifications, February 16, 2023). As examples, the Bank Team provided support in digital payment that
contributed to reducing the share of households receiving over-the-counter payments; and provided support
for reviewing the Pantawid Pamilya Information System to inform its updating.

Outcomes

Evidence showed that the project almost fully achieved its intended outcomes of improved use of health and
education services by poor children under the conditional cash transfer program.

The share of monitored children 0-5 years old in poor CCT beneficiaries’ households undergoing growth
monitoring and check-ups in accordance with Department of Health protocol increased from a baseline of
93.7 percent in 2018 to 97.7 percent in 2022, almost attaining the target of 98.1 percent. Disaggregated data
for different subgroups (males, females, indigenous and non-indigenous children) showed essentially similar
patterns of improvement.

The share of eligible children 3–5 years old in poor CCT beneficiary households attending preschool or
school at least 85 percent of the time increased from a baseline of 86 percent in 2018 to 92.3 percent in 2022,
exceeding the target of 91 percent. Disaggregated data for different subgroups (males, females, indigenous
and non-indigenous children) showed largely similar patterns of improvement.

The share of eligible children 15–18 years old in poor CCT beneficiary households attending school at least
85% of the time increased from a baseline of 68 percent in 2018 to 79.1 percent in 2022, exceeding the target


                                                                                                 Page 5 of 14
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               Social Welfare Development and Reform II (P153744)



                            of 75 percent. Achievements of females were higher than males (81.7 percent vs 76.7 percent), and higher
                            for non-indigenous vs. indigenous beneficiaries (79.5 vs. 74.7 percent).

                            The Government adopted the 4Ps Act in 2019. The Act defined 4Ps as a national poverty reduction strategy
                            and human capital investment program that provided conditional cash transfers to poor households for a
                            maximum period of seven years, with the aim of improving health, nutrition and education aspects of their
                            lives (ICR, p. 25). The Act increased the benefit amount with the expectation that this would augment the
                            impact on poverty reduction and human capital accumulation among 4Ps beneficiaries.

                            Studies conducted during the project period confirmed that CCT continued to contribute to reducing poverty
                            and inequality. The Lorenz curve of the CCT on income inequality, based on Annual Poverty Indicators
                            Survey 2020, showed that the program was progressive, that is, poorer households received the higher share
                            of program benefits than their actual share in the national income distribution (ICR, p. 19). The program
                            covered 33.7 percent of the poorest quintile. Out of various social assistance programs, 4Ps contributed the
                            most to poverty and inequality reducing effects of social assistance over 2006 to 2018. Without 4Ps, poverty
                            would have been 7 percent higher, inequality would have been 0.9 percent higher, and the poverty gap would
                            have been 11 percent higher in 2018 (ICR, p. 19 based on World Bank, forthcoming, Poverty and Inequality in
                            the Philippines: Past Trends and Future Prospects).

                            At the same time, the ICR explained some weaknesses related to the achievements. The accuracy of project
                            targeting was declining, including for pregnant women and missed (non-monitored) children of 4Ps. In the
                            context of increasing exclusion of pregnant women and young children living in poverty, the ICR (p. 25) stated
                            that, in the long term, this could diminish the overall 4Ps impact on national poverty reduction and human
                            capital accumulation. By design, program conditions applied only to monitored individuals who were identified
                            at the time of program enrollment or when updating the National Household Targeting System for Poverty
                            Reduction, unless the beneficiary voluntarily reports updated information, such as with a new pregnancy in
                            the household. But grants were provided per households and did not vary by the number of eligible children,
                            i.e., there were no strong incentives to report new pregnancies. As the program matured, its expansion
                            slowed down and updates in 2015 were not fully utilized to revalidate and update the 4Ps beneficiary registry
                            and enroll new beneficiaries. The number of monitored pregnant/post-partum mothers and children aged 0-5
                            declined significantly (ICR, p. 15). This meant that succeeding pregnancies and newborns were not linked to
                            the program’s compliance verification system. Between 2017 and 2022, only about 200,000 to 300,000
                            pregnant women and under-5 children were monitored for compliance with health conditions, as opposed to
                            the peak of about two million in 2012 and 2013.




                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                                                                                                                            Page 6 of 14
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Social Welfare Development and Reform II (P153744)




  OVERALL EFFICACY
  Rationale
  The project almost fully achieved its objective to improve the use of health and education services by poor
  children under the conditional cash transfer program. The achievement level is consistent with a substantial
  rating for overall efficacy.



  Overall Efficacy Rating
  Substantial



 5. Efficiency
The PAD’s economic analysis (pp. 13-14) used information and benefit incidence analysis derived from the
previous phase of the Pantawid Pamilya CCT Program to highlight positive effects on poverty and inequality. On
average, without CCT grants, poor beneficiary households’ incomes were 35 percent short of meeting the
minimum income level needed to afford their basic needs. Pantawid cash transfers helped beneficiaries close
this gap. The estimated reduction of total poverty and food poverty among beneficiaries of the CCT Program by
up to 6.7 percentage points was significant. At the national level, it was also estimated that the program reduced
both total poverty and food poverty by up to 1.4 percentage points in 2013, from a baseline of 26.4 percent total
poverty and 12.5 percent of food poverty without the CCT. These estimates fell between those found in two
large CCT Programs: Mexico’s Prospera that was estimated to have reduced total poverty by 1.8 percentage
points; and Brazil’s Bolsa Familia by 0.5 percentage point. Pantawid also reduced the overall poverty gap from
9.1 percent to 8.2 percent and contributed to reducing national income inequality as measured by Gini
coefficient by 0.5 points (49.2 without the program and 48.7 with the program in 2013).

The PAD also reported on efficiency gains accruing to the health and education sectors. In terms of health,
Pantawid Pamilya promoted facility-based deliveries (7 in 10 live births in five previous years compared to only
5.5 in 10 live births among non-Pantawid mothers). It also showed that Pantawid Pamilya promoted access to
professional post-natal care where 80 percent of mothers were checked by a skilled health professional after
giving birth, compared to 59 percent in non-Pantawid mothers. In terms of education, Pantawid households
living near the poverty threshold spent 206 Philippine pesos more per school-aged child per year compared to
non-Pantawid households. Higher households’ investment in education translated into higher gross enrollment
rates of children in both age groups 6-11 years and 12-14 years, and these increases made enrolment rates
equally high among poor and non-poor children. Importantly, the likelihood of completing elementary education
among Pantawid Pamilya children of 13-16 years old (83 percent) was higher than among same age poor
children who were not Pantawid Pamilya, children (79 percent). The positive effect was observed in both boys
and girls.

The ICR argued that 4Ps program was an efficient means of delivering assistance to beneficiaries. Based on the
most recent budget data for the program in 2022, the additional administrative cost to the government was only
PHP 8.7 to deliver PHP 100 of cash grant to program beneficiaries. The program administrative cost included
personnel costs, M&E, bank fees, and cost of equipment. The administrative cost was much lower than that of
initial years of the program when, in 2009, the administrative cost was estimated at 18 percent of program costs.



                                                                                                     Page 7 of 14
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Social Welfare Development and Reform II (P153744)



A dynamic shift toward digital payment delivery, increasing from 52 percent at appraisal to 91.9 percent at
project closing, may have also contributed to this improved efficiency (ICR, p. 17).

In addition, the ICR offered arguments about financial sustainability. The Bank's contribution over 2016-2022
accounted for around 7 percent of the government CCT budget, therefore, the loan would have a limited fiscal
impact on the overall DSWD budget and would not raise sustainability risks. Loan proceeds were fully utilized.

Nevertheless, the ICR noted that, in terms of delivering targeted assistance to children from poor households,
efficiency was not as high as originally expected in view of weak targeting performance of the 4Ps and the
exclusion of pregnant women and young children (ICR, p. 17).


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                    0
 Appraisal                                                  0
                                                                                     Not Applicable
                                                                                    0
 ICR Estimate                                               0
                                                                                     Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of objectives was rated substantial in view of alignment with CPF 2019-2023 at project closing and
with the Philippine Development Plan 2017-2022. Efficacy was rated substantial, as the project development
objective was almost fully achieved. Efficiency was also rated substantial in view of the value for money, but
with some aspects of implementation that moderately reduced overall efficiency. These findings are consistent
with a satisfactory outcome rating, indicative of essentially minor shortcomings in the operation’s achievement of
its objectives, in its efficiency, and in its relevance.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The risk that development outcome may not be maintained appears to be limited, as the financial
sustainability of the program was bolstered through legislation. The Pantawid Pamilyang Pilipino Program

                                                                                                    Page 8 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Social Welfare Development and Reform II (P153744)



Act and its Implementing Rules and Regulations were adopted in 2019, thus institutionalizing the CCT
program that became a national poverty reduction strategy (ICR, p. 25).

The financial contribution of the World Bank loan to the overall national program was relatively small and with
limited fiscal impact on the overall DSWD budget and the continuity of program financing. However, the ICR
(p. 25) reported that reduced targeting performance and the exclusion of many pregnant women and young
children could attenuate the overall impact of 4Ps on national poverty reduction and human capital
accumulation in the long term. The ICR (p. 23) stated that M&E findings informed the design of “Beneficiary
FIRST Social Protection Project” (P174066), that aims at mitigating the impact of COVID-19 on the welfare of
low-income households, promoting the inclusion of pregnant women, and at strengthening data
interoperability among databases.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project built on the CCT Program that was well established and operating since its piloting phase in
  2007 (PAD, p. 12). Project activities were technically sound, and the CCT Program was designed with
  consideration to best practice examples from other countries, such as Mexico, Brazil and Colombia (PAD
  p. 14). The rigorous impact evaluation rounds conducted in 2012 and 2014 for the previous project
  provided the evidence to support the continuation of 4Ps with demonstrated impact on poverty reduction
  and human capital accumulation (ICR, p. 20).

  Implementation arrangements were planned to follow existing provisions and government procedures.
  Information provided by the PAD and ICR reflected implementation readiness. The overall risk was
  assessed as moderate. DSWD was the lead executing agency for the project. As in the previous phase of
  SWDRP, overall management of the project was under the DSWD Executive Committee, chaired by the
  Secretary and composed of all the Undersecretaries and Assistant Secretaries. Main activities would be
  undertaken by the CCT National Program Management Office (known as Pantawid NPMO), in
  accordance with the CCT Program Operations Manual and with support from other relevant DSWD
  departments, units and bureaus, all within the structure of DSWD (PAD, p. 10). Financial management
  arrangements were adequate (ICR, p. 24), loan proceeds would disburse to the Treasury, and M&E
  arrangements were well established and embedded institutionally.

  As noted in section 3, the decision not to include TA activities under Bank financing was not attributable
  to the Bank Team, but rather was a decision made by the Borrower, as previously noted in section 3. In
  this context, the Bank Team was proactive in planning for and mobilizing trust fund resources to provide
  complementary TA using Bank-executed activities to mitigate the consequences of not having sufficient
  leverage in TA activities.




                                                                                                    Page 9 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Social Welfare Development and Reform II (P153744)




  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 According to the ICR, the World Bank Team provided intensive and proactive support to DSWD throughout
 project implementation. Trust fund resources continued to be instrumental in providing TA for activities as
 well as in responding to the emerging demands from the Government, notably during the COVID-19
 pandemic.

 The Bank Team facilitated the processing of an AF amounting to US$300 million to continue financing the
 Bank’s contribution in support of CCT grants to poor households with children; and to support program
 improvements and expand digital payments (see section 2e).

 The quality of reporting was good as reflected by aide-memoires and 13 ISRs, where implementation
 progress was well summarized along with arising issues and mitigating measures. The Mid-Term Review of
 the parent project was conducted as planned in 2018, and the review informed AF design. Manila-based
 Bank Team members maintained regular communications with DSWD. Before the COVID-19 pandemic,
 the Bank Team carried out trips to regions to assess progress in the field. These field missions helped the
 Bank Team and government representative to fully understand and discuss implementation challenges and
 potential solutions.

 The Bank's supervision and implementation support missions were joined by the Asian Development Bank,
 UNICEF, and Australia’s DFAT teams to reduce the workload of DSWD (ICR, p. 22).




  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The development objective was reasonably clear and measurable, although support to CCT could have
 been explicitly specified at the outset. Intended outcomes were reflected by the selected indicators.
 Baselines were available. Periodic data would provide updates on program progress. DSWD also planned
 to undertake annual spot checks and impact evaluation as conditions for the loan (ICR, p. 22).



                                                                                                 Page 10 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Social Welfare Development and Reform II (P153744)




b. M&E Implementation
  Overall M&E implementation was adequate overall, but with moderate shortcomings in some areas.
  Annual spot checks were delayed in 2020 and 2021 because DSWD faced understandable challenges in
  performing them during the COVID-19 pandemic. There were concerns about the discrepancy in school
  enrollment rates between administrative data and spot checks, but there was not enough time to fully
  address the issue by the project closing date in 2022. Although, the project attempted to track all children
  in beneficiary households by changing an indicator from “monitored” children in schools to “eligible”
  children in the households, DSWD’s reports continued to present only “monitored” children’s outcomes as
  the Pantawid Pamilya Information System was not modified accordingly.



c. M&E Utilization
  According to the ICR (p. 22), M&E findings informed policy decisions, such as for increasing the CCT
  benefit amount. The nominal value of the grant had not been adjusted since it was piloted in 2007,
  despite an average annual inflation rate at 3.5 percent from 2007 to 2017. M&E findings were also
  expected to inform Government decisions to increase grant amounts under future adjustments in
  accordance with the 4Ps law (ICR, p. 23). As noted in section 7, the ICR (p. 23) stated that M&E findings
  informed the design of “Beneficiary FIRST Social Protection Project” (P174066), that aims at mitigating
  the impact of COVID-19 on the welfare of low-income households, promoting the inclusion of pregnant
  women and young children, and strengthening data validation through data interoperability among
  various databases.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Overview: The overall safeguards rating in the Operations Portal was satisfactory.

   The project was classified as Category B under Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01). It did not support
   civil works, and was not expected to have environmental impacts, however, according to the Integrated
   Safeguards Data Sheet at the appraisal stage, dated October 9, 2015, OP 4.01 was triggered on account of
   the need to assess the social impacts on beneficiaries and other major stakeholders, including Indigenous
   Peoples (IP) under OP 4.10. The ICR (p. 23) highlighted the fact that the CCT Program under its first phase,
   2010-2015, had already extended efforts to advance inclusion, gender aspects and cultural sensitivity.

   Mainstreaming efforts were integrated in the entire DSWD organization with the formation of national and
   regional teams for Gender and Development, and Indigenous People, including hiring of indigenous staff.
   Support for gender and IP development has been effectively mainstreamed in operational information

                                                                                                   Page 11 of 14
        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
        Social Welfare Development and Reform II (P153744)



   systems, operations manual, FDS, and social marketing. Tracking and reporting of compliance were
   enabled using sex- and ethnicity-disaggregated data. Under the Grievance Redress Information System,
   gender- and culture-sensitive guidelines, reporting, and referral systems were operationalized. FDS and
   social marketing activities were regularly reviewed and updated to be more gender-responsive and sensitive
   to the needs of IP grantees. The inclusion of IPs was institutionalized under an Indigenous Peoples
   Participation Framework that was first introduced in 2015 and expanded during this project to incorporate
   strategies around sustainability and exit of IP grantees. The project broadened the capture and inclusion of
   poor and vulnerable IP households, with substantial assistance provided during the COVID-19 pandemic.
   Institutional mechanisms that promoted participation in decision making and leadership roles included IP
   representation in regional, provincial, and municipal interagency committees. Overall safeguards rating
   recorded in the Operations Portal was satisfactory.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management was undertaken through existing government mechanisms and accounting system.
   Arrangements for both the original project and AF were on a reimbursement basis. DSWD was required to
   monitor the liquidation of CCT grants, maintain a grievance monitoring system, and conduct capacity
   building for financial management personnel.

   Overall financial management performance, including maintenance of accounting records, was rated
   moderately satisfactory for most of the implementation period. There were variable delays in the early
   stages of the project, and there were security challenges in the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region where
   payouts were less frequent. No procurement was planned or conducted under IBRD funding.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None reported.



d. Other
   --



11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                           ICR                    IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                           Satisfactory          Satisfactory



                                                                                                    Page 12 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Social Welfare Development and Reform II (P153744)



Bank Performance                Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                  Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                  ---                   High


12. Lessons

The ICR (pp. 25-27) offered several lessons and recommendations, including the following lessons
re-stated by IEG Review:

Flexibility in CCT conditionalities allows uninterrupted grant support for children from poor
households. Under normal circumstances, it is understood that CCT beneficiaries would need to
comply with specified conditions to receive cash grants. However, during the COVID-19 pandemic, it
was difficult for beneficiaries to attend schools or to participate in Family Development sessions and
visit health facilities for checkup and immunizations. DSWD suspended CCT conditions in 2020,
and, in 2021, it introduced new flexible conditions, including remote learning modalities to maintain a
regular flow of grant transfers.

Maintaining the accuracy of social protection targeting systems can promote the inclusion of
vulnerable population groups and can contribute to a stronger impact on poverty reduction
and human capital accumulation. Under the project, targeting accuracy progressively diminished
as the share of poor beneficiaries belonging to the bottom two quintiles declined because of limited
replacement of exit beneficiaries. Program coverage of pregnant women and young children
declined as health grants were provided without varying by the number of eligible children, thus
providing little incentive to report new pregnancies, and contributing to a decreasing coverage of
new pregnancies and young children. This lesson led to a pertinent ICR recommendation for
investing in a dynamic social registry that can receive frequent updates from various sources, and
for designing effective incentives that would promote the inclusion of pregnancies and newborns in
program monitoring.

Strengthening social protection delivery systems beyond 4Ps CCT can make systems more
adaptive to shocks. Under the project, the response to the COVID-19 pandemic highlighted the
need to further strengthen delivery systems. The project helped the government early response to
the pandemic through timely emergency support for 4Ps CCT beneficiaries, but support to additional
beneficiaries (e.g., new poor) encountered difficulties, as there was no accurate and updated social
registry. Application forms were manual and payments were made mostly in cash. This experience
raised another ICR recommendation to make the system more adaptive to shocks, including for
natural disasters, by further investing in DSWD’s capacity, social registries, information technology
and payment mechanisms that can facilitate timely inclusion of eligible populations not covered in
regular social protection programs like 4Ps. Such investments, including the expansion of digital
payments, can provide added attention to the least financially-included areas through collaboration
with the private sector and financial service providers.



13. Assessment Recommended?

                                                                                                   Page 13 of 14
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Social Welfare Development and Reform II (P153744)




  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provided a clear overview of the project experience. It was results-oriented, aligned to stated
objectives, and very candid. It aptly explained the progression of the CCT program from its initial phase to the
current project and onward to the follow-on operation. Its analysis was meticulous and the conclusions were
based on adequate evidence, where some gaps were adequately explained by the ICR. Beyond project
intended results, the ICR also properly presented available evidence on the project’s long-term outcomes in its
contribution to reducing poverty and inequality. Lessons were derived from project experience and the ICR
systematically connected them to future recommendations. The ICR was succinct and followed established
guidelines. It was internally consistent. Apart from some weaknesses in addressing efficiency, the overall
quality of the ICR was high.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       High




                                                                                                   Page 14 of 14
