      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Uzbekistan Reforms for Transition DPO (P166019)



                                                                                   Report Number: ICRR0023053

1. Operation Information



 Operation ID                                Operation Name
 P166019                                     Uzbekistan Reforms for Transition DPO

 Country                                     Practice Area (Lead)
 Uzbekistan                                  Macroeconomics, Trade and Investment



  Non-Programmatic DPF

  L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                   Total Financing (USD)
  IDA-62840                                  31-Dec-2019                                         500,000,000.00

  Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
  26-Jun-2018                                31-Dec-2019

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                               Co-financing (USD)

  Original Commitment                          500,000,000.00                                                0.00

  Revised Commitment                           500,000,000.00                                                0.00

  Actual                                       500,000,000.00                                                0.00




 Prepared by                  Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Giuseppe Iarossi             Clay Wescott                 Jennifer L. Keller              IEGEC




2. Program Objectives and Pillars/Policy Areas
DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives

The development objective of this DPO is to support Uzbekistan's economic transformation to a market
economy.

(PAD p. 15). For this ICRR, the objectives of the operation are taken to be:


                                                                                                    Page 1 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Uzbekistan Reforms for Transition DPO (P166019)



      Strengthening the foundations for sustainable economic growth and a resilient macro-financial
       framework
      Supporting market formation for private sector development
      Enabling Job Creation and Managing Social Risks


b. Pillars/Policy Areas
The DPO had three objectives:

Objective 1 - Strengthening the foundations for sustainable economic growth and a resilient macro-financial
framework – was supported by three policy areas: (i) increasing economic growth by reducing exchange rate
and monetary distortions, and greater private sector access to foreign exchange; (ii) improving financial sector
stability to support a stable economic growth; and (iii) strengthening fiscal sustainability through tariff reforms
and financial transparency of SOEs.

Objective 2 - Supporting market formation for private sector development – was supported by three policy
areas: (i) increasing flexibility in domestic relative prices, along with a transparent business environment; (ii)
fostering external trade to increase investment, growth and jobs, and market-based prices; and (iii) increasing
agricultural productivity and efficiency to promote job growth and wages.

Objective 3 - Enabling job creation and managing social risks -was supported by two policy areas: (i)
facilitating employment through greater options in contracting formal workers; and (ii) developing effective
social safety nets.


c. Comments on Program Cost, Financing and Dates

This operation is an IDA US$ 500,000,000 credit. The Bank approved it on June 26, 2018, it became effective on
July 20, 2018, and closed on Dec. 31, 2019. The amount disbursed was US$ 500,000,000.


3. Relevance of Design

a. Relevance of Objectives

 Uzbekistan emerged from a legacy of central planning characterized by a highly distorted economy, with
 administered prices, trade controls, and a dominant state-owned enterprise sector. In late 2016, the authorities
 unexpectedly announced an ambitious strategy to transition the country to a market economy. In 2017, they
 liberalized the exchange rate, freed prices, reduced trade restrictions, and created greater space for the
 domestic private sector and foreign capital. This DPO aimed to bolster the initial reforms by focusing on three
 areas.

      a. Strengthening the foundations for sustainable economic growth and a resilient macro-financial
         framework.




                                                                                                       Page 2 of 17
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Uzbekistan Reforms for Transition DPO (P166019)



As a legacy of the centralized economy, the Uzbek forex market had a very large parallel exchange rate
premium. The government aimed to liberalize the foreign exchange market through a series of reforms,
including the elimination of surrender requirements - supported by this DPO (along with a large devaluation
of the foreign exchange rate and a move to a managed exchange rate float). In addition, the country had an
extensive SOE sector. The operations of over 2,000 SOEs and other public sector activities collectively
represent about half of Uzbekistan's GDP, and SOEs account for about 18 percent of employment. Among
other subsidies, the large SOEs sector had preferential access to credit. Such exposure implied a significant
credit risk for the financial sector, which this operation proposed to address by upgrading prudential
regulations and stress testing.



    a. Supporting market formation for private sector development.

The Uzbek private sector had limited access to necessary factors of production, including land, labor, and
capital. State-owned enterprises (SOEs) dominated the country's areas of comparative advantage.
Consequently, Uzbekistan's firm creation was among the lowest compared with regional and income-group
peers; unemployment was high, and private firms remained disproportionately small. The state
disproportionately directed resources to SOEs. In particular, the two largest energy SOEs, Uzbekenergo (UE)
and Uzbekneftegaz (UNG), benefitted from several subsidies with significant fiscal implications, such as
energy price subsidies. Similarly, Uzbekistan's agriculture sector had poor performance because of the
misallocation of land, among other distortions. While horticulture was highly productive, generating 50 percent
of the value of crop production and 40 percent of gross agricultural output from only about 10 percent of the
total arable land, the dominant state agricultural system focused on cotton and wheat. Hence the operation
included measures aimed at removing price controls, reducing tariffs, and liberalizing the cotton and wheat
markets.



    a. Enabling Job Creation and Managing Social Risks.

The reforms supported by this DPO could have possible negative impacts on vulnerable groups during the
economic transition. Hence the operation included mitigating measures such as the scaling up of social safety
nets and facilitating the movement of workers from low-value-added to high-value-added sectors.

Finally, the project's objectives are highly relevant to the Bank strategy and the current government strategy as
expressed in the latest National Development Strategy for 2022–2026, which continues to put the market
transition at the center of its development goals. In particular, the government aims to develop a robust
national economy that ensures rapid growth through support to entrepreneurial activity, expanding exports,
improving the investment climate, reducing inflation, and improving public debt management. In addition, the
objectives are aligned with the analytical work of the Bank, as reflected in the latest SCD - Toward a
Prosperous and Inclusive Future – which identifies a strong private sector and an enabling state as key pillars
of the development process of Uzbekistan. These objectives require attention to the labor market, the
regulatory environment, trade liberalization, a reduction in SOEs, the impact of public investments, and public
accountability. (SCD, p 132)


b. Relevance of Prior Actions

                                                                                                   Page 3 of 17
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Uzbekistan Reforms for Transition DPO (P166019)




Rationale

Objective 1:Strengthening the foundations for sustainable economic growth and a resilient
macro-financial framework
PA1. The Recipient, through the Central Bank of Uzbekistan (CBU) has eliminated all foreign
exchange surrender requirements on all export earnings.
PA2. The Recipient, through the CBU has issued revised prudential regulations on banking capital
adequacy, liquidity, and asset classification to improve compliance with international financial
regulatory standards in line with the Basel Core Principles.
PA3. The Recipient has adopted measures requiring the CBU to conduct annual stress tests on
commercial banks in line with international best practices.
PA4. The Recipient has adopted key measures to promote financial recovery and transparency of
Uzbekenergo and Uzbekneftegaz, through: (i) approval of fuel and electricity tariff adjustments; (ii)
introduction of differentiated electricity tariffs to improve efficiency; and iii) adoption of policy
requirements for Uzbekenergo and Uzbekneftegaz on financial statement audits’ compliance with
the international financial reporting standards.
Objective 2: Supporting market formation for private sector development
PA5. The Recipient has (i) removed regulatory price controls for a list of key products, in particular
production inputs and raw materials and; (ii) adopted requirements for a set of products to be
transacted through commodity exchanges, in order to develop market institutions and to liberalize
prices.
PA6. The Recipient has reduced average custom tariff rates.
PA7. The Recipient has increased the regulated purchase price paid for cotton closer to the
international market price aimed to increase cotton productivity and to promote a more efficient
use of resources (including land, water and fertilizer).
PA8. The Recipient has reduced the land area mandatorily assigned to grow cotton and grain in
order to support the raise of productivity and to promote a more efficient use of resources
(including land, water and fertilizer).
Objective 3: Enabling Job Creation and Managing Social Risks
PA9. The Recipient, through its Executive branch, has submitted to its Parliament, for approval
thereof, the draft amendments to the Labor Code to expand formal contracts to part-time and
temporary workers.
PA10. The Recipient has increased the social safety nets financial support for vulnerable groups,
including low-income families and families with dependent children.

First objective: Strengthening the foundations for sustainable economic growth and a resilient macro-
financial framework.



      PA1 required the elimination of the surrender requirement on foreign exchange. Foreign exchange
       surrender requirements represented a major distortion in the economy, requiring, in many cases, up
       to 100% of proceeds by exporters, often pre-paid before contract execution and delivery. The private
       sector had reduced access to foreign currency because of this surrender requirement. This harmed its
       ability to acquire imported inputs and created distortions in the forex market, representing an economic
       growth obstacle. Consequently, PA1 reduced foreign exchange distortions and facilitated access to
       foreign currency for the private sector (relevance of PA1: satisfactory).

                                                                                                     Page 4 of 17
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Uzbekistan Reforms for Transition DPO (P166019)



     PA2 and PA3 involved adopting regulations requiring banks to improve data quality submitted to the
      Central Bank to allow risk-based supervision by the Central Bank (PA2) and adopting measures to
      require the Central Bank to conduct annual stress testing of commercial banks (PA3). Direct lending to
      the SOE sector exposed the financial sector to underlying credit risk. Upgrading the prudential
      regulations and stress-testing would contain such potential financial risk. Through improved standards
      and required stress testing, PA2 and PA3 would increase financial sector stability (relevance of PA2:
      satisfactory; relevance of PA3: satisfactory).
     PA4 required the reduction of current spending and net lending to the two largest SOEs and publishing
      IFRS-compliant financial statements for prior years. In 2017 budget outturns, current spending, and net
      lending to Uzbekenergo and Uzbekneftegaz amounted to 1.2% of GDP. The objective was to bring fiscal
      policy (including off-budget operations) towards a more sustainable path. State-owned enterprises
      (SOEs), and in particular Uzbekneftegaz (UNG) and Uzbekenergo (UE), were benefitting from below-
      cost recovery electricity and natural gas tariffs. This compromised their financial and technical
      performance and required the adoption of a plan to increase electricity and natural gas tariffs to achieve
      cost recovery and the application of differentiated tariffs to promote more efficient energy use. PA4 also
      required the introduction of international financial reporting standards, a practice rarely adopted in the
      country. The reform of the tariff structure in the two large SOEs aimed to harden budget constraints,
      facilitate competition in these markets by aligning prices to production costs, and reduce pressures for
      (subsidized) off-budget lending. (Relevance of PA4: satisfactory).

Second objective: supporting market formation for private sector development.

     PA5 required the elimination of price controls on raw materials and inputs and promoted the exchange
      of products through a liberalized market. Goods subject to this action were critical raw materials and
      production inputs, including gasoline extraction, cathode copper, copper wire, secondary aluminum,
      metal zinc, technical kerosene, polypropylene, polyethylene, technical Sulphur, caustic ash, rolled
      ferrous metals, cement, cement clinker, construction glass, sugar, and barley. Price controls had limited
      opportunities for other economic agents to enter the market and compete. These reforms marked the
      shift from a state-led approach to managing the economy to one driven by the private sector. The
      actions of PA5 support more flexible domestic relative prices and a more transparent business
      environment. By doing so, these actions support the development of the private sector (relevance of
      PA5: satisfactory).

     PA6 required reducing average tariff rates. In Uzbekistan, 10,800 industrial items were subject to import
      tariffs, with the weighted average import tariff estimated at 13.9 percent. The lowering of tariffs aimed at
      reducing peak rates to reduce tariff dispersion. This action aimed to improve the competitiveness of
      import-intensive companies to help develop the private sector by lowering production costs and
      increasing competition. By facilitating trade and improving the investment regime (bringing domestic
      prices closer to international prices), PA6 is appropriate for achieving the PDO (relevance of PA6:
      satisfactory).

     PA7 and PA8 sought to bring the regulated price of cotton closer to international prices (PA7) and
      increase the efficient use of resources to grow cotton and grain (PA8). Cotton was subject to regulated
      prices, and cotton and wheat were subject to regulated land allocation. In addition, since SOEs
      dominated agriculture, a significant share of the production was acquired by SOEs under direct, non-
      market allocation mechanisms, distorting the market, the efficient allocation of resources, and
      opportunities for other economic agents. These PAs eliminate price distortions and foster a flexible


                                                                                                    Page 5 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Uzbekistan Reforms for Transition DPO (P166019)



         market to increase agricultural productivity and develop the private sector (relevance of PA7:
         satisfactory; relevance of PA8: satisfactory).

 Third objective: enabling Job Creation and Managing Social Risks.

       PA9 required submitting for parliamentary approval amendments to the labor code to expand formal
         contracts to part-time and temporary workers. The objective was to facilitate labor mobility and
         participation. Amendments to the Labor Code to issue formal contracts (PA9) would increase labor
         mobility and participation and enable job creation, an objective of the project. The Labor Code didn't
         apply to temporary and part-time jobs before this PA. Formalizing jobs better protects workers and may
         contribute to a more stable supply of jobs (relevance of PA9: satisfactory).

       PA10 includes measures to support vulnerable groups through financial support. Price and utility
         reforms supported by the project negatively affect some low-income families. Hence, to assure the
         social acceptability of reforms, this PA10 aimed at mitigating these risks by providing vulnerable groups
         with direct financial support. To provide targeted assistance to low-income families, the government
         relied on a local public institution (Mahalla). However, the Mahalla system had several problems related
         to the targeting mechanisms, the processes followed, the integration of various benefits into a single
         well-targeted cash allowance, and the sizing of the benefit to better tailor benefits to specific conditions
         of beneficiary families. The operation did not address these constraints to ensure a proper allocation of
         benefits (relevance of PA10: moderately satisfactory).



Rating

Satisfactory


4. Relevance of Results Indicators

Rationale

First objective: Strengthening the foundations for sustainable economic growth and a resilient
macro-financial framework.

       RI1 measures the percentage of foreign exchange earned by exporters and surrendered to the
        government. A reliable Central Bank source collected the data, which was easily accessible. It is
        noteworthy that the ICR is not clear on the RI used (see Section 10). The presumed indicator is
        not a repetition of the PA. The PA refers to eliminating this requirement, and the
        indicator measures the % of currency surrendered. (Relevance of RI1: satisfactory).
       RI2 sought to measure the impact of PA2 toward the objective by verifying the delivery of the data
        needed (on capital, asset classification, and liquidity) by the Central Bank to properly assess the
        financial system's stability in line with the Basel Core Principles. PA2 called for revised prudential
        regulations to be approved, while RI2 measured that the required reporting called for under these
        regulations was taking place. (Relevance of RI2: satisfactory).
       RI3 sought to measure the impact of PA3 toward the objective by verifying the implementation of
        at least four stress tests in 4 large representative banks. The indicator measures the actual

                                                                                                       Page 6 of 17
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Uzbekistan Reforms for Transition DPO (P166019)



      conduct of the verification by the Central Bank in line with the Basel Core Principles and
      collaboration with the Bank, allowing for measuring financial risks in the financial system. The DPO
      targeted four banks representative of three different types of financial institutions: two large state-
      owned banks, a joint-stock bank, and a private bank. The tests assumed a significant depreciation
      of the local currency, a slowdown of economic activity, and an increase in CBU's interest
      rate. (Relevance of RI3: satisfactory).
     RI4 sought to measure the impact of PA4 toward the objective by measuring the effects of
      measures aiming at ensuring financial recovery of the two largest SOEs through the approval of
      fuel and electricity tariff adjustments and the introduction of differentiated electricity tariffs which
      would allow them to achieve cost-recovery and realign revenues with costs. However, while the RI
      captured budget outturns, it does not directly measure to effect of the PA on the SOEs' financial
      positions (relevance of RI4: moderately satisfactory).

Second objective: supporting market formation for private sector development.

     RI5 sought to measure the impact of PA5 toward the objective by measuring the value of annual
      trading in the Commodity Exchange for a group of deregulated products. The indicator measures
      the outcome of measures supported by the PA (eliminating price controls and improving
      regulations for Commodity exchange), which aim at creating functioning markets where the
      government doesn't subsidize prices to foster the participation of the private sector. However, it
      does not control for other factors that could impact the value of trading, such as changes in
      exchange rates. It would be better if the indicator was scaled (like the share of exports). The data
      source is reliable – the Uzbekistan Commodity Exchange website and easily available (relevance
      of RI5: moderately satisfactory).
     RI6 sought to measure the impact of PA6 toward the objective by measuring the average custom
      tariff on imported products. However, the indicator used measures the average custom tariff for all
      products using the WTO as a source, not just the list of intermediate and raw materials, which was
      the intention of the PA (relevance of RI6: unsatisfactory).
     RI7 sought to measure the impact of PA7 toward the objective, by measuring the difference
      between the domestic and international cotton prices. The indicator measures the extent of price
      controls that prevent the efficient use of resources. The source of the data is reliable - the Ministry
      of Agriculture – and consistently available (relevance of RI7: satisfactory).
     RI8 sought to measure the impact of PA8 toward the objective by measuring the hectares of land
      mandated for growing cotton or grain. These indicators measure the reduction in land compulsorily
      allocated for cotton and grain production to promote productivity and efficiency in the use of
      resources. However, the measure does not ensure that landowners use land efficiently. The data
      comes from a reliable and available source, the Ministry of Agriculture. (relevance of RI8:
      moderately satisfactory).

Third objective: enabling Job Creation and Managing Social Risks.

     RI9 sought to measure the impact of PA9 toward the objective by measuring the number of
      employees with part-time and temporary formal employment contracts. The RI adequately
      measured the impact of the PA (in expanding formal employment) Data comes from the Ministry of
      Labor (relevance of RI9: satisfactory).
     RI10 sought to measure the impact of PA10 toward the objective by measuring the number of
      beneficiaries of social safety nets, as identified by the Mahalla system, which is linked to the


                                                                                                     Page 7 of 17
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Uzbekistan Reforms for Transition DPO (P166019)



      objective of managing social risks. However, the indicator does not target those who would have
      been impacted by the price and utility reforms. The data is reliable and is estimated by the Bank
      staff using data from the Ministry of Finance (relevance of RI10: moderately satisfactory).

                                                                     Actual   Most
                                                                   Change Recent
     Description                     Baseline Target       Actual
                                                                      in RI  Value         RI
    [assigning a Associated   RI    [including [including Value as
                                                                   Relative Available Achievement
 number to each    PA(s) Relevance units and units and of Target
                                                                        to   [if not     Rating
         RI]                           date]      date]    Date
                                                                   Targeted target
                                                                   Change    date]
Objective 1: Strengthening the foundations for sustainable economic growth and a resilient
macro-financial framework
  RI1: Surrender
requirements on                         25          0         0
                                                                   100% of
       foreign
                    PA1        S                                   targeted               High
exchange export                      01-Sep- 01-Jan- 08-Dec-
                                                                    change
      earnings                         2017       2019     2021
   (percentage)
RI2: Commercial
  bank reporting
                                        No        Yes       Yes
  framework on                                                     100% of
   capital, asset   PA2        S                                   targeted               High
                                     01-Sep- 01-Jan- 08-Dec-
   classification,                                                  change
                                       2017       2019     2021
    and liquidity
      (Yes/No)
     RI3: Stress
      testing of
    commercial
  banks and the
                                        No        Yes       Yes
 conclusion of at                                                  100% of
 least one round    PA3        S                                   targeted            Substantial
                                     01-Sep- 01-Jan- 08-Dec-
  of stress tests                                                   change
                                       2017       2019     2021
       on four
  representative
    commercial
 banks (Yes/No)
RI4: Augmented
budget outturns
        on tax
  expenditures,                        1.20       0.80      0.10     Over
current spending                                                   100% of
                    PA4       MS                                                       Substantial
 and net lending                     01-Sep- 01-Jan- 08-Dec- targeted
to Uzbekenergo                         2017       2019     2021     change
         and
  Uzbekneftegaz
 (share of GDP)


                                                                                                 Page 8 of 17
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                      Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Uzbekistan Reforms for Transition DPO (P166019)



Objective 2: Supporting market formation for private sector development
RI5: Annual total
      trading of
                                                          22.854
  products with
                                     8 billion 16 billion            Over
    deregulated
                                                           billion 100% of
       prices in   PA5       MS                                                       High
                                     01-Sep- 01-Jan-               targeted
    Commodity
                                      2017       2019     08-Dec- change
     Exchange
                                                           2021
  (number, '000
         UZS)
                                       15.3      7.99       7.6      Over
  RI6: Average
                                                                   100% of
custom tariff rate PA6        U                                                      Modest
                                     01-Sep- 01-Jan- 08-Dec- targeted
   (percentage)
                                      2017       2019      2021     change
 RI7: Difference
       between
                                        20        10          0      Over
      domestic
                                                                   100% of
average price for  PA7        S                                                       High
                                     01-Sep- 01-Jan- 08-Dec- targeted
     cotton and
                                      2017       2019      2021     change
   international
         price
                                    1,285,500 1,150,000 1,005,000
 RI8: Mandatory                                                      Over
                                     hectares hectares hectares
    hectares for                                                   100% of
                   PA8       MS                                                       High
 growing cotton                                                    targeted
                                     01-Sep- 01-Jan- 08-Dec-
     (Hectares)                                                     change
                                      2017       2019      2021
         AND
                                    1,329,500 1,289,500 1,239,000
                                                                     Over
                                     hectares hectares hectares
 RI8: Mandatory                                                    100% of
                   PA8       MS                                                       High
    hectares for                                                   targeted
                                     01-Sep-    01-Jan- 08-Dec-
  growing grain                                                     change
                                      2017       2019      2021
     (Hectares)
Objective 3: Enabling Job Creation and Managing Social Risks
 RI9: Number of
 employees with
  part-time and                          0      90,000 1,000,000 Over
     temporary                                                     100% of
                   PA9        S                                                       High
        formal                       01-Sep- 01-Jan- 08-Dec- targeted
   employment                         2017       2019      2021     change
      contracts
      (Number)
         RI10:
                                     435,000 500,000                 Over 1,560,000
 Beneficiaries of
                                                                   100% of
social safety net PA10       MS                                                     Substantial
                                     01-Sep- 01-Jan-               targeted 13-May-
      programs
                                      2017       2019               change   2022
      (Number)


                                                                                          Page 9 of 17
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  Uzbekistan Reforms for Transition DPO (P166019)




   Rating

   Moderately Satisfactory

   5. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               Strengthening the macro-financial foundations for sustainable economic growth.

               Rationale
               The Bank intended to achieve the objective through four prior actions and was measured by four results
               indicators. The 'elimination of all foreign exchange surrender requirements on all export earnings' had a
               baseline value of 25 percent surrender requirement on foreign exchange from export earnings (September
               2017), with a target of 'no surrender requirement on foreign exchange from export earnings.' At the time of the
               recording (June 2019) the objective of eliminating this requirement was achieved (RI1 achievement rating:
               high). Second, the government has revised prudential regulations on banking capital adequacy, liquidity, and
               asset classification to improve compliance with international financial regulatory standards in line with the
               Basel Core Principles. The baseline (September 2017) was 'Current reporting framework on capital, asset
               classification, and liquidity does not ensure a proper reflection of banks' risks.' The target was 'Improved data
               quality from banks is implemented and permits adoption of risk-based supervision plan for onsite inspections.'
               (June 2019) The target was achieved (RI2 achievement rating: high). Third, 'the government has adopted
               measures requiring the CBU to conduct annual stress tests on commercial banks in line with international
               best practices.' The baseline was 'No stress testing of Banks.' (September 2017) The target was 'The CBU
               has developed guidelines for regular stress testing of commercial banks and has conducted at least one
               round of stress tests on four representative commercial banks.' (June 2019) The target was achieved (RI3
               achievement rating: Substantial). A fourth prior action is promoting financial recovery and transparency of
               two SOEs (Uzbekenergo and Uzbekneftegaz), through fuel and electricity tariff adjustments and financial
               statement audit compliance. The RI to measure efficacy-related statements of budget outturns, with a
               baseline value of ‘2017 augmented budget outturns on tax expenditures, current spending, and net lending to
               Uzbekenergo and Uzbekneftegaz amount to 1.2% of GDP. The SOEs haven’t published IFRS-compliant
               financial statements (December 2017), and a target of ‘2018 augmented budget outturns on tax expenditures,
               current spending, and net lending to Uzbekenergo and Uzbekneftegaz amount to less than 0.8% of GDP.’
               The government published IFRIS-compliant financial statements for prior years (2015 and 2016). The
               government achieved the objective well above target, although the measure did not directly capture the
               impact of tariff adjustments (RI4 achievement rating: Substantial).

               The government achieved all result indicators on time. The abolition of the surrender requirement continues
               to hold. Further, the CBU keeps collecting data from banks and has expanded stress testing to all commercial
               banks. The targeted improvement on the budget outlays of the two major SOEs was met in end-2018 and has




                                                                                                                 Page 10 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Uzbekistan Reforms for Transition DPO (P166019)



not been exceeded since, although the measures did not capture the impact of tariffs adjustments. All these
measures strengthened the macro-financial resilience of the Uzbek economy.



Rating

Satisfactory

OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Supporting market formation for private sector development.




Rationale
The indicators used for this objective were five. First, 'The government has (i) removed regulatory price
controls for a list of key products, in particular, production inputs and raw materials, and; (ii) adopted
requirements for a set of products to be transacted through commodity exchanges, to develop market
institutions and to liberalize prices.' The baseline (2017) was 'Annual total trading of products with
deregulated prices (gasoline extraction, cathode copper, copper wire, secondary aluminum, metal zinc,
technical kerosene, polypropylene, polyethylene, technical Sulphur, caustic ash, rolled ferrous metals,
cement, cement clinker, construction glass, sugar, barley) in Commodity Exchange amounts to UZS 8 trillion.'
The target was 'Annual total trading of products with deregulated prices (gasoline extraction, cathode copper,
copper wire, secondary aluminum, metal zinc, technical kerosene, polypropylene, polyethylene, technical
Sulphur, caustic ash, rolled ferrous metals, cement, cement clinker, construction glass, sugar, barley) in
Commodity Exchange increases to UZS 16 trillion.' (2018) The target was achieved (RI5 achievement
rating: high). Second, 'The Recipient has reduced average custom tariff rates.' The baseline (September
2017) was 'Average custom tariff rate is 15.3%.' The target was 'Average custom tariff rate is less than 8%.'
(June 2019). The government achieved the target in part achieved because it measured all the imports not
only the deregulated goods (RI6 achievement rating: Modest). Third, 'The Recipient has increased the
regulated purchase price paid for cotton closer to the international market price aimed to increase cotton
productivity and to promote a more efficient use of resources (including land, water and fertilizer).' The
baseline (September 2017) was the 'Difference between domestic average price for cotton and international
price is more than 20 percent.' The target was 'Difference between domestic average price for cotton and
international price is 10 percent or less.' (June 2019) The target was achieved (RI7 achievement rating:
high). Fourth and fifth, 'The Recipient has reduced the land area mandatorily assigned to grow cotton and
grain to support the rise of productivity and to promote a more efficient use of resources (including land, water
and fertilizer).' The baseline was 'Mandatory hectares for growing is 1,285,500 ha. for cotton and 1,329,500
ha. for grain.' (September 2017) The target was 'Mandatory hectares for growing cotton is reduced by
135,000 ha. and grain by 40,000 ha.' (June 2019) The target was achieved (RI8 achievement rating: high).

The government achieved all result indicators on time. However, in the commodity exchanges dominant
purchasers or suppliers such as SOEs stifle competition and exert near-monopoly or near-monopsony
powers. This did not impact the project's tariff result indicator, which remains below 8 percent, although the
indicator has some limitations. By 2021 the market-based reforms of reduction in mandatory cotton acreage
by 20% since 2016 and near convergence of the domestic price with export parity price and moving up the

                                                                                                  Page 11 of 17
                         Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                         Uzbekistan Reforms for Transition DPO (P166019)



                      value chain so that mainly processed cotton is exported (in place of raw cotton previously). Acreage reduction
                      is less with grains due to food security concerns, hindering the transition to higher-value products such as
                      horticulture. Overall, the DPO met the goal of supporting private-sector development.



                      Rating

                      Satisfactory

                      OBJECTIVE 3
                      Objective
                      Enabling Job Creation and Managing Social Risks




                      Rationale
                        The indicators used for this objective were two. First, 'Number of employees with part-time and temporary
                        formal employment contracts.' The baseline (September 2017) was zero - No employees with part-time and
                        temporary formal employment contracts.' The target was 'Employees with part-time and temporary formal
                        employment contracts are 90,000 or more, including the participation of female workers of 30,000 or more'
                        (June 2019). The operation achieved the target. PA9 supported preparation of relevant amendments to the
                        labor code and submission to Parliament. These were adopted, and provided the legal basis for the new
                        contracts (RI9 achievement rating: high). Second, 'The Recipient has increased the social safety nets
                        financial support for vulnerable groups, including low-income families and families with dependent children.'
                        The baseline (March 2017) was 'Budget includes funding for 435,500 beneficiaries, including low-income
                        families and families with dependent children.' The target was 'Budget includes funding for 500,000
                        beneficiaries, including low-income families and families with dependent children.' (June 2019). The target
                        was achieved (RI10 achievement rating: Substantial).

                        The government achieved all result indicators on time. The government completed a significant overhaul of the
                        labor code in 2021 (supported under a subsequent DPO). Over one million workers are now estimated to have
                        these contracts. Similarly, over 1.5 million families are beneficiaries of social protection reforms. However, the
                        targeting of beneficiaries presented some known shortcomings that the project did not address.




                      Rating

                      Moderately Satisfactory


OVERALL EFF TBL OLD




Overall Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
Rationale
                                                                                                                        Page 12 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Uzbekistan Reforms for Transition DPO (P166019)




Most of the targets in the operation were achieved, with most result indicators being relevant to the project's
objectives. In a few instances the indicators could not accurately measure the objective of the PA, so other
information had to be brought in to supplement the RI. Objectives 1 and 2 are rated satisfactory, and Objective 3
is rated moderately satisfactory, giving an overall efficacy rating of satisfactory.



Overall Efficacy Rating
Satisfactory


6. Outcome

Rationale

The relevance of prior actions was satisfactory, and efficacy was satisfactory. The operation supported the
government of Uzbekistan in moving towards a market economy by removing macro distortions and risks,
stimulating private sector activity, and safeguarding those vulnerable to transition shocks. All actions were
relevant, and results continue to be relevant. The Bank linked most prior actions to achieving project objectives,
and most indicators were appropriate.


a. Rating

Satisfactory

7. Risk to Development Outcome

IEG agrees with the ICR that Uzbekistan’s authorities are strongly committed to their reform vision and 2022-
2026 strategy, implementing sequenced reforms enhancing market liberalization, increasing productivity,
improving the investment climate, supporting exports, and attracting FDIs in partnership with the Bank.
These reforms are encountering popular support, as shown by numerous nationally representative surveys
of public sentiment to reforms conducted by the World Bank, where over 80 percent of the population
believes that the country is headed in the right direction.

Some risks remain; for example, SOE reforms are only at an initial stage, and the transition will require
carefully designed and sequenced reforms on competition and budget constraints. The risk of elite capture is
still present given the high centralization and low administrative capacity. Finally, regional instability
(Afghanistan, Ukraine, global uncertainty) can increase the risk of sustained reforms if these external shocks
compromise the economic dividends of the reforms and thus generate popular discontent.


 8. Assessment of Bank Performance

 a. Bank Performance – Design

                                                                                                    Page 13 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Uzbekistan Reforms for Transition DPO (P166019)




Rationale


The SCD informed the operation, along with technical work on foreign exchange convertibility, financial
sector strengthening, energy pricing and efficiency, investment climate, entrepreneurship, and agricultural
modernization, as well as the results of the Performance and Learning Review (2018). These analytical
pieces properly position the current status of the country's economy (being in an early stage of transition)
and properly identify the relevant constraints, risks, and policy options. Most of the PAs and RIs are based
on good analytical work. However, there are instances where the PAs and RIs do not correspond to the
operation's objective, such as the import tariff reduction on all imported goods or the targeting of
beneficiaries. In addition, the PAD makes a very short reference to three high-level lessons from previous
experience in its design (PAD p 48). The macro-economic environment was adequate for the operation,
given the positive growth prospects, low inflation expectations, and prudent macro policies, and benefitted
from a well-coordinated dialogue with the IMF. Identifying risks was of good quality and depth, but
mitigating solutions relied heavily on government commitment with specific solutions only for capacity
constraints. The Bank didn't initially assess governance risks correctly and subsequently had to raise the
risk rating from moderate to substantial.

Furthermore, implementation risks will become more prominent as the reforms become more challenging
(e.g., SOE, banking and land reforms). On one occasion, the Bank didn't take known risks into account:
the inadequate targeting mechanism adopted (the Mahalla).



Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

b. Bank Performance – Implementation

Rationale

The ICR reports briefly on implementation (ICR page 19). It states that the government's commitment and the
presence of the TTL and key sector staff in the field facilitated the implementation of the reforms. It adds that
the government consulted with the Bank team in formal and informal settings like a think tank, drawing on their
global experience. It states that Bank supervision was critical to maintain technical quality and ensure
government ownership. However, there is no evidence to support such claims in the ICR or operations portal to
document these conclusions. The ICR states that the Ministry of Finance successfully coordinated reforms with
other agencies and development partners. However, monitoring and evaluation focused on actions rather than
results. Proactive use of M&E to anticipate problems and provide solutions was lacking. Good practice M&E
systems need to be developed.



Rating


                                                                                                   Page 14 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Uzbekistan Reforms for Transition DPO (P166019)



Moderately Satisfactory

c. Overall Bank Performance

Rationale

The operation design drew from analytical work but presented a general description of previous lessons that
informed the design. The ICR discussed potential risks but identified few mitigating solutions while it benefitted
from consultations with the government and partners. The ICR makes broad statements on implementation
without providing evidence of specific examples of good practice.


Overall Bank Performance Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

9. Other Impacts

a. Social and Poverty

The TTL confirmed that jobs increased from around 200,000 to over 600,000 from 2017 to today, although it is
impossible to attribute the increase to any specific reform.



b. Environmental

The TTL mentioned that there were improvements after the DPOs. For example, water usage was more efficient,
land improvement practices were applied, and energy intensity decreased. However, the ICR doesn't present any
actual evidence of such impacts.



c. Gender

NA



d. Other

NA




10. Quality of ICR

                                                                                                     Page 15 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Uzbekistan Reforms for Transition DPO (P166019)




Rationale

The ICR provides a good account of the project design, implementation, and progress toward expected
outcomes. However, the reporting on efficacy could have provided more detailed evidence, for example, on
targeting social safety net beneficiaries. Similarly, the discussion on Bank performance does not provide
enough details on the underlying analytical work underpinning the operation. The TTL told IEG that such details
were not included to avoid a lengthy ICR but can easily be found in the project document. Other shortcomings
included the lack of well-articulated lessons spelling out what can be learned from this operation. Finally, the
articulation of the RI for PA1 is confusing. On page 10, the ICR states that the RI’s target is “No surrender
requirement on foreign exchange from export earnings. (June 2019)” giving the impression that the elimination
of the requirement was the RI. This could not be possible since the PA1 eliminated the requirement. However,
on page 22 - “Annex 1 Results Framework” - the ICR reports as RI1 the percentage of forex surrendered (not
the elimination of the rule), which is a better indicator than just the elimination of the rule.

IEG adds that the TTL was very approachable and willing to help and provide additional information.



a. Rating

Modest

11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                 Disagreement/Comments
Outcome                         Satisfactory           Satisfactory
                                                                                 M&E quality was less than
                                                                                 expected, some PAs and RIs
                                                                                 are not linked to the objectives
Bank Performance                Satisfactory           Moderately Satisfactory
                                                                                 and in one occasion one risk
                                                                                 was not properly taken into
                                                                                 account.
Relevance of Results
                                ---                    Moderately Satisfactory
Indicators
Quality of ICR                  ---                    Modest


12. Lessons

There are no detailed lessons in the ICR, only findings. The discussion is general. For example, the text "The
Bank's approach has also emphasized complementary institutional reforms …." does not identify or explain
'how' this happened.

IEG finds that one lesson is warranted: RIs have a critical role in evaluating the success of DPOs in achieving
their objectives when they are properly framed to measure the results of supported reforms. In the case of this

                                                                                                    Page 16 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Uzbekistan Reforms for Transition DPO (P166019)



DPO, while most RIs were properly framed, there were instances where the RIs adopted were not linked
enough to the supported reforms. For example, the reduction of import tariffs was not tailored to the imported
goods representing intermediate and raw materials (objective of the operation) but referred to all imported
goods. Also, the payment of benefits to low-income families missed a proper targeting system (or failed to
improve the existing targeting system, which was known to be not accurate).


13. Project Performance Assessment Report (PPAR) Recommended?

No




                                                                                                   Page 17 of 17
