     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Inclusive Growth and Fiscal DPO (P168204)



                                                                                Report Number: ICRR0023233

1. Program Information



 Country                                    Practice Area (Lead)
 Kenya                                      Macroeconomics, Trade and Investment

 Programmatic DPF

 Planned Operations                          Approved Operations
 0                                           0

 Operation ID                                Operation Name
 P168204                                     Inclusive Growth and Fiscal DPO




 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)                  Total Financing (USD)
 IDA-64190                                 30-Jun-2020                                        751,130,459.68

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 28-May-2019                               30-Jun-2020
                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                              Co-financing (USD)

 Original Commitment                             750,000,000.00                                           0.00

 Revised Commitment                              749,999,996.71                                           0.00

 Actual                                          751,130,459.68                                           0.00




P172321_TBL
 Country                                    Practice Area (Lead)
 Kenya                                      Macroeconomics, Trade and Investment

 Operation ID                               Operation Name
 P172321                                    Kenya Growth and Fiscal DPO2 ( P172321 )




                                                                                                 Page 1 of 26
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Inclusive Growth and Fiscal DPO (P168204)




  L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                    Total Financing (USD)
  IBRD-91060,IDA-64190,IDA-66350             30-Jun-2021                                          1000000000.00

  Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
  19-May-2020                                30-Jun-2021

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                               Co-financing (USD)

  Original Commitment                         1,000,000,000.00                                                0.00

  Revised Commitment                          1,000,000,000.00                                                0.00

  Actual                                      1,000,000,000.00                                                0.00



 Prepared by                  Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator           Group
 Shahrzad Mobasher            Jennifer L. Keller           Gabriela Chamartin Escobar       IEGEC
 Fard



2. Program Objectives and Pillars/Policy Areas
EVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives

The program development objectives (PDO) were to: (i) crowd in private investment and financing for affordable
housing; (ii) enhance farmer incomes and food security; (iii) create fiscal space to allow the government to invest
in key development programs; and (iv) crowd in private investment and leverage digitization to support the
governments inclusive growth agenda (Financing Agreement, pp. 5-7 for the first operation; Financing
Agreement, pp. 5-6 for the second operation). For the purpose of this ICRR, the four objectives are (i) crowd in
private investment and financing for affordable housing; (ii) enhance farmer incomes and food security; (iii) create
fiscal space to allow the government to invest in key development programs; and (iv) crowd in private investment
and leverage digitization to support the governments inclusive growth agenda.


b. Pillars/Policy Areas
There were four policy areas/pillars aligned to the objectives of the programmatic series, consisting of:

Pillar 1: Crowd in private investment and financing for affordable housing;

Pillar 2: Enhance farmer incomes and food security;

Pillar 3: Create fiscal space to allow the government to invest in key development programs; and




                                                                                                     Page 2 of 26
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Inclusive Growth and Fiscal DPO (P168204)



Pillar 4: Crowd in private investment and leverage digitization to support the governments inclusive growth
agenda.

Table 1: Policy Actions

Objective 1: Crowd in Private Investment and Financing for the Delivery of Affordable Housing
Prior Actions for DPO1                                 Prior Actions for DPO2
                                                       PA2: The Recipient has (i) enacted through its
                                                       Parliament the Physical and Land Use Planning
                                                       Act, which, inter alia, allows for changes to
PA1: The Recipient has (i) approved, through its restrictive zoning laws that hold back the
Cabinet, amendments to the Sectional Properties construction of multi-story buildings in high density
Act to allow for individual titling of units in multi- areas(ii) through the president, assented to the,
story buildings; and (ii) enacted, through its         Business Laws Amendment Bill, which amends
Parliament, the Building Surveyors Act with the        the National Construction Authority Act which,
objective to improve building standards, including inter alia, makes provision for an up to date
in low-income housing units.                           building code, allowing the use of a wider range of
                                                       construction materials and technology, hence
                                                       enabling the delivery of less expensive code-
                                                       compliant housing units.
PA3: The Recipient has (i) enacted, through its
Parliament, an amendment to the Central Bank of
Kenya (CBK) Act to empower the CBK to license
and supervise mortgage re-financing businesses;
and (ii) submitted, through the CBK, the draft
Mortgage Refinance Companies Regulations,
dated 2019, to the Attorney General, which
provides a framework to operationalize the
business of mortgage refinancing.
Objective 2: Enhance Farmers Income and Food Security
Prior Actions for DPO1                                 Prior Actions for DPO2
                                                       PA5: The Recipient has through its Cabinet
                                                       approved a policy to commit purchases for the
PA4: The Recipient has approved, through its
                                                       strategic grain reserve function of the National
Senate, and submitted to its National Assembly,
                                                       Cereals and Produce Board (NCPB) through the
the proposed Warehouse Receipts System (WRS)
                                                       WRS consistent with the Agricultural Sector
Bill providing the legal framework for the
                                                       Growth and Transformation Strategy issued by the
establishment of a warehouse receipt system.
                                                       Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock, Fisheries and
                                                       Cooperatives.
                                                       PA7: The Recipient through the Cabinet Secretary
PA6: The Recipient has approved, through its
                                                       for finance, has approved the Capital Markets
Cabinet the structure for the establishment of a
                                                       (Commodity Markets) Regulations that provides a
Commodities Exchange.
                                                       framework for the commodities exchange market.
PA8: The Recipient has (i) approved, through its PA9: The Recipient has through its Cabinet
Senate, and submitted to its National Assembly, approved the policy for the roll out of the e-
the proposed Irrigation Bill, which supports better voucher subsidy program consistent with the
use and harnessing of water resources for              Agricultural Sector Growth and Transformation

                                                                                                       Page 3 of 26
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Inclusive Growth and Fiscal DPO (P168204)



irrigation through the integration of irrigation in    Strategy issued by the Ministry of Agriculture,
water harvesting, flood control and storage and;       Livestock Fisheries and Co-operatives.
(ii) through its Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock,
Fisheries and Irrigation (MoALFI), piloted the e-
voucher fertilizer subsidy program in four (4)
counties with a coverage of at least 20,000
farmers with the aim of restructuring the fertilizer
subsidy program from a manual to an e-voucher

program.
PA10: The Recipient has enacted, through its
Parliament, the Kenya Coast Guard Service Act,
which protects Kenya’s territorial waters from
illegal exploitation and degradation of marine
ecosystems.

Objective3: Create Fiscal Space and Crowd in the Private Sector to Advance the Government’s
Inclusive Growth Agenda

Prior Actions for DPO1                                Prior Actions for DPO2
PA11: The Recipient has (i) enacted, through its
Parliament, the Finance Act 2018 which contains
a provision for the removal of VAT exemptions on PA12: The Recipient has through its Cabinet
petroleum products; and (ii) through the Cabinet approved for submission to Parliament, the
Secretary of the National Treasury and Planning, Income Tax Bill 2019, which streamlines tax
adopted a governance framework through which exemptions by reducing the number of exemptions
tax exemptions are granted to avoid the creep in offered.
tax exemptions and arrest the decline in tax
revenues.
PA13: The Recipient has (i) signed a                  PA14: The Recipient has (i) published in a publicly
memorandum of understanding (MoU) between             available online portal details of contracts and
the Competition Authority of Kenya (CAK) and the tenders; including tender documents; details on
Public Procurement Regulatory Authority (PPRA) companies that were awarded the tender; and the
that allows for information sharing to help carry out names of the directors of the company; (ii) through
effective investigations on collusive behavior in     its Cabinet approved the Public Procurement and
public procurement; and (ii) through its National     Asset Disposal Regulations which will allow for
Treasury and Planning, verified and reconciled its revision of standard bidding documents to provide
external debt records to improve upon the             greater details on bidders to enhance
accuracy of its electronic debt registry.             transparency; and (iii) through its Parliament
                                                      enacted the Competition Amendment Act that
                                                      include specific penalties on collusive behavior in
                                                      public procurement

                                                       PA15: The Recipient has (i) through its Cabinet
                                                       approved the Debt and Borrowing Policy; and (ii)
                                                       through its Central Bank launched the Treasury
                                                       Mobile Direct System which allows institutional
                                                       and retail investors to participate through an

                                                                                                         Page 4 of 26
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Inclusive Growth and Fiscal DPO (P168204)



                                                  electronic platform in the issuance of government
                                                  securities to enhance transparency and efficiency.




Objective 4: Crowd in Private Investment and Leverage Digitization to Support the
Government’s Inclusive Growth Agenda
Prior Actions for DPO1                            Prior Actions for DPO2
PA16: The Recipient has through (i) the Cabinet
Secretary of ICT, approved the Broadband
Strategy, which commits to crowd-in private
investment to expand broadband access; and (ii)
enacted, through its Parliament, amendments to
the Registration of Persons Act to establish a
National Integrated Identity Management System,
with the mandate to assign a unique national
(digital) identification number to all registered
persons.

                                                  PA17: The Recipient has through its Parliament
                                                  repealed section 33B of the Banking Act, removing
                                                  the cap on interest rates on bank lending.

                                                  PA18: The Recipient (i) has through its Cabinet
                                                  approved the Kenya Investment Policy, which
                                                  simplifies the process of investor entry and
                                                  retention; (ii) has through the Ministry of
                                                  Industrialization, Trade and Enterprise
                                                  Development approved the Special Economic
                                                  Zones (Amendment) Regulations, implementing
                                                  the Special Economic Zones Act; (iii) has enacted
                                                  through its Parliament amendments to the
                                                  Companies Act, requiring companies to keep a
                                                  register of beneficial owners.
c. Comments on Program Cost, Financing and Dates

Project cost and financing. The first operation was approved for an International Development Association
(IDA) loan of US$750 million. The second operation was approved for an International Bank for Reconstruction
and Development (IBRD) and IDA loans of US$250 million and US$750 million, respectively. The total
approved amount for the two operations was US$1.75 billion. The actual disbursed amount was US$1.751
billion, with the difference between the approved and the disbursed amounts being explained by fluctuations in
the exchange rate for Special Drawing Rights (SDR).



                                                                                                  Page 5 of 26
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Inclusive Growth and Fiscal DPO (P168204)



Dates. The first operation was approved on May 28, 2019, became effective on June 26, 2019, and closed
on June 30, 2020, as envisaged. The second operation was approved on May 19, 2020, became effective on
May 22, 2020, and closed on June 30, 2021, as envisaged.


3. Relevance of Design

a. Relevance of Objectives

 Kenya made significant progress in poverty reduction and shared prosperity in the years that
 preceded this operation. Kenya's poverty rate measured at the international poverty line of US$1.90 per
 day fell from 43.7 percent in 2006 to 36.8 percent in 2015. Economic growth in Kenya was pro-poor over the
 2005/06 and 2015/16 period, with consumption growth for households in the bottom income quintile rising by
 3-4 percent per year, on average, over that period, exceeding the pace of growth for the top income quintile
 (World Bank, Kenya Poverty and Gender Assessment 2015/16). Moreover, household consumption growth in
 rural areas exceeded that of households in urban areas, leading to a greater decline in rural poverty
 compared to urban poverty. This was accompanied by improvements in non-monetary measures of poverty,
 with Kenya’s Human Development Index, which consists of a composite index across education, inequality
 and life expectancy indicators, rising by 0.1 percentage points between 2005 and 2017 (UN,
 Human Development Insights).

 Notwithstanding these improvements, there were a number of challenges which persisted. The
 reduction in the poverty rate experienced by Kenya was less than its regional peers despite the country's
 comparatively higher economic growth rate (World Bank, Kenya Poverty and Gender Assessment 2015/16).
 Moreover, the fact that a third of Kenya's population was still living under the international poverty line of
 US$1.90 per day also constituted a challenge to sustaining higher economic growth rates. Given that poverty
 was predominantly concentrated in rural areas where the population was reliant on agricultural activity,
 reforms aimed at increasing farmers' income and enhancing food security were viewed as critical steps to
 supporting poverty reduction. Kenya’s low-income households were also confronted with a lack of access to
 affordable housing, which in part explained the high incidence of households living in slums. Increasing
 access to information and communication technology (ICT) was also viewed as an important are for
 enhancing inclusive growth.

 The reforms sought by this programmatic series were aligned with the Government of Kenya's
 medium-term reform program and the World Bank’s Kenya Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) FY14-
 FY20 (Report 87024-KE). The government's medium-term reform program, which operationalized Kenya's
 Vision 2030 to create “a globally competitive and prosperous country with a high quality of life by 2030”, was
 focused on four key policy areas, i.e., food security, affordable housing, universal health coverage, and
 manufacturing, also known as the Big Four. The programmatic series was also aligned with the Kenya CPS,
 which was structured around three pillars of engagement: (i) competitiveness and sustainability – growth to
 eradicate poverty; (ii) protection and potential – human resource development for shared prosperity; and (iii)
 consistency and equity – delivering a devolution dividend. The first pillar of the DPF is viewed as having
 contributed towards both the growth and human resource development domains of the CPS. By enhancing
 farmer incomes and food security, the second pillar contributes towards sustainable economic growth and
 poverty reduction. Measures under Pillars 3 and 4 on supporting the expansion of fiscal space, crowding in
 private investment and enhancing the capacity of the public sector to deliver on the inclusive growth agenda
 were consistent with the fiscal sustainability, economic growth and good governance goals of the CPS.


                                                                                                   Page 6 of 26
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Inclusive Growth and Fiscal DPO (P168204)



This DPF complemented other ongoing Bank commitments, namely, the Kenya Affordable Housing
Finance Project (P165034), the Kenya Climate Smart Agriculture Project (P153349), the National Agriculture
and Inclusive Growth Project (P153349), the Marine Fisheries and Socio-economic Development Project
(P163980), and the Governance for Improved Service Delivery Project (P161387).


b. Relevance of Prior Actions

Rationale

Relevance of Prior Actions for Objective 1 - To crowd in private investment and financing for
affordable housing

PA1 was intended to facilitate the development of multi-story units, thereby crowding in private investment
and financing for affordable housing.

      PA1(i) addressed the challenge of new housing supply (estimated at 50,000 units per year) falling
       short of new housing demand (estimated at 80,000 units per year) (World Bank, Kenya Economic
       Update, April 2017), leading to a cumulated housing deficit of 2 million housing units and to a sharp
       deterioration in housing affordability. This deficit partly accounted for some 51 percent of urban
       households living in slums. This PA contributed to the provision of affordable housing to low-income
       households by modifying property registration practices to allow developers to obtain titles for
       individual units as leases, thereby allowing individuals to purchase these at the pre-construction
       phase. Prior to this, the lack of sectional titles restricted developers’ ability to sell units at the pre-
       construction phase. The PA effectively supported an increase in cash flow early on to developers
       during the construction process, which contributed to increased housing supply and to a reduction
       in the housing imbalance.
      PA1(ii) addressed the problem of lower-cost buildings violating engineering requirements under the
       Building Code. An audit conducted by the National Building Inspectorate had shown that 13,778
       buildings in Nairobi and 690 buildings in other towns were in dangerous structural condition, and that
       an additional 9,701 buildings were unsafe for human occupation, which it attributed to the lack of
       adherence to the Building Code requirements. The PA addressed this problem by supporting the
       adoption of the Building Surveyors Act, which includes provisions for approvals at various stages of
       the construction process, limits construction activity to licensed building professionals, and holds
       licensed professionals liable for negligence.

PA2 (DPO2) followed up on PA1 by supporting modifications to zoning laws and the use of a wider range of
construction materials and technology, for an increase in the supply of more affordable code-compliant
housing units.

      PA2(i) introduced the Physical and Land Use Planning Act, which grants County Executives the
       authority to make changes to restrictive zoning laws as part of a comprehensive County Physical and
       Land Use Development Plan. This measure was intended to increase the potential number of housing
       units which can be constructed over a given land area, addressing constraints on the supply side
       related to land, thereby supporting the provision of more affordable housing units.
      PA2(ii) made amendments to the National Construction Authority Act to allow for more cost-effective
       materials and technologies to be adopted, while continuing to ensure that they respect building

                                                                                                       Page 7 of 26
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Inclusive Growth and Fiscal DPO (P168204)



       requirements under the Sectional Properties Act. Prior to the adoption of the PA, builders were
       restricted to the use of specific materials (i.e., stones and mortar) which prevented the adoption of
       sustainable and cost-saving technologies. PA2 deepened the reforms implemented under DPO1 and
       were complemented by other reforms under a separate World Bank operation (P165034: the Kenya
       Affordable Housing Project), which supported faster and more reliable land transactions through an
       improved Land Information Management System and land sector strategic assessment.

The relevance of PA1 and PA2 is rated Satisfactory for the achievement of the objective of crowding in
private investment and financing for affordable housing. PA1 and PA2 supported the improvement in financial
conditions required for developers to undertake housing construction projects, and for cost-effective materials
and technologies in housing construction which meet the requirements of the Building Surveyors Act to be
adopted (relevance of PA1=S; relevance of PA2=S).

PA3 sought to address the lack of access to finance for low- to middle-income purchasers of affordable
housing units. Prior to the implementation of PA3, mortgage lending was almost entirely funded through
short-term retail and institutional deposits, which limited the amount of capital available to finance mortgages
for affordable housing. Given that Kenya had a deep and liquid capital market, with pension funds and
insurance companies interested in holding long-term quality paper, the Government of Kenya, through the
support provided by the Kenya Affordable Housing Finance Project (P165034), established the Kenya
Mortgage Refinance Company (KMRC). The KMRC would mobilize private investment from institutional
investors and provide long-term loans to financial institutions, including financial co-operatives, which would
in turn provide loans to households across all income groups. PA3 empowered the CBK (through the
amendment of the Central Bank of Kenya Act) to license and supervise mortgage refinance companies and
complete the regulatory framework for their operationalization and its relevance is therefore rated
Satisfactory (relevance of PA3=S).

Relevance of Prior Actions for Objective 2 - Enhance farmer incomes and food security

PA4 sought to enhance farmers' income through the proposed Warehouse Receipt System (WRS) Bill, which
provided the legal framework for the establishment of a warehouse receipt system. Prior to the
implementation of the programmatic series, Kenya’s agricultural supply chain was limited by inadequate post-
harvest storage and handling infrastructures, which led to about a third of agricultural products being lost,
adversely impacting farmer profitability and food security. The country was estimated to have lost 1.9 million
tons of agricultural products valued at KES 150 billion (US$1.5 billion) in 2017 largely as a result of post-
harvest losses. Moreover, this PA addressed the challenge of food insecurity, with Kenya ranking 77th out of
119 countries assessed as part of the Global Hunger Index in 2018. The National Cereals and Produce
Board (NCPB) and the Eastern Africa Grain Council were in the process of piloting systems for certifying
warehouses that receive grain deposits and issuing tradable and transferable warehouse receipts. However,
the pilot systems were challenged by the lack of a legal and regulatory framework to provide an enabling
trading environment for warehouse receipts. PA4 sought to address this constraint, with the implementation
of the WRS allowing farmers to store their grains at warehouses and obtain a receipt that confirmed the type
and quantity of products being stored. This would provide farmers the flexibility to store grains when prices
were low and sell when they were high, improving farmer income. Furthermore, farmers could use warehouse
receipts to obtain loans from financial institutions. The storage of grains in climate-controlled warehouses
also enhanced the preservation of the produce, further supporting farmer income and food security.

PA5 (DPO2) complemented PA4 with the NCPB committing to purchase grains for the strategic grain
reserves of the country directly through the WRS, thereby allowing smallholder grain farmers to sell their


                                                                                                    Page 8 of 26
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Inclusive Growth and Fiscal DPO (P168204)



grains to the NCPB through the WRS rather than to the NCPB directly. Prior to PA5, smallholder grain
farmers were confronted with challenges related to selling their grains to the NCPB directly, which adversely
affected their incomes. First, while the NCPB was offering a price markup of 33-62 percent relative to market
prices for the purchase of grains for the strategic grain reserves, the markup was insufficient to cover the cost
of delivering grains to the NCPB for smallholder grain farmers. Second, there was some rent-seeking
behavior prior to this PA. The rent-seeking behavior in turn limited the supply of strategic grain reserves at
the NCPB, with small-scale farmers who were net purchasers of maize having to purchase maize outside of
the NCPB and having to pay a premium relative to what they could have paid if the strategic grain reserves of
the NCPB were adequate (Source: Agricultural Sector Transformation and Growth Strategy entitled Towards
Sustainable Agricultural Transformation and Food Security in Kenya 2019-2029). With the implementation of
PA5, warehouses sold grains to the NCPB directly, limiting the heavy financial burden of delivering grains to
the NCPB for smallholder grain farmers and the opportunity for rent-seeing behavior at the NCPB gates,
thereby supporting farmers’ income and food security.

PA4 and PA5 supported the overarching objective of enhancing farmer incomes and food security through a
credible results chain and their relevance is rated Satisfactory (relevance of PA4=S and PA5=S).

PA6 sought to support the legislation, i.e., the Capital Markets (Commodity Markets) Regulations, 2020,
related to the establishment of a commodities exchange to better connect producers and buyers, and to allow
for price discovery of agricultural products. The establishment of a commodities exchange was an important
step in the Agricultural Sector Transformation and Growth Strategy to connect sellers and buyers of
agricultural products, to reduce transaction costs, to enforce contracts, and to enhance farmers’ income and
food security.

PA7 (DPO2) followed up on PA6 by seeking to register the Kenya Multi Commodity Exchange (KOMEX) with
the regulator, i.e., the Capital Markets Authority, to allow the commodities exchange to operate.

PA6 and PA7 supported the overarching objective of enhancing farmer incomes and food security through a
credible results chain by establishing the legal and regulatory framework for the KOMEX to be able to
operate. The relevance of PA6 and PA7 is rated Satisfactory (relevance of PA6=S; relevance of PA7=S).

PA8 and PA9 sought to reduce reliance on rain-fed agriculture to build resilience against droughts by
submitting the Irrigation Bill to the National Assembly and piloting an e-voucher fertilizer subsidy program,
and then expanding the e-voucher program more broadly.

      PA8(i) sought to address the challenge of the National Irrigation Board’s (NIB) mandate being limited
       to the management of seven national irrigation schemes and four research stations, which excluded
       medium-scale and small-scale facilities and failed to meet the irrigation needs of farmers. Fiscal
       devolution and climate conditions made it increasingly important to develop non-national irrigation
       schemes. With 98 percent of agricultural activity in Kenya estimated to be rain-fed, and more frequent
       and intense droughts due to climate change, farmers and pastoralists, particularly small holders, were
       severely affected by droughts. Furthermore, yields of staples, such as, maize, rice and wheat were
       projected to decline by 12 percent, 23 percent and 13 percent, respectively, by 2030 under the
       business-as-usual scenario due to climate change. Water scarcity was also expected to lead to less
       productive pastures, lower dairy yields, and high risks for crop and livestock diseases to spread. This
       PA supported the adoption of the National Irrigation Policy and the enactment of the Irrigation Bill, with
       the policy supporting better use of existing water resources to significantly expand the area of
       agricultural land under irrigation. The Irrigation Act established the National Irrigation Authority (NIA),

                                                                                                     Page 9 of 26
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Inclusive Growth and Fiscal DPO (P168204)



       county irrigation development schemes and community-based irrigation water users association
       (IRWA). County level irrigation development units would support the development of agricultural land
       under irrigation, consistent with national policies. The governance of small holder irrigation schemes,
       which were previously established as non-legal entities with weaker governance structures, are now
       established under the formation of the IRWAs. This would allow for greater accountability and better
       community level management of water resources. The Act also included guidelines for the
       involvement of the private sector in the provision of irrigation.
      PA8(ii) sought to improve agricultural productivity by improving access to subsidized fertilizers for
       small-scale farmers. This PA was grounded in the findings of the Kenya Poverty and Gender
       Assessment which found that farmers with better access to markets are less poor. This was
       considered one of the most effective channels for poverty reduction and for enhancing the country's
       food security. Agricultural production constituted the predominant economic activity in Kenya,
       accounting for 50 percent of the country's GDP and 60 percent of the country's labor force when
       including subsistence farming employment. The fertilizer program prior to the implementation of this
       PA had several failures, which included that it was targeted to medium- to large-scale farmers, that
       there were significant delays in distribution as the procurement of fertilizers was largely undertaken by
       the government, and that the program allowed rent-seeking behavior. The new program supported by
       this PA led to the electronic distribution of vouchers to targeted groups of farmers, primarily those with
       small-scale operations and women farmers, allowing them to directly purchase fertilizers from the
       suppliers of their choice. The program was to be accompanied by an electronic database, which could
       assess eligibility to subsidized fertilizers based on farm size, with eligibility limited to an agricultural
       land area of up to 4 acres for the pilot. The subsidy payment was made through mobile deposits as
       this constituted a more efficient mechanism to reach target beneficiaries.

      PA9 (DPO2) followed the reforms which began under PA8 (first DPO series) by expanding access to
       subsidized fertilizers to farmers through the e-voucher fertilizer subsidy program, from 20,000 farmers
       under PA8(ii) to 150,000 famers under PA9.

The piloting of the e-voucher program for fertilizer distribution under PA8(ii) supported targeted subsidies to
small scale farmers with agricultural yields lower than large-scale farmers, and who were more vulnerable to
food insecurity; the adoption of the NIA supported the development of non-national irrigation schemes to
support small-scale farmers and pastoralists who were particularly affected by droughts. PA9 expanded the
fertilizer subsidy scheme, increasing support for farmer incomes and food security through a credible results
chain (relevance of PA8=S; relevance of PA9=S).

PA10 sought to protect Kenya’s territorial waters from illegal exploitation and degradation of marine
ecosystems through the passing of the Kenya Coast Guard Service Act which established the Kenya Coast
Guard Service charged with monitoring and prosecuting illegal fishermen. The main challenges in Kenya’s
fisheries sector consisted of: (i) a lack of monitoring on fish stocks (which posed a risk to the sustainability of
the fisheries resources), and (ii) inadequate monitoring and protection of territorial waters. PA10 sought to
address these challenges by establishing the Kenya Coast Guard Service, which was expected to improve
the monitoring of fishing activities and fish stocks.. The relevance of PA10 is rated Satisfactory given that a
more sustainable exploitation of Kenya’s fish stock is expected to support the objective of enhancing farmers’
incomes and food security over the medium- to long-term horizon(relevance of PA10=S).

Relevance of Prior Actions for Objective 3 - Create fiscal space to allow the government to invest in
key development programs


                                                                                                      Page 10 of 26
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Inclusive Growth and Fiscal DPO (P168204)



PA11 and PA12 supported domestic revenue mobilization through the reduction in tax expenditures from
VAT exemptions on petroleum products, the adoption of a governance framework through which tax
exemptions are granted, and the rationalization of tax exemptions.

      PA11(i), through the Finance Act 2018, removed VAT exemptions that had applied to petroleum
       products (the VAT on petroleum products was introduced through the VAT Act 2013, but its
       implementation was deferred) and introduced a VAT rate of 8 percent on the taxable value of
       petroleum products. The expiry of VAT exemptions on petroleum products was expected to increase
       revenues, although the 8 percent rate still represented a concessionary rate to the VAT rate of 16
       percent. The compromise VAT rate on petroleum products was introduced within the context of
       unprecedented social protests and rejections in parliament until the concessionary rate was approved.
      PA11(ii) applied more stringent conditions on granting tax exemptions and on reporting requirements
       for the use of exemptions and introduced regular internal audits. Prior to the implementation of this
       PA, accounting officers in line ministries would make requests for tax exemptions, and there was no
       accountability for ensuring that exemptions met the requested use. Through the measure, the
       Permanent Secretary of a line ministry, who is also the Chief Accounting Officer, would make
       the request for a tax exemption and would be accountable for ensuring the intended use of the tax
       exemption was followed. Requests for tax exemptions would be made to the National Treasury.
      PA12 (DPO2) followed on the reforms implemented under PA11 and was related to the approval for
       submission to Parliament of the Income Tax Bill 2019. The Bill included the repeal of preferential
       corporate income tax rates on newly listed entities, the repeal of the reduced corporate tax rates in
       certain sectors, the repeal of special corporate tax rates for companies operating under the special
       operating framework, the repeal of the electricity rebate used to reduce tax liability, the overhaul of the
       capital allowances schedule, removal of corporate income tax exemptions on certain parastatals, and
       redefining “qualifying interest” to broaden the scope of the tax base. With regard to VAT, the Bill
       proposed to expand the taxable base to include excise duty, fees and charges, and to change the
       VAT status on certain products from exempt to standard-rated. The submission to Parliament of the
       Income Bill 2019 constituted a step toward its enactment. The Program Document suggests that this
       measure was estimated to increase government revenues by 0.3 percentage points of GDP per
       year.

The relevance of PA11 and PA12 is rated Satisfactory as both of these actions supported the overarching
objective of creating fiscal space by supporting increased government revenues (relevance of PA11=S;
relevance of PA12=S).

PA13, PA14 and PA15 sought to reduce the cost of public procurement by (i) increasing competition and
transparency through the establishment of procedures for the investigation of collusive behavior in public
procurement bids and by publishing tender documents and public procurement awards online; as well as (ii)
improving debt management and debt transparency.

      PA13(i) required the signing of a memorandum of understanding to allow information to be shared
       between the CAK and the PPRA to carry out effective investigations on collusive behavior in public
       procurement. Thirty-four percent of organizations reporting incidences of procurement fraud against
       an average of 25 percent in East Africa and 22 percent globally (according to a Price Waterhouse
       Coopers report (see Global Economic Crime Survey: Kenya Report
       (https://www.pwc.com/ke/en/publications/economic-crime-survey.html)) and the value of government
       procured goods and services was equivalent to at least 7 percent of GDP per year in
       Kenya. Conservative estimates indicated that addressing bid rigging could lead to savings of up to

                                                                                                    Page 11 of 26
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Inclusive Growth and Fiscal DPO (P168204)



       KES 28 billion per year (0.3 percent of GDP). Prior to the implementation of this PA, while the CAK
       had the ability to investigate collusive behavior in public procurement and to impose sanctions on bid
       riggers, it did not have the mandate to obtain bidding documents which were held by the PPRA.
       Moreover, the PPRA did not have sufficient capacity to investigate or impose sanctions on bid riggers.
       Through PA13(i), the standard tender documents were amended to better capture information to
       detect bid rigging, and to increase the fines on bid riggers through amendments to the Competition
       Subsidiary Rules. The PA effectively supported the implementation of Executive Order No. 2 which
       was passed in 2018. This was expected to deter bid rigging in the public procurement of goods and
       services.
      PA13(ii) aimed to improve the accuracy of Kenya's electronic debt registry by verifying and
       reconciling external debt records by transitioning from the manual recording of external debt to an
       electronic system. The electronic debt registry system allowed the National Treasury to be notified of
       upcoming payment, debt amortizations, and principals due to specific countries, which is a more
       reliable system to the paper-based system.
      PA14 (DPO2) followed on the reforms implemented under PA13(i) (first DPO series) by seeking to
       reduce collusive bidding on government contracts by publishing tender documents on an online portal,
       and to impose penalties for collusive behavior.
            o PA14(i) led to the online publishing of tender documents, along with the details of
               the companies that were awarded the tenders and the names of the directors of the
               companies.
            o PA14(ii) allowed the approval of new regulations to revise the format of bidding documents in
               order to provide greater details on bidders.
            o PA14(iii) led to the enactment of the Competition Amendment Act that introduced penalties on
               collusive behavior in public procurement.

      PA15 sought to establish clear guidelines on the debt and borrowing policy in order to improve debt
       management and deepen domestic debt markets through the introduction of the Treasury Mobile
       Direct System.
            o PA15(i) led to the adoption of the Debt and Borrowing Policy, which established that new
               borrowing must be assessed against the fiscal space and the government’s current and future
               capacity to service its debt, and that concessional sources of financing must be prioritized. The
               Policy included clear guidance on the decision-making process for contracting debt and the
               institutions which would audit debt management activities and which institutions would oversee
               the utilization of borrowed funds. The policy indicated that domestic debt would be issued
               through transparent auctions conducted by the CBK. The policy benefitted from technical
               support from the World Bank and the Office of the Technical Assistance, US Department of
               Treasury.
            o PA15(ii) introduced the Treasury Mobile Direct System, which allowed institutional and retail
               investors to transition from a manual trading platform for primary auctions to an automated
               platform. Prior to the implementation of PA14(ii), access to the online platform was limited to
               commercial banks, and institutional and retail investors did not have access to it. With the
               online platform, registered investors would be able to invest in government securities remotely
               and would no longer be required to visit the CBK. This measure would be expected to
               contribute to the deepening of domestic debt markets, allowing for improved price discovery
               for government securities.

The relevance of PA13 is rated Moderately Satisfactory as there is no evidence that an electronic debt
registry would increase fiscal space relative to a manual debt registry. The relevance of PA14 and PA15 are

                                                                                                  Page 12 of 26
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Inclusive Growth and Fiscal DPO (P168204)



rated Satisfactory as the measures supported greater transparency and accountability of public procurement
contracts, an improvement in the debt and borrowing policy and the deepening of financial markets
(relevance of PA13=MS; relevance of PA14=S; relevance of PA15=S).

Relevance of Prior Actions for Objective 4 - Crowd in private investment and leverage digitization to
support the government’s inclusive growth agenda

PA16 sought to expand the coverage and the access to a broadband network and improve the targeting of
government programs and benefits through a unique national (digital) identification number to every person
enrolled in the register.

      PA16(i) led to the adoption of the second National Broadband Strategy (NBS) covering the 2018-2023
       period, which addressed some of the shortcomings of the first strategy, i.e., the NBS 2013-2017,
       which did not adequately reduce the digital divide in accessing broadband services, thereby limiting
       the transition to a knowledge-based society. The NBS 2018-2023 envisioned increasing access to
       broadband coverage of 3G to 94 percent of the population by 2020 and addressing some of the
       demand side challenges in using broadband services, including cybersecurity. While there were 33
       million internet users in Kenya in December 2017, less than 1 million of these had broadband
       coverage, despite the fact that the country was connected to four international undersea fiber optic
       cables. The Strategy sought to increase broadband coverage by encouraging cost reduction through
       network sharing, embracing public-private partnerships in expanding networks, incentivizing
       companies to expand coverage in rural and remote areas, and developing digital literacy.
      PA16(ii) amended the Registration of Persons Act, establishing a National Integrated Identity
       Management System to create, manage and operate a national population register and assign a
       unique national (digital) identification number to every person enrolled in the register to enhance
       the targeting of subsidies to small-scale farmers, social protection benefits to the most vulnerable, e-
       medical services, and e-commerce. Prior to the implementation of this PA, there was no unique
       national (digital) identification number for individuals enrolled in the register, which allowed a person
       to quality for the same social benefits and transfers multiple times.
      The relevance of PA16 is rated Satisfactory (relevance of PA16=S).

PA17 repealed section 33B of the Banking Act pertaining to an interest rate cap on bank lending in an effort
to support private sector credit growth. Prior to the implementation of PA17, the interest rate cap rationed
lending to the most creditworthy borrowers, thereby limiting credit for private investment. A survey conducted
by the CBK a year after the introduction of interest rate caps on lending in 2016 found that the stock of credit
to SMEs fell by 10 percent, but that credit to households and large borrowers continued to increase at a pace
that was comparable to the rate which prevailed prior to introduction of this measure (IMF, Do Interest Rate
Controls Work? Evidence from Kenya). Since the lifting of the interest rate caps on lending would be
expected to result in increased credit growth to SMEs based on the results of this survey, the relevance of
PA17 is rated Satisfactory (relevance of PA17=S).

PA18 supported the adoption of the Kenya Investment Policy to simplify the process of investor entry and
retention, the approval of the Special Economic Zones (Amendment) Regulations which allowed the
implementation of the Special Economic Zones Act and the enactment of amendments to the Companies Act,
requiring companies to keep a register of beneficial owners.

      PA18(i) required the adoption of the Kenya Investment Policy which improved the capacity of the One
       Stop Centre to offer essential services to companies, assigned a unique identification number to all

                                                                                                    Page 13 of 26
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Inclusive Growth and Fiscal DPO (P168204)



        companies, and restricted the payment of minimum capital requirements to sensitive sectors (i.e.,
        defined activities where foreign investment is restricted to protect national investors). Prior to the
        implementation of this PA, firms were required to pay US$100,000 as a capital requirement to enter
        the market. However, program documents do not provide evidence that the minimum capital
        requirement was a significant disincentive to investment.
       PA18(ii) supported approval of the Special Economic Zones (SEZ) (Amendment) Regulations,
        allowing for the implementation of the Special Economic Zones Act. The Program Document for the
        second operation indicates that surveys and consultations with existing and potential investors
        pointed to the need to operationalize the principles of the Kenya SEZ Act 2015 and provide greater
        clarity and certainty for the rules governing SEZ enterprise operations.
       PA18(iii) supported improvement in corporate governance by requiring firms to hold a register of
        shareholders with at least 10 percent ownership in the company and to keep a copy of the register
        with the Registrar of Companies. This measure was intended to reduce the incidence of major
        shareholders establishing third-party companies to exert a greater influence on corporate decisions.
        Shortcomings in corporate governance was viewed as the reason for the liquidation and the
        bankruptcy of a number of banks, as well as one the largest supermarket chain in Kenya, Nakumatt,
        resulting in the deterioration in business confidence, reduced credit growth to the private sector, and
        unpaid bills for many suppliers, particularly, small- to medium-sized enterprises.
       The relevance of PA18 is rated Satisfactory (relevance of PA18=S).


Rating

Satisfactory

4. Relevance of Results Indicators

Rationale

The program included 14 Results Indicators (RIs). Objective 1 (Crowd in Private Investment and Financing for
the Delivery of Affordable Housing) included three RIs. Objective 2 (Enhance farmer incomes and food security)
included three RIs. Objective 3 (Create fiscal space to allow the government to invest in key development
programs) included five RIs. Objective 4 (Crowd in private investment and leverage digitization to support the
government’s inclusive growth agenda) included three RIs. (Table 2)

RI1 (Number of affordable housing units constructed with private investment under the government supported
Affordable Housing Program) and RI2 (Proportion of affordable housing units constructed with private
investment under the government supported Affordable Housing Program owned by women, including,
individual or joint ownership agreements) was intended to measure the number of affordable housing units
constructed through the reforms supported by PA1 and PA2. It is not clear how RI1 and RI2 measure the impact
of PA1 and PA2 as the PAs are not specifically related to the Affordable Housing Program. As such, the
relevance of RI1 and RI2 is rated Unsatisfactory (relevance of RI1=U; relevance of RI2=U).

RI3 (Number of private sector shareholders in KMRC) (associated with PA3) measured the number of
institutions providing long-term financing to the KMRC. While the number of institutions providing long-term
financing to the KMRC can be expected to be closely linked to the volume of financing, a better measure of


                                                                                                    Page 14 of 26
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Inclusive Growth and Fiscal DPO (P168204)



outcome would have consisted in measuring the value of long-term financing provided by financial institutions to
the KMRC. As such, the relevance of RI3 is rated Moderately Satisfactory (relevance of RI3=MS).

RI4 (Number of licensed warehouses under the WRS participating in the Commodities Exchange that have been
leased from the National Cereals and Produce Board to the private sector) (associated with PA4) measured the
increase in farmers’ accessibility to warehouses participating in the WRS, providing farmers the flexibility to store
their produce in quality-controlled warehouses when prices are low and to sell their produce when prices are
high. While RI4 adequately measures accessibility to warehouse space under the WRS, it does not capture the
intended impact of the PA toward enhanced food security and farmer income through enhanced use of
warehouse space. The relevance of this RI is therefore rated Moderately Satisfactory (relevance of RI4=MS).

RI5 (Number of farmers benefitting from e-vouchers) and RI6 (Proportion of farmers benefitting from e-vouchers
who are female (associated with PA8, PA9) measured the number of small-scale farmers benefitting from
subsidized fertilizers through the e-voucher program. While the relevance of this indicator hinges on the
assumption that farmers receiving vouchers use them to directly purchase fertilizers from the suppliers of their
choice, IEG recognizes that being in receipt of e-vouchers and purchasing subsidized fertilizers through the e-
voucher program are closely correlated and as result, the relevance of RI5 is rated Satisfactory. On RI6, it can
be reasonably assumed that women smallholder farmers are particularly disadvantaged, and this indicator
therefore provides evidence of improved targeting. The relevance of RI6 is therefore rated Satisfactory
(relevance of RI5=S; relevance of RI6=S).

RI7 (VAT and income tax revenues as a share of GDP) (associated with PA11 and PA12) was intended to
measure (i) the expected increase in VAT revenues following the removal of VAT exemptions on petroleum
products under PA11(ii) and the expansion of the tax base to include excise duty, fees and charges, and the
change in the VAT status on certain products from exempt to standard-rated through the 2019 Income Tax Bill
under PA12; and (ii) the expected increase in corporate income tax revenues following the enactment of the
2019 Income Tax Bill through a reduction in tax expenditures under PA12. PA12 was limited to the submission,
rather than the enactment, of the 2019 Income Tax Bill (which did not progress), IEG recognizes that relevant
elements of that bill were passed under the 2020 Tax Amendment Act and that this increased income
taxes. However, in addition to the challenges in controlling for the indicator’s denominator, the usefulness of this
RI is also limited by the fact that the two separate elements – VAT and income tax – were achieved at different
points in time. A disaggregated indicator (with baselines closer to the expected approval dates of the relevant
legislation) would therefore have been preferable. For these reasons, the relevance of RI7 is rated Moderately
Satisfactory (relevance of RI7=MS).

While the cumulative value of government procurement contracts published on the online procurement portal
under RI8 (Cumulative value of government procurement contracts published on online procurement portal)
conveys some information on increased transparency as result of PA13 and PA14, a more meaningful measure
would have been the share (in terms of value) of all government procurement contracts published on the online
procurement portal. Further, RI9 (Number of investigations related to bid rigging undertaken jointly by CAK and
PPRA) measured the output of PA13 and PA14, rather than the outcome of these investigations (which was
particularly important in an environment characterized by shortcomings in the court system), which would have
been relevant to assess the impact of enforcement impact on the objective of creating fiscal space. As such, the
relevance of RI8 and RI9 are rated Moderately Unsatisfactory (relevance of RI8=MU; relevance of RI9=MU).

RI10 (Debt service ratio (percent of GDP)) (associated with PA13, PA15) was intended to measure the reduction
in the debt service ratio as a proportion of GDP related to adoption of the Debt and Borrowing Policy, and the
deepening of domestic debt markets through the Treasury Mobile Direct System. RI10 is considerably broader


                                                                                                     Page 15 of 26
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Inclusive Growth and Fiscal DPO (P168204)



than the scope of the PAs for which it is intended to measure impact and is therefore poorly suited for assessing
progress towards the overarching objective. It is unclear why improvements in the accuracy of the electronic
debt registry would result in a change in the debt service ratio. While increased participation in government
securities auctions can reasonably be expected to increase demand for government securities (and thereby
lower borrowing costs to the government), this will affect total debt service only at the margin given the much
larger base which determines debt service. An RI that focused on borrowing costs or participation in government
securities auctions would have been more meaningful over the time horizon of this programmatic series
(relevance of RI10=U).

RI11 (Share of government securities transacted on electronic platform, allowing for the participation of
institutional and retail investors) (associated with PA15) measured the proportion of government securities
transacted through the Treasury Mobile Direct System, which is assumed to be a proxy for the deepening of the
domestic debt markets. While a rising share of government securities transacted through an electronic platform
does not necessarily imply increased participation, the increased participation could potentially result in an
increased share of government securities transacted through an electronic platform. As such, the relevance of
RI11 is rated Moderately Satisfactory (relevance of RI11=MS).

RI12 (Average credit growth to the private sector) (associated with PA17) measured credit growth to the private
sector following the removal of the interest rate cap on banks under PA17. The relevance of RI12 is rated
Satisfactory as it is considered to be a good measure of progress toward the objective of crowding in private
investment (relevance of RI12=S).

RI13 (Number of investment projects registered by the Kenya Investment Authority) and RI14 (Value of capital
investments registered by the Kenya Investment Authority (Ksh billion)) (associated with PA18) measured the
number and the value of investment projects registered with the Kenya Investment Authority following the
implementation of measures under the Kenya Investment Policy. Since the measures implemented under
PA18(i) did not follow a clear results chain toward the achievement of the objective as they did not lift binding
constraints to crowding in private investment, the relevance of RI13 and RI14 are rated Moderately
Unsatisfactory (relevance of RI13=MU; relevance of RI14=MU).

Table 2: Results Indicators

                                                                                  Actual
                                                                                  change in
                                             Baseline Target       Actual value               RI
                        Associated RI                                             RI
 RIs                                         (including (including as of target               achievement
                        PA(s)      Relevance                                      relative to
                                             date)      date)      date                       rating
                                                                                  targeted
                                                                                  change
 Objective 1: Crowd in Private Investment and Financing for the Delivery of Affordable Housing
 RI1: The number of     PA1, PA2 U           Baseline Target       Actual (April Over 100 Negligible
 affordable housing                          (2017): 0 (2021):     2022): 5,106 percent of
 units constructed with                                 20,000     government targeted
 private investment                                                funded units change
 under the government                                              completed;
 supported affordable                                              15,300
 housing program.                                                  private sector
                                                                   funded
                                                                   affordable

                                                                                                    Page 16 of 26
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Inclusive Growth and Fiscal DPO (P168204)



                                                                          housing units
                                                                          completed.




RI2: Proportion of
affordable housing
units constructed with
private investment
under the government
supported affordable
                                                                          Actual: 46%
homes program owned                                                                       92 percent
                                                            Target        were solely
by women (including                             Baseline                                  of
                        PA1, PA2   U                        (2021):       owned by                   Negligible
individual or joint                             (2017): 0                                 targeted
                                                            50%           women
ownership                                                                                 change
                                                                          (2021)
agreements) helping to
close the gender gap
since currently a lower
proportion of houses
are solely or jointly
owned by women.
                                                                                          Over 100
RI3: Number of private
                                                Baseline    Target     Actual             percent of
sector shareholders in PA3         MS                                                                High
                                                (2017): 0   (2021): 15 (2021): 20         targeted
KMRC
                                                                                          change
Objective 2: Enhance Farmers Income and Food Security
RI4: Number of
licensed warehouses
under the WRS
participating in the                                                      Actual          75 percent
Commodities                              Baseline Target                  (2022): 12      of
                     PA4        MS                                                                   Substantial
Exchange that have                       (2017): 0 (2021): 16             Warehouses      targeted
been leased from the                                                      Licensed)       change
National Produce and
Cereal Board to the
private sector
                                                                                         Over 100
RI5: Number of                                              Target        Current
                                                Baseline                                 percent of
farmers benefitting   PA8, PA9     S                        (2021):       status (2021):            High
                                                (2017): 0                                targeted
from e-vouchers                                             150,000       167,000
                                                                                         change
RI6: Proportion of     PA8, PA9    S            Baseline    Target        Actual         Over 100 High
farmers benefitting                             (2017): 0   (2021):       (2021): 58% percent of
from e-vouchers who                                         50%                          targeted
are female, helping to                                                                   change

                                                                                                     Page 17 of 26
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Inclusive Growth and Fiscal DPO (P168204)



close gender gap since
in 2017 a higher
proportion of male
farmers used fertilizer
Objective 3: Create Fiscal Space and Crowd in the Private Sector to Advance the Government’s
Inclusive Growth Agenda
                                                                   Actual
                                                                   (2022):11.0%
                                                                   reflecting     91 percent
RI7: VAT and income                         Baseline Target
                                                                   strong         of
tax revenues as a        PA11, PA12MS       (FY2017): (FY2021):                              Substantial
                                                                   recovery after targeted
share of GDP                                11.2%      12.1%
                                                                   COVID-19       change
                                                                   reduced it to
                                                                   9.9% in 2021.
RI8: Cumulative value
of government                                                                     80 percent
                                                       Target      Actual
procurement contracts                       Baseline                              of
                         PA13, PA14MU                  (2021): 600 (2021): 480               Negligible
published on online                         (2017): 0                             targeted
                                                       billion     billion
procurement portal                                                                change
(Ksh billions)
RI9: Number of
                                                                                  Over 100
investigations related
                                            Baseline Target        Actual         percent of
to bid rigging           PA13, PA14MU                                                        Negligible
                                            (2017): 0 (2021): 5 (2021): 7         targeted
undertaken jointly by
                                                                                  change
CAK and PPRA
                                                                                  0 percent
                                            Baseline Target
RI10: Debt service                                                 Actual (June of
                         PA13, PA15U        (2017):    (2021):                               Negligible
ratio (percent of GDP)                                             2021): 4.8% targeted
                                            4.3%       3.9%
                                                                                  change
RI11: Share of
government securities
transacted on                                                                     Over 100
                                                       Target      Actual
electronic platform,                        Baseline                              percent of
                         PA15      MS                  (2021):     (2021):                   High
allowing for the                            (2017): 0                             targeted
                                                       70%         80.7%
participation of                                                                  change
institutional and retail
investors
Objective 4: Crowd in Private Investment and Leverage Digitization to Support the Government’s
Inclusive Growth Agenda
                                                                   Actual: 2021:
                                                                                  61 percent
RI12: Average credit                        Baseline: Target:      8.6 percent
                                                                                  of
growth to the private PA17         S        2017: 2.8 2021: 14 (and 11.5%                    Modest
                                                                                  targeted
sector                                      percent    percent     by April
                                                                                  change
                                                                   2022).
RI13: Number of          PA18      MU       Baseline Target        Actual         Over 100 Modest
investment projects                         (2017): 37 (2021): 55 (2021): 195 percent of


                                                                                             Page 18 of 26
                   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                   Inclusive Growth and Fiscal DPO (P168204)



               registered by Kenya                                                                   targeted
               Investment Authority                                                                  change
               RI14: Value of capital                                                                Over 100
                                                               Baseline Target         Actual
               Investments registered                                                                percent of
                                       PA18       MU           (2017):      (2021): 20 (2021): 56.32            Modest
               by Kenya investment                                                                   targeted
                                                               13.5 billion billion    billion
               Authority (Ksh billion)                                                               change

  While there are no dedicated RIs for five PAs (PA5, PA6, PA7, PA10, and PA16), the Efficacy section evaluates
  achievement using other information.




  Rating

  Moderately Satisfactory

   5. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
EFFICACY_TBL




                OBJECTIVE 1
                Objective
                To crowd in private investment and financing for affordable housing

                Rationale
                Outcomes. The programmatic series met targets for two out of the three RIs, with 92 percent of the targeted
                change being achieved on the third RI. However, weak relevance of the RIs implies little evidence of progress
                toward the objective.

                      A total of 20,406 affordable housing units were completed (5,106 government funded units; 15,300
                       private sector funded units) by April 2022 against a target of 20,000 units by 2021 and a baseline of 0.
                       However, since RI1 does not measure the achievement of the associated objective as a result of PA1
                       and PA2, its achievement is rated Negligible (rating of RI1=Negligible).
                      Forty-six percent of affordable housing units which were constructed with private investment under the
                       government supported Affordable Homes Program were owned by women (including individual or joint
                       ownership agreements) in 2021 against a target of 50 percent and a baseline of 0. However, since RI1
                       does not measure the achievement of the associated objective as a result of PA1 and PA2 along the
                       results chain, its efficacy is rated Negligible (rating of RI2=Negligible).
                      There were 20 private sector shareholders in KMRC in 2021 against a target of 15 and a baseline of
                       0. Achievement is rated High given that the target was exceeded (rating of RI3=High).



                Rating

                                                                                                                Page 19 of 26
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Inclusive Growth and Fiscal DPO (P168204)




Moderately Unsatisfactory



OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Enhance farmer incomes and food security

Rationale
Outcomes. The programmatic series met targets for two out of the three RIs. Roughly 75 percent of the
targeted change on the third RI was met. However, weak relevance of some of the RIs reduces their ability to
provide evidence of progress toward the objective.

      The number of licensed warehouses under the WRS participating in the Commodities Exchange that
       have been leased from the National Produce and Cereal Board to the private sector reached 12 in
       2022 against a target of 16 and a baseline of 0. Given that more than two-thirds of the targeted
       change in the RI was realized by the target date, and the relevance of RI4 is rated MS, the efficacy
       rating is considered Substantial (rating of RI4=Substantial).
      167,000 farmers benefitted from e-vouchers in 2021 against a target of 150,000 and a baseline of 0
       (rating of RI5=High).
      The proportion of farmers benefitting from e-vouchers who were female reached 58 percent in 2021
       against a target of 50 percent (rating of RI6=High).

Progress toward the overarching objective of enhancing farmer incomes and food security as a result of PA6
and PA7 was limited by the fact that the full functionality of the trading floor was not established due to
insufficient private investment, partly due to the COVID-19 pandemic. A portion of the achievement of
enhancing farmer incomes and food security through PA5, PA6, PA7 and PA10 could not be assessed and
achievement on that portion is rated Negligible.



Rating
Satisfactory



OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
Create fiscal space to allow the government to invest in key development programs

Rationale
Outcomes. The programmatic series met targets for two of the RIs. However, weak relevance of some of the
RIs reduces their ability to provide evidence of progress toward the objective.




                                                                                               Page 20 of 26
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Inclusive Growth and Fiscal DPO (P168204)




      VAT and income tax revenues as a share of GDP reached 11.0 percent in 2022 against a target of
         12.1 percent during FY2021 and a baseline of 11.2 percent in FY2017. The achievement of the target
         for this RI is rated Substantial (rating of RI7=Substantial).
        The cumulative value of government procurement contracts published on the online procurement
         portal reached Ksh 480 billion in 2021 against a target of Ksh 600 billion and a baseline of 0. The
         achievement of the target for RI8 is downgraded to Negligible given the lack of relevance of the RI as
         explained earlier (rating of RI8=Negligible).
        The number of investigations related to bid rigging undertaken jointly by CAK and PPRA reached 7 in
         2021 against a target of 5 and a baseline of 0. The achievement of the target for RI9 is downgraded to
         Negligible given the lack of relevance of the RI as explained earlier (rating of RI9=Negligible).
        The debt service ratio as a percent of GDP reached 4.8 percent in June 2021 against a target of 3.9
         percent and a baseline of 4.3 percent. The achievement of the target for RI10 is downgraded to
         Negligible given the lack of relevance of the RI as explained earlier (rating of RI10=Negligible).
        The share of government securities transacted on the electronic platform, allowing for the participation
         of institutional and retail investors, rose to 80.7 percent in 2021 against a target of 70 percent and a
         baseline of 0 percent (rating of RI11=High).

PA12 failed to be implemented as the measure was viewed to be lacking political support in the aftermath of
the COVID-19 pandemic which induced countercyclical measures to stimulate the economy. The elements of
the Bill were reflected in the Tax Amendment Act which was later adopted. The efficacy of PA12 is assessed
to be Negligible.




Rating
Moderately Unsatisfactory



OBJECTIVE 4
Objective
Crowd in private investment and leverage digitization to support the government's inclusive growth agenda

Rationale
Outcomes. The programmatic series met targets for two out of the three RIs. However, weak relevance of
some of the RIs reduces their ability to provide evidence of progress toward the objective

      Average credit growth to the private sector rose by 8.6 percent in 2021 against a target of 14 percent
       and a baseline of 2.8 percent. Since progress by the target date represents only 61 percent of the
       targeted change, achievement is rated Modest (RI12=Modest).
      The number of investment projects registered by the Kenya Investment Authority rose to 195 in 2021
       against a target of 55 and a baseline of 37. The achievement of the target for RI13 is downgraded to
       Modest given the low relevance of the RI as explained earlier (rating of RI13=Modest).


                                                                                                  Page 21 of 26
                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                      Inclusive Growth and Fiscal DPO (P168204)




                        The number of investments registered by the Kenya Investment Authority rose to Ksh 56.32 billion in
                          2021 against a target of Ksh 20 billion and a baseline of Ksh 13.5 billion. The achievement of the
                          target for RI14 is downgraded to Modest given the low relevance of the RI as explained earlier (rating
                          of RI14=Modest).



                  Rating
                  Moderately Satisfactory




OVERALL EFF TBL OLD




Overall Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
Rationale

With Objective 1 rated Moderately Unsatisfactory, Objective 2 rated Satisfactory, Objective 3 rated Moderately
Unsatisfactory and Objective 4 rated Moderately Satisfactory, overall efficacy is rated Moderately Satisfactory.



Overall Efficacy Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

6. Outcome

Rationale

The relevance of PAs is rated Satisfactory, with PAs linked to the achievement of the program objectives in a
convincing and credible manner. The relevance of RIs is rated Moderately Satisfactory, with some RIs failing to
measure achievement toward the overarching objectives. Overall efficacy is rated Moderately Satisfactory, with
some shortcomings in the achievement toward the overarching objectives and/or the poor relevance of some
RIs. As such, the outcome of this DPO series is rated Moderately Satisfactory.


a. Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

7. Risk to Development Outcome




                                                                                                                  Page 22 of 26
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Inclusive Growth and Fiscal DPO (P168204)



The main risks to sustaining development outcomes relate to: (i) lack of funding to the Kenya Coast Guard
Service limiting the effectiveness of its monitoring and enforcement of illegal fishing (with annual cost estimated
at US$100 million); (ii) weaknesses in the court system undermining the credibility of enforcement against
collusion; and (iii) differential interest rates based on category of borrower and risk to borrowing limiting credit
growth to SMEs if interest rates are excessively high or placing excessive financial burden on SMEs if too
high.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Bank Performance – Design

Rationale

The Bank relied on a range of analytical underpinnings in identifying PAs as detailed in PD (Table 4 for first DPO
series and Table 5 for second DPO series). PAs under Pillar 1 were informed by the Kenya: Expanding
Affordable Housing and Housing Finance and the Business Plan for the Kenya Mortgage Refinance Company
which identified bottlenecks to the delivery of affordable housing units from the demand and the supply side.
PAs under Pillar 2 were informed by the Kenya Commodity Exchange: Feasibility Study, the Political Economy
Analysis of Kenya’s Agricultural Sector, and the Kenya Agriculture Sector Discussion Note: Transforming
Subsistence Agriculture and Building Resilience to Climate Change. PAs under Pillar 3 were informed by the
analytical underpinnings of the Kenya Tax Policy Studies: Value Added Tax: Improving Tax Policy for
Strengthening Domestic Revenue Mobilization. PAs under Pillar 4 were informed by the Kenya Country Private
Sector Diagnostic.

The program had a number of shortcomings, however. The results chain between PAs and the achievement of
objectives was not credible in many instances. Further, the PD did not identify the main risks and constraints to
achieving PDOs. Further, there were serious shortcomings in a number of the RIs which undermined their ability
to provide credible evidence of progress toward the achievement of objectives. Further, there were no dedicated
RIs for five PAs, which undermined the measurement of progress toward the achievement of objectives and
prevented RIs to be adapted appropriately to lessons learned or changes in underlying conditions and risks.



Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

b. Bank Performance – Implementation

Rationale

The IEG concedes that the COVID-19 pandemic may have delayed the achievement of some of the RI targets.
The IEG finds, however, that there were a number of shortcomings in Bank performance with implementation.
First, the programmatic series failed to incorporate mitigating measures to address technical capacity constraints
and ownership concerns to address risks to achieving PDOs. Second, RIs which did not adequately measure

                                                                                                      Page 23 of 26
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Inclusive Growth and Fiscal DPO (P168204)



progress toward the achievement of the PDOs could have been adjusted in the second programmatic series.
Third, there is a lack of evidence of the Bank’s engagement with stakeholders.



Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

c. Overall Bank Performance

Rationale

Overall Bank performance is rated Moderately Satisfactory, with Bank performance on design and Bank
performance on implementation each rated Moderately Satisfactory.


Overall Bank Performance Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

9. Other Impacts

a. Social and Poverty

Measures implemented under Pillar 2 allowed more than 165,000 farmers to benefit from subsidized fertilizers
under the e-voucher scheme. According to the Ministry of Agriculture estimates, average agricultural productivity
increased by roughly 25 percent among the beneficiaries of the e-voucher program, supporting smallholder
farmers' food security and livelihoods.



b. Environmental

The increased reliance on fertilizers may have adverse environmental impacts.



c. Gender

None noted.



d. Other




                                                                                                  Page 24 of 26
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Inclusive Growth and Fiscal DPO (P168204)



The project supported institutional strengthening through the improved governance in the agricultural sector, the
institutional and legal foundation adopted for the warehouse receipts system, and the more efficient
procurement system through the electronic procurement portal.



10. Quality of ICR

Rationale

The quality of the ICR is rated Substantial. The ICR could have been improved by providing a bit more context
and details to justify the relevance of some of the PAs. For example, the ICR missed to explain the relevance of
the Commodities Exchange or the WRS to the Kenyan context. It also missed explaining why the Commodities
Exchange was not operational by the project closing date and what it would take for it to become fully
operational. Finally, one would expect a fully operational Commodities Exchange to be linked to the WRS. The
ICR also failed to include PA10.


a. Rating

Substantial

11. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                   IEG
                                                                                Disagreement/Comments
                                                                              The relevance of PAs is rated
                                                                              Satisfactory, with PAs linked to
                                                                              the achievement of the program
                                                                              objectives in a convincing and
                                                                              credible manner. The relevance
                                                                              of RIs is rated Moderately
                                                                              Satisfactory, with some RIs
                                                                              failing to measure achievement
                                                                              toward the overarching
Outcome                         Satisfactory          Moderately Satisfactory
                                                                              objectives. Overall efficacy is
                                                                              rated Moderately Satisfactory,
                                                                              with some shortcomings in the
                                                                              achievement toward the
                                                                              overarching objectives and/or
                                                                              the poor relevance of some RIs.
                                                                              As such, the outcome of this
                                                                              DPO series is rated Moderately
                                                                              Satisfactory.
                                                                              Overall Bank performance is
                                                                              rated Moderately Satisfactory,
Bank Performance                Satisfactory          Moderately Satisfactory
                                                                              with Bank performance on
                                                                              design and Bank performance

                                                                                                  Page 25 of 26
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Inclusive Growth and Fiscal DPO (P168204)



                                                                              on implementation each rated
                                                                              Satisfactory.
Relevance of Results
                                ---                 Moderately Satisfactory
Indicators
Quality of ICR                  ---                 Substantial


12. Lessons

There a number of lessons which may be derived from this ICR Review, which include, most notably:

    1. Estimates of the anticipated reduction of tax exemptions of the Income Tax Bill 2019 should have been
       assessed to justify its relevance in supporting the achievement of the overarching objective of creating
       fiscal space.
    2. Evidence should have been provided on how the adoption of an electronic debt registry supported the
       achievement of the overarching objective of creating fiscal space compared to the manual debt registry
       which was relied upon until then.
    3. The adoption of a strategy, such as the second National Broadband Strategy covering the 2018-2023
       period, does not sufficiently move the reform process along the results chain, and must have
       been complemented by reform measures.
    4. RIs should be carefully selected carefully in order to ensure that they are clear, well defined and can
       measure achievement of the target of the RI toward the overarching objective along the result chain. In
       this DPO series, the relevance of many RIs were rated as Unsatisfactory or Moderately Unsatisfactory,
       which limited the assessment of the achievement of the overarching objectives. Further, the achievement
       of Objective 2 was not even fully assessed through the RIs which had been identified.


13. Project Performance Assessment Report (PPAR) Recommended?

Yes
ASSESSMENT_TABLE
Please explain
Given the large size of the DPO series, and its complexity, this may warrant a more in-depth look through a
PPAR.




                                                                                                 Page 26 of 26
