     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BF-Transport and Urban Infras. Dev. (P151832)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0023345

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P151832                                    BF-Transport and Urban Infras. Dev.

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Burkina Faso                               Urban, Resilience and Land


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-58590                                  31-Oct-2022                                         88,160,897.84

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 13-Jun-2016                                31-Mar-2022

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           100,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                             92,890,450.00                                              0.00

 Actual                                         87,974,407.98                                              0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Cynthia Nunez-Ollero        Ebru Karamete                Kavita Mathur                  IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Financing Agreement (FA, p. 4) and the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, paragraph 17),
   the Project Development Objective (PDO) was "to improve mobility and access to infrastructure in target
   urban/rural areas and in the event of Eligible Crisis, Emergency, to provide immediate and effective response
   to an eligible crisis or emergency."

   This review will assess the achievement of the following objectives:


                                                                                                  Page 1 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BF-Transport and Urban Infras. Dev. (P151832)



         to improve mobility in target urban/rural areas.
         to improve access to infrastructure in target urban/rural areas.
         to provide immediate and effective response to an eligible crisis or emergency.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project included five components:

   1, Inter-urban Infrastructure (US$56.0 million in IDA, including US$3.1 million in Project Preparation
   Advance, US$52.97 million, actual). This component was to finance investments in roads and
   telecommunications to connect five targeted regional capitals and the rural hinterland in the south (Manga
   and Tenkodogo). Specifically, this component was to finance the following road upgrading: (i) roads
   between Manga and Zabré; (ii) the Dindéogo-Zonsé rural road connecting production areas to the Manga-
   Zabré main road; and (iii) construction of two toll stations and an axle load control station between Manga
   and Zabré. In addition, the component was to finance feasibility studies and engineering designs to; (i)
   upgrade existing rural roads, (ii) construct or rehabilitate culverts in the hinterland rural areas of Manga,
   Tenkodogo, Ouahigouya, Koudougou, and Dédougou, and (iii) internet connectivity along the Manga-Zabré
   road.

   2. Urban Infrastructure in Targeted Regional Capitals (US$30.0 million equivalent in IDA,
   US$25.96 million actual). This component was to finance urban infrastructure investments in the five
   targeted regional capitals of Manga, Tenkodogo, Ouahigouya, Koudougou, and Dédougou. A pre-feasibility
   study was to be financed to assess institutional, socio-environmental, technical, and financial viability of all
   proposed investments. An indicative list of potential investments included: (i) asphalting of unpaved urban
   roads; (ii) construction of storm water drainage channels; (iii) rehabilitation and expansion of market
   gardens in Manga and Ouahigouya; (iv) upgrading of central bus stations in Dédougou and Manga; (e)
   construction of a market in Dédougou and a cattle market in Manga; and (f) upgrading of an abattoir in
   Manga (ICR, paragraph 14). This indicative list was to be refined based on a fixed investment ceiling for
   each city and in consultation with the local governments that were to be elected (ICR, footnote 7).

   3. Institutional Support and Sector Governance (US$13.0 million equivalent consisting of US$10.0
   million in IDA and US$3.0 million in counterpart funding, US$8.7 million actual consisting of
   US$6.8 million in IDA and US$1.9 million in co-financing). This component was to finance activities to
   improve the institutional and operational capacity of ministries through training and participation in seminars
   and workshops, equipment and implementation of sector reforms. These reforms were to include multiyear
   contracting of road maintenance activities; urban planning and management and improving statistics and
   management skills.

   4. Project Management (US$6.0 million consisting of US$4.0 million in IDA and US$2.0 million in
   counterpart funding, IDA US$5.9 million, actual consisting of US$4.7 million in IDA and US$1.1 million in


                                                                                                      Page 2 of 22
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    BF-Transport and Urban Infras. Dev. (P151832)



  counterpart financing). This component was to finance the cost of project management, monitoring and
  evaluation (M&E), technical and financial audits, and communication.

  5. Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC) (US$0 at appraisal, US$0 actual). In
  accordance with OP/BP 10.00, this component would address major adverse economic and/or social impact
  from natural or man-made disaster by rapidly reallocating uncommitted project funds. In case of an
  emergency, the Government was to declare an emergency or justify the use of emergency funding. If the
  Bank agrees, the uncommitted project funds would be reallocated to finance a positive list of critical goods
  or the procurement of works and services to support rapid response and recovery. An Emergency
  Response Operations Manual was to detail financial management (FM), procurement, safeguards,
  and other implementation arrangements. The Permanent Secretariat of the Transport Sector Project
  (Secrétariat Permanent du Programme Sectoriel de Transport, or SP/PST) was to implement CERC. No
  crisis or emergency occurred to trigger this component (ICR, paragraph 7).



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost: The original total project cost was equivalent to US$105 million. The actual project cost
  was US$87.97 million.

  Financing: The International Development Association (IDA) financed the credit (appraisal estimate was
  US$100 million). The credit disbursed US$87.97 million. US$7 million was cancelled during the second
  restructuring (see below). Another US$4.9 million was cancelled at closing. According to the ICR (Annex 3)
  exchange rate fluctuations accounted for the balance.

  Co-financing: The Swiss Development Cooperation (SDC) was to separately provide CHF 7 million in
  parallel to complement the project by financing high-intensity labor methods (HILM) to upgrade and
  rehabilitate roads, culverts, health and education centers. connect selected hinterlands agriculture
  production areas, and technical feasibility study for internet connectivity. There was no actual co-financing.

  Borrower Contribution: The government committed contributions of US$5.0 million at appraisal
  and disbursed US$3.08 million. Out of the US$5.0 million, US$3.0 million was to co-finance activities under
  Institutional Support and Sector Governance component (see above). US$2.0 million was to finance the
  preparation and implementation of social and environmental safeguard instruments, and costs for focal
  points, and meetings of the steering and technical committees. The balance of US$1.92 million was unused.

  Dates: The project was approved on June 13, 2016 and made effective on November 16, 2016. The Mid
  Term Review (MTR) was conducted on February 26, 2020. The original closing date was October 31, 2022
  but the project closed earlier, on March 31, 2022. There were two level 2 restructurings reported in the ICR
  but three noted in the data sheet:

        On November 11, 2020 to advance the original closing date from October 31, 2022, to December
         31, 2021, change the institutional arrangements and the implementing agency, and
         introduce changes to the results framework. All key project activities were expected to be completed
         by the end of 2021. This first restructuring amended the FA to include two new implementing entities
         - the Burkina Faso Infrastructure Works Agency (AGETIB) to implement the construction of 20 km of
         urban roads and 2.5 km of storm water drainage channel, and the Urban Infrastructures and


                                                                                                    Page 3 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BF-Transport and Urban Infras. Dev. (P151832)



          Equipment Agency (ACOMOD) to implement 2 central bus stations, 1 animal slaughter facility and 3
          markets.
         On December 23, 2021 to extend the closing date to March 31, 2022, reallocate resources among
          disbursement categories, and cancel US$7 million equivalent (ICR, paragraph 19(c)). A 2-month
          extension was granted to complete the ICR and allow the team to retrieve unarchived data used for
          the economic analysis at appraisal.

   Split Rating: No split rating of the outcome is made. There was no change in PDO. Changes made to the
   results framework did not affect the ambition or scope of the project and did not warrant a split rating.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country Context: Burkina Faso is a landlocked, low-income, mostly agricultural country in the Sahel.
Eighty percent of the country’s labor work in the agricultural sector. Sixty-one percent of rural households
derive their income from agriculture. They rely on roads to bring their products to markets. The road
network is underdeveloped. Secondary and tertiary rural roads provided mobility to 75 percent of the
population. Majority of these roads were in bad condition. Only 20 percent of classified roads were
asphalted. Over half of tertiary roads were impassable during the rainy season. Sub-Saharan Africa (SSA)
has a Rural Access Index average of 34 percent. Burkina Faso averaged 26 percent. In 2014, 38 percent of
rural households were located more than an hour’s walk from the nearest road, 33 percent more than an
hour away from the market, and 51 percent more than an hour from a means of transportation. This lack of
infrastructure and connectivity between regional capitals, larger cities and their rural hinterlands make
it difficult for producers to send their agricultural surplus to markets. Meanwhile, economic opportunities in
urban areas attracted rural migration. Over 70 percent of the country’s urban population lived in its two
largest cities, Ouagadougou and Bobo-Dioulasso spilling into outskirts that had inadequate road networks.
Sixty percent lived in underserved informal settlements. The use of individual motorized transport rose,
leading to traffic congestion and even poorer mobility. These and other cities lacked core infrastructure to
meet the needs of a growing population. Cities lacked capacity, resources, and institutional framework for
urban and transport planning.

The project development objectives (PDOs) were to link agricultural production areas and urban centers,
and improve access to urban infrastructure by improving roads, investing in local service delivery, and
boosting urban planning capacity. The objectives were outcome oriented, pitched at an appropriate level to
match limited implementation capacity and development conditions based on its Fragile, Conflict, and
Violence (FCV) category (see Bank strategy below).

Country Plans: The efforts to improve urban infrastructure, finance local government
infrastructure, improve connectivity in agricultural zones of production by connecting the hinterlands and
urban centers were reflected in the government's National Plan for Social and Economic Development
(Plan National de Développement Economique et Social or PNDES) I and evident in PNDES II for 2021-
2025. PNDES was to link the country to the global economy by improving transport and trade. Objective 4.4
aimed to improve accessibility to transport infrastructure, planning and management of urban mobility,
develop urban and rural areas, and provide amenities to cities. PNDES II, by 2025, was to increase paved
roads to 36 percent (from 27 percent in 2020). This meant 100 percent of urban roads (from 59 percent),

                                                                                                    Page 4 of 22
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      BF-Transport and Urban Infras. Dev. (P151832)



               and 44 percent of rural roads (from 33 percent). In addition, PNDES II efforts aimed to achieve 60 percent
               of roads to be in good condition (from 24 percent) and rehabilitate 36 percent of paved roads (from 18
               percent). PNDES II objective 4.3 was to ensure that everyone had access to safe, affordable, accessible,
               and sustainable transport systems by 2030. The PDOs were relevant to the objectives of the government
               outlined in PNDES II. For example, four of the six focus areas in the government’s urban investment
               program to implement PNDES II constituted the preselected activities under component B.

               World Bank Country Partnership Framework: At project closing, the World Bank's Country Partnership
               Framework (CPF) for FY18-23 highlighted three main priorities: (i) improving the management of natural
               resources; (ii) promoting skills development; and (iii) reducing gender bias against women. The second-tier
               priorities were: (i) building infrastructure to promote further local and regional integration; (ii) encouraging
               financial inclusion; (iii) increasing resilience through improved social protection of the poorest; (iv) ensuring
               fiscal efficiency and macroeconomic stability; (v) building up inclusive and transparent institutions; (vi)
               promoting competition and private sector development to stimulate efficiency and innovation; and (vii)
               managing urbanization with efficient urban centers.(CPF, paragraph 40). AThe PDOs were relevant to
               objective 1.3: Improve connectivity for better access to markets to achieve Focus Area 1: Accelerate
               sustainable private sector led growth for job creation. Hence, the project aimed to generate employment
               and promote small businesses along the improved roads. The PDO was also relevant to the approach
               adopted in the CPF to address deteriorating security due to the influx of over 34,000 refugees from the
               Sahelian sub-region.

               World Bank Experience in the Country and in the Sector: The Bank has been engaged in the country
               and in the sector since 2003 (PAD, paragraph 39). Some of these projects included: Decentralized Urban
               Capacity Building Project (P084027, US$10 million IDA funds, closed January 2013); the Ouagadougou
               Transport Modal Shift Project (P087630, US$1 million Global Environment Fund, closed June 2015); and
               the Local Government Support Project (P120517, US$60 million IDA, closed December 2016). The latter
               was to support a revenue collection performance contract between the General Directorate of Tax and the
               local councils.

               Overall, the project objectives were highly aligned with the country's own plans and the Bank's current
               country strategy. The objectives were to address the development problem brought about by the poor road
               network and unplanned urbanization. The government's plan acknowledges the need to rehabilitate and
               improve its road network. The objectives were also aligned with the Bank's one of three pillars and was
               noted to specifically contribute to achieving objective 1.3.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective

                                                                                                                      Page 5 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BF-Transport and Urban Infras. Dev. (P151832)



To improve mobility in target urban/rural areas.

Rationale
Theory of Change (TOC): No TOC was prepared at appraisal (ICR, paragraph 6) but the results framework
in Annex 1 of the PAD provided the causal link between inputs, outputs, and expected outcomes. Investments
in roadworks and telecommunications connectivity were to improve inter-urban connectivity between five
targeted regional capitals and the rural hinterland in the south of the country (around Manga and
Tenkodogo).

The inputs included technical design of road upgrading works of the RN29 between Manga and Zabré with
two toll stations, an axle load control station, the rehabilitation of the Dindéogo-Zonsé road, and feasibility
study of internet connectivity along the Manga-Zabré road. These inputs were to lead to outputs such
as paved road between Manga and Zabré; rehabilitated rural road in the Dindéogo-Zonsé to
connect production areas to the Manga-Zabré main road; and toll stations and an axle load control station on
the road between Manga and Zabré.

These outputs were to lead to the outcome of improved mobility expressed as reduced travel time along the
completed roads, improved urban services, increased access to markets, and improved living conditions in
the long run. These outcomes were expressed as the number of gender-disaggregated direct project
beneficiaries. No other indicators were provided to reflect the development outcomes of improved mobility,
such as how these outputs improved the lives (access to health facilities, or lowered incidence of
accidents, for example) and livelihoods of its beneficiaries (e.g., increase in income). These could have
included, e.g., increase in marketed outputs and incomes of agricultural producers, frequency of transporting
goods to markets, or efficient market prices of agricultural products.

Three critical assumptions in the TOC to increase the likelihood that the outcomes would be achieved were
(i) that newly elected officials would approve the investment activities; (ii) the completed investments have
available resources for maintenance; and (iii) reforms were adopted and enacted. The assumptions did not
include capacity of the implementing entities, or the revenues collected from operational toll roads or use of
the axle load control station.

The TOC lacked indicators measuring road safety, quality of constructed roads and other infrastructure. The
TOC did not include the factors the project identified as benefits in justifying the economic benefits of the
project. These included the following:(i) time and cost savings due to improved connectivity and mobility; (ii)
temporary and permanent jobs generated; (iii) lowered cost of agricultural produce in urban areas due to
improved connections to the agricultural hinterland; (iv) reduced losses in transporting agricultural produce;
and (v) increased economic activities and job creation along the rehabilitated roads. (see Section 5 Efficiency
below). According to the Bank Team they did not use these outcomes because these were only estimated at
closing.

OUTPUTS: The following outputs achieved or almost achieved its targets:

      79.06 km of non-rural roads of R29 was paved, exceeding the target of 78 km.
      289,062 person days of employment were created. The original target was 310,000 person days. The
       construction of a 9 km rural road between Dindéogo and Zonsé and other infrastructures were
       cancelled with no change in the number of target person-days of employment.
      A feasibility study of internet connectivity along the Manga-Zabré road was completed, achieving the
       target. The feasibility of including a digital connectivity activity or ICT services (e.g., fiber optic or

                                                                                                     Page 6 of 22
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  BF-Transport and Urban Infras. Dev. (P151832)



     wireless antennae) in the road designs to avoid the 'digital isolation’ of the agglomerations along these
     roads. However, the project was unable to incorporate physical connectivity into roadway design.
     This activity was dropped.
    Two toll and axle load control stations were constructed as targeted.
    The following feasibility studies were completed as planned - to upgrade 100 km of rural unpaved
     roads and build 40 culverts; extension of the national road network; and engineering designs for the
     remaining 24 km of the Manga-Zabré-Zoaga-Ghana border road (between Zabré and the Ghana
     border), 200 km of rural roads, 40 km of road between Dindéogo and Bagré, and 9 km between
     Dindéogo and Zonsé.

OUTCOMES:

    The completed Manga-Zabré road reduced travel time from a baseline of 130 to 80 minutes or by
       50 minutes. The original target was to reduce this travel time by 60 minutes. The target was almost
       achieved. Residents requested safety measure in the villages adjacent to the road by installing speed
       bumps to reduce accidents, and due to the construction of these, the travel times reduced was less
       than the target. The reduced travel time between Manga and Zabré improved the transport
       of agricultural products to consumers and led to increased economic benefits for producers. However,
       baseline and the value of this increase in economic benefits was not measured or reported.
      18,701 direct project beneficiaries were provided with access to all-season roads within a 500-meter
       range. The original target of 18,000 people was exceeded because an additional 800 m of asphalted
       road was constructed in densely populated areas. The target of 53 percent female beneficiaries was
       achieved.
      The ICR claimed that the rehabilitated RN29 improved safety conditions for vehicles and
       pedestrians and provided access to health and education centers. No indicator measured these
       aspects, particularly road safety. In addition, the project was to have contributed to an increase in the
       sustainability and integration of the road network. No data was provided but anecdotes were
       reported. A Mangan farmer and a merchant reported: “We ... needed the tar and the central bus
       station for our activities. With the paved road, I can easily go and sell my products or buy agricultural
       inputs” and “Before the road was built, it was not easy to get to Zabré, especially in the rainy season.
       .... Now, at any time we can take the road without being afraid [of vehicle breakdown]. I know people
       who even make two or three round trips a day” (ICR, paragraph 28).
      The completed infrastructures toll station and the axle load control station were to increase the
       sustainability and integration of the broader road network. The two newly built stations (only one was
       operational at project close) was to collect toll revenues to supplement the budget allocated to the
       Ministry of Transport (MOT) Special Fund for Roads (Fonds Spécial Routier du Burkina, or FSR-B) for
       road maintenance and contribute to the sustainability of this infrastructure. The project financed the
       toll road buildings to connect the RN29 between Manga and Zabré to a section of road between Zabré
       and the border with Ghana. At project closing, the staff and equipment were not yet in place. The road
       has not reached the minimum traffic threshold necessary to be financially viable but is expected to be
       reached after the construction of 24 km of road between Zabré and the border with Ghana, planned
       under the Lomé-Ouagadougou-Niamey Economic Corridor project (P168386). In the case of the axle
       load control station, this was to maintain the completed road (RN29) in good condition.
      The Swiss Agency for Development and Cooperation (SDC) separately financed the construction of
       100 km of rural roads and 40 culverts using employment-intensive method in coordination with this
       project. Neighboring rural hinterlands were opened. This activity was expected to benefit 30 percent of
       the local population to develop economic activities in the future. Some of the studies extending the

                                                                                                  Page 7 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BF-Transport and Urban Infras. Dev. (P151832)



       national road were used by the Bank-financed Secondary Cities Urban Mobility and Development
       project (P177918). The completed design to construct the road between Dindéogo and Zonsé showed
       a threefold increase in cost that the project could not afford to finance and was cancelled and
       transferred to another project.

Overall, the efficacy of the project to achieve this objective is rated Modest because only one of two
outcomes was almost achieved, and other outcomes were not measured or supported by evidence.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To improve access to infrastructure in target urban/rural areas.

Rationale
Theory of Change (TOC): No TOC was carried out at appraisal (ICR, paragraph 6) but the results framework
in Annex 1 of the PAD provided the causal link between inputs, outputs, and expected outcomes. Inputs
were to include a pre-feasibility study to assess institutional, socio-environmental, technical, and financial
viability of all proposed infrastructure investments and reforms to improve capacity to monitor the
implementation of policies for the transport and road sectors. Inputs also included the design and construction
of infrastructure investments such as roads, markets, and other economic infrastructures such as bus
stations, and abattoirs. Outputs were to include the implementation of sector reforms expressed as capacity
to generate annual sector reports and the built infrastructure investments such as roads, bus terminals,
markets, etc. Restructuring reduced the outputs from 8 to 7 infrastructure activities and the construction of
two was cancelled. Outputs were also to include the number of businesses (the number of shops and
economic activities) to be installed along the rehabilitated roads as an intermediate outcome.

Outcomes were to be expressed as the number of people in urban areas with access to all-season roads
within a 500-meter range and those provided with access to other infrastructure. The assumptions identified
for the first objective also applied to this objective. A gap in these assumptions was sufficient capacity of the
implementation agencies. There were no other indicators to capture how the outputs (reforms) were
implemented (beyond generating reports) and improved lives (access to health facilities, clean markets,
safety features in bus terminals, or lowered incidence of accidents, for example) and improved livelihoods
(e.g., increase in income or business ventures in markets and bus terminals) of the beneficiaries.

Outcome in sector reforms could have captured zoning improvements by way of new business permits
generated, for example. One outcome indicator, the number of sectors that would generate annual reports
was a proxy for improved capacity but was more at an output rather than an outcome level indicator (see
Section 9 Monitoring and Evaluation below). The TOC correctly identified the number of new businesses
generated along the improved roads as an intermediate outcome. The ICR acknowledged that more specific
indicators would have better targeted women beneficiaries to improve the gender equity of the project impact
(ICR, paragraph 63).The Bank team clarified that these could have included targeting a majority of the shops



                                                                                                    Page 8 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BF-Transport and Urban Infras. Dev. (P151832)



established around the roads to have been managed by women or gender disaggregating the indicators that
applied to the number of jobs created, the number of people trained, or new business shop owners.

OUTPUTS:

     19.34 km of non-rural roads - 7 km of road in Koudougou, 7.04 km in Ouahigouya and 5.3 km in
        Tenkodogo - were rehabilitated. The target of 20 km was almost achieved. All roads were equipped
        with solar-powered street lighting, which facilitated commercial activities after dark and helped
        creating safer streets at night, while having a low carbon footprint. Civils works in Koudougou also
        included the construction of two crossing structures, multiple culverts and a 2.5 km rainwater drainage
        canal.
       7 economic and other infrastructure was constructed - a cattle market, an abattoir and a bus terminal
        in Manga, a market and a bus terminal in Dédougou, a market garden in Ouahigouya, and drainage
        canal in Koudougou. The original target of 8 was reduced to 7 and was almost achieved. The
        construction of two infrastructure was cancelled at restructuring - two gardening perimeters in Manga
        and Ouahigouya and a craft village in Ouahigouya. All completed infrastructure was accessible by
        mid-December 2022, seven months after the project closing date. Preparatory studies for two
        garden perimeters in Manga and Ouahigouya that were finalized but not constructed due to a lack of
        time were to be completed under the Burkina Faso Emergency Local Development and Resilience
        Project (P175382).
       262 shops and other economic activities were installed along the rehabilitated non-rural roads
        (ICR, paragraph 32). The target of 300 was almost achieved.
       As targeted, staff from 12 cities were trained to implement urban master plans. Training included the
        preparation of a series of studies to enhance urban planning through demarcation zoning in major
        cities and improve urban mobility in Ouagadougou and improve storm water drainage in secondary
        cities (now used by the Burkina Faso Emergency Local Development and Resilience Project
        (P175382). The strengthened capacities for demarcating zoning designations were expected
        to address urbanization patterns. Regional capitals were provided with adequate demarcation
        equipment to complement their training and the city of Ouagadougou was equipped with vehicles,
        office furniture and the installation of traffic signs which contributed to improve traffic flow.
        The equipment was to support the recently created transport authority in Ouagadougou to implement
        the regulations developed by the project.
       5 regulatory acts and policies were prepared. The target of 5 was achieved. The project supported
        the partner ministries in preparing regulations to improve the planning, implementation, and
        management of infrastructure and urban mobility. These regulations included urban planning
        and construction code, the law on real estate development, business licenses, a decree regulating
        road traffic in Upper Volta, and a decree on the organization of urban transport. All regulations were
        prepared, but four had not been adopted at project close due to the political situation.
       80 percent of annual training plans were delivered through seminars and workshops on - construction
        and maintenance techniques for rural roads and hydraulic structures, paving and gutter construction;
        public policies; M&E; and results-based management. The target of executing 80 percent was
        achieved. Local authorities received specific training in managing local infrastructure assets and
        maintaining infrastructure to ensure the sustainability of investments. These benefited over 500
        persons.
       100 percent of grievances that were registered related to delivery of project benefits were addressed
        following the establishment of the grievance mechanism. The target of 90 percent was exceeded.
        There was no GRM in the first three years of the project. GRM was set up during the second half of

                                                                                                  Page 9 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BF-Transport and Urban Infras. Dev. (P151832)



       the project. GRM was limited to the committees set up as part of the Resettlement Action Plans
       (RAPs). The GRM was not fully functional until a few months before project closure. Without the GRM
       or RAP in the project areas during 90 percent of the project period, complaints in these areas were
       not properly recorded, including those related to GBV and sexual exploitation, abuse and harassment
       (SEA/SH). This was one of the main shortcomings of the project.

OUTCOMES:

      23,442 people in urban areas were provided access to other infrastructure. The original target
       of 23,750 people was almost achieved. Two factors affected this outcome. First, the January 2022
       coup replaced local governments with special delegations. The official start-up of the urban facilities
       was delayed because new local elections were yet to be held. Second, the PIU did not carry out
       census of beneficiaries. The estimated number of beneficiaries for these facilities at preparation was
       reported as achieved even with the cancelled construction of two infrastructures and seven of eight
       targeted infrastructures were built. The original target was not reduced at restructuring. The final tally
       of beneficiaries included beneficiaries of the market garden in Ouahigouya that was not included in the
       initial target at appraisal. The solar-powered street lighting in these roads facilitated commercial
       activities after dark, helped create safer streets at night, and a low carbon footprint.
      As targeted, two sectors (transport and urban) received training to improve their capacity to monitor
       the implementation of its policies and prepare statistical studies and annual reports. This improved
       capacity was expected to increase public awareness and inform future decision-making in these
       areas.
      165,393 direct project beneficiaries (the target of 165,000 persons was achieved, of which 53 percent
       were female (the baseline was 51 percent, and the original target of 53 percent was achieved).
      The completed infrastructure was expected to allow the cities to increase their roles
       in commercialization of agriculture products and strengthen their local economies in the future. These
       claims were not supported by data.

Overall, the efficacy of the project to achieve this objective is rated Substantial. All target outcome indicators
were achieved. The economic infrastructure and roads were built and beneficiaries were provided access.
The Bank team confirmed that the project estimated some of the economic and social impacts of the
completed projects although not all were captured in the beneficiary surveys (see Section 5 Efficiency).



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
To provide immediate and effective response to an eligible crisis or emergency.

Rationale




                                                                                                   Page 10 of 22
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                BF-Transport and Urban Infras. Dev. (P151832)



                            Theory of Change (TOC). This component was to provide immediate and effective response to an eligible
                            crisis or emergency. According to the ICR, this component (Contingent Emergency Response Component or
                            CERC) was not triggered (ICR, paragraph 7).

                            INPUTS: The inputs included identifying a positive list of eligible activities to be financed, a declaration of the
                            emergency and a Manual of Operations to guide the disbursement of funds should CERC be triggered.

                            OUTPTUS: The outputs were to include the activities to be financed by CERC.

                            OUTCOMES: If CERC were triggered, this was the number of beneficiaries benefitting from emergency
                            response and recovery activities. CERC was not triggered.



                            Rating
                            Not Rated/Not Applicable


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The efficacy of the project to achieve the first objective of mobility is rated modest because the outcome
                            targets were almost achieved, however, there was a lack of data to support some of the reported results. The
                            efficacy of the project to achieve the second objective of access is rated substantial with moderate
                            shortcomings. All the outcome target indicators were achieved or exceeded but there was also a lack of
                            indicators that would have better reflected the efficacy of the project to achieve this objective. The efficacy of
                            the project to achieve the third objective is not rated because the activities to support this objective was not
                            triggered. Overall efficacy of the project to achieve its objectives is rated Substantial with moderate
                            shortcomings.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   Economic and Financial Efficiency: At appraisal, an economic benefit cost analysis used the Highway
   Development and Management for Roads Economic Decision (RED) Model. The Bank team clarified that the
   benefits were estimated and included the following: (i) time and cost savings due to improved connectivity and
   mobility; (ii) temporary and permanent jobs generated; (iii) lowered cost of agricultural produce in urban areas
   due to improved connections to the agricultural hinterland; (iv) reduced losses in transporting agricultural
   produce; (v) increased economic activities and job creation along the rehabilitated roads; (vi) improved service
   levels; (vii) improved access to urban services; (viii) improved local government revenues; and (ix) more efficient
   and effective urban planning and management in target cities. During appraisal, the Economic Internal Rate of

                                                                                                                                 Page 11 of 22
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      BF-Transport and Urban Infras. Dev. (P151832)



Return (EIRR) was estimated at 36 percent for the 78 km road with a Net Present Value (NPV) of US$45.4
million discounted at 12 percent. Financial analysis for the planned revenue-generating investments were to be
carried out during the implementation.

At closing, the economic analysis used the same RED method at appraisal. However, with COVID19 and
security constraints, onsite data collection was not carried out to have a comparable analysis using the method
at appraisal, e.g., vehicle counting. The Bank team clarified that they used other methods to estimate
comparable data and that some, not all of the benefits identified at appraisal were monitored through the
beneficiary survey conducted at closing. Only the ex-ante financial analysis was carried out by calculating the
benefits accruing from the rehabilitation of 78 km of RN29 Manga-Zabré inter-urban road. The project did not
carry out an ex-ante financial analyses of the revenue-generating investments. None of the benefits identified
ex-ante (beside the temporary and permanent jobs created and the increased economic activities and jobs
created along the rehabilitated roads) were monitored. The RED Model was re-run and was adjusted for the
travel time saved. Land appreciation next to upgraded urban roads was added using a benefit transfer to a
hedonic method. A hedonic method uses the incremental cost of land associated with urban road improvement.
The improvement reflects the economic opportunities derived from factors associated with time, services,
access, dust, dirt, vector-borne diseases, etc. perceived by economic agents after enjoying paved and flood-
proofed roads (ICR, Annex 4, paragraph 2). Additional income generated by labor-intensive work used the
multiplier effect. At closing, using a discount rate of 12 percent, the same 78 km reached an EIRR of 22 percent
with an NPV of US$26.4 million equivalent (FCFA15.6 billion).

Operational and Administrative Efficiency: The project design was simple, but the organizational
arrangement was complex. The 2014 coup d’état dissolved the councils and affected the operations since local
governments were part of the implementation arrangement. Complex institutional arrangements, lack of
coordination among key stakeholders and delays in the recruitment of key staff led to project delays. For
example, a month before the original deadline, construction of urban infrastructures had not yet begun, and
most Component C activities were not ready for implementation (see Section 8 Assessment of Bank
Performance below). An unqualified coordinator during the first three years of implementation led to low quality
of reports, weak coordination, poor reporting; and implementation delays. A qualified coordinator was
subsequently appointed but with insufficient time to simultaneously supervise several projects. Risks and
mitigating measures were not sufficient to overcome operational and administrative inefficiencies. Shortcomings
in the design and implementation of the M&E system further reduced project efficiency (see Section 9 M&E
Design and Implementation below). Secondary activities and associated funds were cancelled further reducing
operational efficiency. Low capacity and poor compliance with environmental and social (E&S) safeguards led to
delays and cancelled activities that could not be completed on time. The PIU had high turnover in the case of
the M&E specialist and hired the social specialist three years after project start, taking up his duties in June
2020.These recruitments affected project efficiency. Some of the activities could not be completed in time and
were transferred to other Bank-funded projects.

Overall, project efficiency is rated Modest. The team estimated substantial economic efficiency of the project
based on assumptions and not actual data, and also there was operational inefficiencies. Complex institutional
arrangements, lack of coordination between key stakeholders and delays in the recruitment of key staff also led
to difficulties in project implementation


Efficiency Rating
Modest

                                                                                                   Page 12 of 22
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      BF-Transport and Urban Infras. Dev. (P151832)




a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)            *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                       56.00
Appraisal                                                   36.00
                                                                                        Not Applicable
                                                                                       53.00
ICR Estimate                                                22.00
                                                                                        Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The relevance of objectives is rated High. The efficacy of the project to achieve the first objective is rated
Modest while the efficacy of the project to achieve the second objective is rated Substantial with moderate
shortcomings. The efficacy of the project to achieve the third objective is not rated. The overall efficacy of the
project to achieve its objectives is rated Substantial with moderate shortcomings. Efficiency is rated
Modest. Outcome is therefore rated Moderately Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The following pose risks to the development outcome of the project:

      Weak capacity and lack of ownership by the municipalities pose a substantial risk to sustain the
       completed urban infrastructure investments. Municipalities do not have the resources or do not
       consider themselves responsible for maintaining the infrastructure delivered. Continuing training and
       reform of local government decentralization, accompanied by reforms in resource generation and
       allocation may mitigate this risk.
      Insufficient budgets for operations and maintenance (O&M) also pose a substantial risk to
       sustain the completed urban infrastructure investments. This risk may be mitigated by the generation
       of revenue through user fees and taxes on economic activity. Municipalities signed an agreement
       with the Permanent Secretariat of the Transport Sector Project (Secrétariat Permanent du
       Programme Sectoriel de Transport or SP/PST) committing to introduce management methods to
       collect revenues to sustain the use of the infrastructure. Municipalities also received short training
       sessions on infrastructure management, governance and financing. However, the centralized
       implementation of the project did not strengthen local government O&M management capacity for the
       infrastructure. The Special Fund for Roads (Fonds Spécial Routier du Burkina, or FSR-B) budget
       allocated to the Ministry of Transportation (MOT) was insufficient to cover the current and future
       needs of the sector. The toll revenues from the two newly built stations were to help fund road

                                                                                                      Page 13 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BF-Transport and Urban Infras. Dev. (P151832)



      maintenance and contribute to the sustainability of this infrastructure. But the staff and equipment for
      the toll stations were not yet in place. The minimum traffic threshold necessary to be financially viable
      has not been reached but is anticipated after the completion of 24 km of road between Zabré and the
      border with Ghana, under the current Bank-financed Lomé-Ouagadougou-Niamey Economic Corridor
      project (P168386).
     Technical risks. In this project, local staff received training to establish zoning designations on
      proprietary software such as ArcGIS. Municipalities may have difficulty in assuming the high costs of
      license renewals and may lead to difficulties in updating the software. To mitigate this risk, local
      governments may be encouraged to use open-source software such as QGIS to limit dependence on
      proprietary software (ICR, paragraph 79).
     Premature road deterioration. There are currently no other Bank-funded projects that may
      support the maintenance of the road network in Burkina Faso. The lack of support to implement axle
      load limits presents a risk of early road degradation. To prevent premature road deterioration, the axle
      load control station financed by the project was expected to help mitigate axle overload and
      inadequate behavior of truck drivers. There is an international agreement that authorized axle load in
      West African Economic and Monetary Union (WAEMU) countries. However, its application is
      controversial and subject to tension with truckers who are opposed to it due to the loss of revenue
      associated with compliance. Failure to enforce this law presents a significant risk of premature road
      deterioration. For opponents to adhere to these controls, better regulation of the truckers' working
      conditions may contribute to resolve the root cause of their opposition (ICR, paragraph 78).




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project was strategically aligned with the government's priorities in its Poverty Reduction Strategy
  (Stratégie de Croissance Accélérée et de Développement Durable or SCADD) to rehabilitate roads (PAD,
  paragraph 39). This project was also highly relevant to the Bank's own priorities in the country, citing this
  project to achieve Objective 1.3: Improve connectivity for better access to markets, to achieve Focus
  Area 1 Accelerate sustainable private sector led-growth for job creation. Lessons from prior similar
  projects in the country and in the region informed project design. These included sustained long-term
  engagement in the sector since 2003 (see Section 3 Relevance of Objectives above);
  regularly maintaining road systems by using toll road revenues; including a weighing station to
  address the impact of axle overload on its roads.

  The Bank team outlined the institutional and financing arrangements for infrastructure investments
  to avoid breakdown and inoperability of investments financed by the Bank and completed in
  2005. Completed projects, such as the sanitary landfill in Bobo-Dioulasso and a drainage canal in
  Ouagadougou, were not formally turned over to the local governments nor did they have financial means
  for its operations and maintenance (O&M). Design included beneficiary participation in
  selecting, designing, and prioritizing investments with corresponding institutional arrangements
  and O&M funding.

  The Bank team identified substantial political and governance risks because Burkina Faso was exposed
  to Fragility, Conflict, and Violence (FCV). Mitigating measures were adequately identified for capacity and

                                                                                                    Page 14 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BF-Transport and Urban Infras. Dev. (P151832)



  fiduciary risks but proved insufficient at implementation (see below). For example, support from the
  experienced Permanent Secretariat of the Transport Sector Project (Secrétariat Permanent
  du Programme Sectoriel de Transport) and the early hiring of a technical assistant were to mitigate the
  lack of capacity of the implementing agency, the Ministry of Urban and Housing (MUH). Service and
  timed standards were to be implemented. The government committed to adopt incentives for technical
  project focal points. The project was to be coordinated with other donors - the Swiss Agency for
  Development and Cooperation (SDC), the Millennium Challenge Corporation (MCC), and the African
  Development Bank (ADB) - with ongoing activities in the country. Donor coordination was evident in
  efforts by the task team to work closely with the Bank-financed Burkina Faso Local Government Support
  Project (P120517) in building local government capacity to support decentralization (ICR, footnote
  47). The Bank team confirmed strong donor coordination, particularly with the SDC because both teams
  were working on inter-related projects. The Bank team deemed the project implementation ready based
  on a list of pre-selected investments from the government investment plans to be confirmed by local
  officials after the elections scheduled for January 31, 2016. Additional preparations were to be completed
  during implementation. Most Component C activities proved to be not ready for implementation (ICR,
  paragraph 82). The project proved not ready for implementation because the election of local officials
  was postponed, delaying implementation. Local elections were initially scheduled for January 31, 2016.
  They were postponed to May 22, 2016, following a terrorist attack on January 15, 2016, in Ouagadougou
  (ICR, footnote 48).

  Overall, the Bank performance at entry is rated Moderately Satisfactory. The project was highly relevant
  to both the country plans and the Bank's strategy. Design was informed by previous engagement in the
  sector and in the country. However, not all risks were captured, and mitigating measures proved
  inadequate to address capacity risks. The results framework also lacked adequate indicators to capture
  the achievement of the project objectives (see Section 9 M&E below).



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The Task Team conducted 11 supervision missions over the six-year project period. High turnover in TTLs
 caused some delays in supervision support. Overlaps in TTLs and some team members were present from
 the start to help continuity. Two co-TTLs initiated project preparation and early implementation. A third TTL
 took over in 2018. Two new co-TTLs assumed the role in 2019 with one based in the field to
 expedite timely follow-up. Even with some members and a co-TTL in Ouagadougou, a number of decisions
 were delayed (e.g., reporting and issuing No Objection notices). No supervision missions were conducted
 between February 2020 and May 2021 because of the COVID 19 pandemic, outside the control of the
 Bank and the government. A one-day technical mission was conducted in June 2020. The Bank's Country
 Management Unit (CMU) provided additional support.

 The Bank team included a legal covenant to hire a technical assistant for the MUH at project startup.
 However, the initially appointed unqualified coordinator hampered the Project Implementation Unit (PIU)
 from its leadership role. The MUH technical assistant was hired at the end of the third year of
 implementation (ICR, paragraph 73). Outside of the control of the Bank and the government was the coup
 in Ouagadougou that delayed local elections and caused further delays in completing design for the local

                                                                                                   Page 15 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BF-Transport and Urban Infras. Dev. (P151832)



 infrastructure investments. The Bank team proposed corrective measures to address the initial poor
 performance of the RN29 civil works contractor and overall implementation progress by extending the
 project period, but the initial implementation delays cascaded to cancelled activities that could not be
 completed by the time the project closed. Accompanying funds were cancelled (ICR, paragraph 72, see
 Section 5 Efficiency above). Some activities were transferred to other Bank-funded projects for
 completion. The Bank team did not use the restructurings to adjust the targets and indicators of the results
 framework.

 Overall, the Bank performance at supervision is rated Moderately Satisfactory. The Bank team provided
 corrective measures to address capacity shortcomings but not all were taken up by the implementing
 agency. The coup and the impact of the travel restrictions due to the pandemic were outside the team's
 controls but the restructurings were not used effectively to make changes to the results framework.

 Overall, with both entry and supervision rated Moderately Satisfactory, the quality of overall Bank
 supervision is rated Moderately Satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The M&E system was built on the existing mechanisms used by the Permanent Secretariat of the Transport
 Sector Project (Secrétariat Permanent du Programme Sectoriel de Transport or SP/PST). The SP/PST
 M&E specialist, with the focal points, was to monitor, evaluate, and consolidate data. Small surveys were to
 be conducted. Baseline data was to be established before project start. Impact assessments were to be
 conducted for the mid-term review (MTR) and at closing. Surveys were planned to capture data on
 permanent employment generated, reduced losses of agricultural production, and beneficiary satisfaction.
 Technical audits were to verify the quality and cost-efficiency of the infrastructure investments. Data and
 reports were to be widely shared. The Bank team were to undertake M&E training.

 The objectives were simply stated. The results framework provided the causal link between the activities
 and outputs that would lead to outcomes. The intermediate results indicators were specific, measurable,
 achievable, time bound and relevant. However, the outcome indicators were at the output not outcome
 level and did not include development impact of the project on the lives and livelihoods of beneficiaries.
 Reduced risk of accidental death and injuries to humans and livestock, increase in the value of
 traded agricultural products, access to other factors of production, and increase in farmers' incomes were
 not included as outcome indicators. Some targets were overly ambitious. For example, an outcome target
 indicator estimated that vehicles would travel an average of 100 km per hour on open road and 50 km per
 hour in built-up areas to reduce travel time between Manga and Zabré by 60 minutes. This target did not
 anticipate that residents along built up areas would request safety measures (speed bumps). The outcome

                                                                                                   Page 16 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BF-Transport and Urban Infras. Dev. (P151832)



 target was therefore not achieved. In another example, 262 of a target of 300 shops along the rehabilitated
 roads (intermediate indicator 2.3) did not consider a period that businesses required to set up before taking
 advantage of the improved roads (ICR, paragraph 37).



b. M&E Implementation
  The Ministry of Infrastructure (MI) implemented the M&E system. A high turnover rate of M&E specialists
  (6 throughout the life of the project) led to ineffective attention to M&E implementation. This
  meant unnoticed changes or inconsistencies in the results framework (e.g., target of 250,000 person-
  days of employment created instead of the original 310,000 in the PAD) or calculation methodologies. For
  example, how the outcome indicator measuring direct project beneficiaries was calculated was not
  recorded at appraisal (ICR, paragraph 64). Another target indicator proved to be ambitious (reduced
  travel time) and was not achieved. The lack of clear link between an intermediate indicator (number of
  economic and other infrastructures constructed) to project component led to lowering the target from 8 to
  7 infrastructures during implementation. Weaknesses in M&E design, specifying indicators that would
  better capture the results of the project on the lives and livelihoods of beneficiaries, were
  not addressed at implementation. The ICR did not report if the planned baselines were undertaken. The
  Bank team indicated that no baselines were taken. According to the ICR, the PIU did not carry out
  a census (baseline) of beneficiaries (Annex 1). COVID-19 and security constraints did not allow any data
  to be collected for the benefit-cost analysis, e.g., vehicle counting. Poor involvement of beneficiaries at
  design stage was evident in the unanticipated inclusion of safety measures (speed bumps) along high
  traffic areas of improved roads that eventually led to not achieving the original target for reducing travel
  time.

  A beneficiary satisfaction survey was conducted in March 2022, but did not capture all the required data
  to measure project results. The Bank team clarified that the survey used random sampling of 1,350
  individuals from 813 beneficiary households. They also used 62 semi-structured interviews with 11
  different types of beneficiaries (according to activities) and 8 focus groups from 4 different types of
  beneficiaries. 97 percent of respondents confirmed that the investments met their needs. The rest were
  disappointed with the lack of gutters, early deterioration of some asphalted areas, and the absence of
  cycle lanes. The ICR reported on data collected for jobs created (in person days) but not data for
  agricultural losses reduced.



c. M&E Utilization
  M&E data was mostly used to monitor contractor performance of the Manga-Zabré road construction
  (component A). Contractor performance benefited from appropriate corrective measures informed by the
  M&E data, to complete the civil works on time. Components B and C, however, were poorly monitored.
  The implementing agency did not effectively use M&E data to formulate measures that would address
  implementation challenges. Some activities were cancelled because these would not be completed
  before the project closed. In addition, both the target values and the indicators in the results framework,
  were insufficiently used to guide the project progress to achieve the objectives. Some targets were
  changed, some methodologies were inconsistent, some indicators were not associated with the inputs
  (see Section 4 Efficacy above). M&E data was not effectively used to provide evidence of project
  outcomes, only the application of inputs and achievements of outputs. Implementation was delayed.


                                                                                                   Page 17 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BF-Transport and Urban Infras. Dev. (P151832)



  Some M&E data, in particular from the beneficiary survey, provided design considerations in future road
  projects, e.g., cycle lanes and roadside gutters.

  The overall quality of M&E is rated Modest. Not all outcome indicators were captured in the results
  framework. Not all targets were adequately matched to the activities. Corrective measures were
  informed by the use of M&E data to complete component A. The other two components lacked effective
  use of M&E data to inform implementation. The M&E system had shortcomings in implementation and
  utilization.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Environmental safeguards: The project was rated Category B and triggered two environmental policies:
   Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01), and Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11). The
   project prepared an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and a Physical Cultural
   Resources Management Framework (PCRMF). Design details were unknown at appraisal. The ESMF was
   designed to serve as a guide for developing Environmental and Social Impact Assessments (ESIAs) and
   Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs) after project sites were selected. Companies
   responsible for building the urban facilities were recruited before the social and environmental studies were
   carried out. Environmental and social (E&S) clauses were not included in the contracts (see below,
   Procurement), resulting in non-compliance with several E&S aspects (ICR, paragraph 81). Poor compliance
   with E&S safeguards led to significant delays and the cancellation of some activities that could not be
   completed on time (ICR, paragraph 53). The quarterly Safeguard Monitoring Report was often late, of
   modest quality, and the PIU did not regularly follow up on the recommendations. Compliance with the
   E&S safeguards was rated Moderately Unsatisfactory from June to November 2019 and February 2020 to
   May 2021 or almost a third of the project period (ICR, paragraph 68).

   Social safeguards. The project triggered Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12). A Resettlement Policy
   Framework (RPF) was prepared. A social safeguard specialist was recruited in June 2020, four years into
   implementation. This absence contributed to implementation delays of the Resettlement Action Plans
   (RAPs) and construction work (see Section 12 Lessons below). At MTR, there was no final RAP. Some
   RAPs were still not finalized as the project was closing (December 2021). These delays led to the
   cancellation of activities that could not be completed on time.

   With regard to the Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM), complaints on working conditions were not
   adequately managed. By the time of the MTR, the GRM only applied to the RN29 activity. Until 3 months
   prior to project closure, the GRM was limited to civil work sites that were associated with an RAP. No
   mechanism existed to manage potential complaints regarding the substantial risk of gender-based violence
   (GVB) and sexual exploitation, abuse and sexual harassment (SEA/SH). According to the 2022 beneficiary
   survey, only 2.7% were aware of the GRM mechanism while 84 percent were not aware, and 12.5
   percent not sure.



                                                                                                  Page 18 of 22
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    BF-Transport and Urban Infras. Dev. (P151832)



  Field missions noted several shortcomings in E&S monitoring of worksites. For example, months after civil
  works started on the Manga-Zabré, some workers had no copy of their contract, not signed the code of
  conduct, or were sensitized to safety, GBV, sexually transmitted infections (STIs) or the GRM. In September
  2021, a few months before the project was to close, the Bank's mission noted absence of (i) safeguard
  personnel in some companies, (ii) Occupational Health and Safety (OH&S) measures; (iii) inadequate
  and/or nonexistent protective equipment for site personnel, (iv) poor management of access to sites, (v)
  unsanitary workplaces, (vi) unsecured open pits, and (vii) a failure to monitor and implement the ESMP. The
  project reinforced road signs and barriers to strengthen safety on site after a fatal accident on a portion of
  the RN29 that was closed during construction. The police reported that non-compliance with speed
  requirements and refusal to use the detour caused the accident. The quarterly Safeguard Monitoring Report
  was often late, of modest quality, and the PIU did not regularly follow up on the recommendations of
  previous missions.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management (FM): At project closing, FM was rated moderately unsatisfactory, and the
  financial risk was deemed substantial due to several shortcomings. Over US$5.3 million equivalent
  remained outstanding (payable) two months after the contract was completed prior to project closure. The
  project bank accounts had about CFA francs 9 million to meet eligible invoices worth CFA francs 3.9
  billion. This reflected poor cash flow management, and delayed payment to suppliers. From January 24 to
  May 14, 2022, disbursements across the country portfolio were suspended. In 2022. IDA funds (about US$
  21,000 equivalent) were used to pay for expenses payable by counterpart funds. Other deficiencies
  included missing documentation for some payment records, the absence of arrangements for transferring
  project assets to the government, and a discrepancy of approximately US$ 445,000 between the
  accounting position and the fixed asset register. There is no information in the ICR how these were
  satisfactorily resolved.FM demonstrated certain strengths such as the regular submission of reports and
  reimbursement requests. Financial management deficiencies included long delays in making checks
  available, recurring check cancellations, and delays between the date of invoice transmission and check
  remittance (ICR, paragraph 70).

  Procurement: Shortcomings in procurement included delays in the contracting process due to
  multiple actors involved in the procurement, delays in the submission of TORs to the Bank, delays by the
  Bank in issuing No Objections, and lack of procurement staff to monitor a large number of contracts. A high
  cancellation rate of programmed activities also reflected shortcomings in the programming and maturation
  of activities. Delays in updating contracts through the STEP tool were regularly noted. Restructuring
  improved the procurement process and strengthened the contracts management. A change in
  implementing agencies and the adoption of an action plan advanced the closing date December
  2021. However, not all activities could be completed by that time because the political situation had
  deteriorated. The project closing date was extended by three months. Despite this extension, some of the
  activities remained incomplete and were transferred to other Bank-funded projects (ICR, paragraph 60). In
  case of low capacity of the executing agencies or complex arrangements, the project also demonstrated
  that entrusting construction work to a specialized executing agency can expedite implementation.
  Specifically, the absence of an external approving entity results in fast-track procurement procedures that
  can significantly reduce procurement time (typically from 6-12 months to 2-3 months).



                                                                                                  Page 19 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BF-Transport and Urban Infras. Dev. (P151832)




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   There were no other unintended impacts reported by the ICR.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                               Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                  IEG
                                                                               Disagreements/Comment
                                Moderately
Outcome                                              Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
                                Moderately
Bank Performance                                     Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                  Modest               Modest

Quality of ICR                  ---                  Substantial


12. Lessons

The operations identified four lessons (ICR, paragraphs 80-83). These are presented below with
slight editing.

      Covenants in legal agreements may be useful in synchronizing all components that
       would support readiness to implement. In this project, the simplified project design
       focused on activities that were ready to be implemented. Counterpart financing was secured
       by a covenant in the financing agreement. This completed supporting studies for activities
       under the first component. However, a covenant or agreement with the local governments
       similar to how counterpart financing was secured for preparatory studies was not used. As a
       result of these shortcomings, targets were underachieved, and some activities
       were cancelled because these could not be completed on time or transferred to other Bank-
       financed projects in the country for completion. Future similar projects may consider
       covenants in legal agreements to synchronize all components' readiness to implement.
      Early planning of safeguards may help identify risks that may be mitigated by
       including corrective measures in contracts. In this project, contractors were hired before
       the environmental and social (E&S) safeguards studies were completed. Implementation
       revealed several E&S non-compliance. Good practice calls for identifying safeguards risks,
       proposing mitigation measures and instruments following the preparation of technical studies
       before firms are contracted E&S clauses may then be included such as stipulating the timely
       recruitment of safeguards specialists to monitor compliance. In this project, the social
       safeguard specialist was absent for four years. This contributed to delays in implementing
       the RAPs and construction work. An early assessment of Gender-Based Violence (GBV)
       risks may also outline an implementable GRM applicable to all activities.

                                                                                                 Page 20 of 22
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       BF-Transport and Urban Infras. Dev. (P151832)



        Including periodic minimum performance standards/measures in construction
         contracts may be useful incentives in an FCV environment. In this project, corrective
         measures in the first three years of the project (or halfway through project period) did not
         improve implementation. One road had a 46 percent completion rate one month away from
         the initial deadline, investment contracts under component B had not started, and component
         C activities were not ready for implementation. The task team recognized the institutional
         instability within an FCV context brought by a large influx of internally displaced
         persons and the constant demand to restore peace and security. Action plans were adopted
         to expedite project implementation by including clauses in construction contracts requiring a
         company to reach a minimum monthly progress rate under penalty of (recoverable)
         deductions. Bonuses rewarded exceeding performance targets. As a result, construction
         contracts met revised targets. A change in implementing agencies also facilitated
         implementation. Future operations in the country may benefit from adopting a similar clause
         in construction contracts.
        Multi sector projects may require separate executing agencies to foster ownership
         of activities implemented by each agency. In this project, the Ministry of Infrastructure was
         the home of a single Project Implementation Unit (PIU) with the Ministry of Transport (MOT)
         and the Ministry of Urban Planning and Housing (MUH) as members. This implementation
         arrangement did not encourage ownership by the line agencies of their respective activities
         (see Section 5 Efficiency above). One PIU in each line Ministry may encourage ownership
         and foster leadership in each executing agency. A coordinator devoted to the project in each
         PIU may be hired using performance-based contracts. Including performance measures in
         personnel contracts (e.g., standards to be met for completing specific tasks (preparing TORs,
         awarding contracts, recruiting staff, reporting to donors, addressing grievances), including
         regular coordination with key stakeholders and rating the quality of reports) may address
         challenges objectively based on evidence. Future operations may hire a technical
         coordinator exclusively committed to the project under the supervision of a strategic
         coordinator overseeing all activities to increase responsiveness and leadership.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR was consistent with the guidelines and provided a picture of the operation with some shortcomings,
except for rating the overall outcome. The ratings for relevance of objective, efficacy, and efficiency would have
led to a Satisfactory rating of the outcome according to the guidelines but was reported as Moderately
Satisfactory. The evidence of the outputs were strong, but outcome level data was weak and some results were
not supported by evidence but by anecdotes. The project suffered from a high turnover of M&E staffing, which
brought into question the credibility of the evidence offered to support outcomes. This shortcoming was
addressed by useful annexes (Annexes 4, 5, and 6). Salient points were linked to the findings although there
was very little information from the actual surveys. The Bank team confirmed that the reported outcomes were



                                                                                                    Page 21 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BF-Transport and Urban Infras. Dev. (P151832)



not extracted from the beneficiary survey. The report was candid about administrative and operational
inefficiencies. Lessons were based on project experience.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                 Page 22 of 22
