     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BR MST Tocantins Integrated Sust. Reg. (P121495)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0023124

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P121495                                    BR MST Tocantins Integrated Sust. Reg.

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Brazil                                     Transport


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-81850                                 31-Mar-2019                                        281,024,658.01

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 26-Jul-2012                                31-Dec-2021

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                          300,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                           281,024,658.01                                               0.00

 Actual                                       281,024,658.01                                               0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Ranga Rajan                Vibecke Dixon                 Kavita Mathur                  IEGSD (Unit 4)
 Krishnamani




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) as stated in the Loan Agreement (Schedule 1, page 6) and in the
   Project Appraisal Document (PAD, page 4) is " to foster improved effectiveness of road transport and
   enhanced efficiency of selected public services, in support of the Borrower's integrated and
   territorially balanced development agenda".

   The PAD (page 4) adds that the objective was to be achieved through fostering: (i) improved accessibility of
   populations to employment opportunities, services, resources and markets and enhanced connectivity to the

                                                                                                  Page 1 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BR MST Tocantins Integrated Sust. Reg. (P121495)



   State's territories and productive regions; and (ii) institutional strengthening to contribute to modernize public
   service delivery and management, promote local economic activities, strengthen environmental management
   and improve education.

   The PDO is parsed as follows for this review:

   PDO 1: To foster improved effectiveness of road transport in support of the Borrower's integrated and
   territorially balanced development agenda.

   PDO 2: To enhance efficiency of selected public services, in support of the Borrower's integrated and
   territorially balanced development agenda.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   There were three components (PAD, pages 5 - 7).

   1. Improving effectiveness of rural transport. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$304.00 million.
   The actual cost was US$236.50 million. The large difference between the appraisal estimates and actual
   cost was due to the cancellation of counterpart funding (discussed in section 2e). This component planned
   to finance activities aimed at improving accessibility to the remote populations of the State of Tocantins
   (SoT).

   There were four sub-components: (i) improving transport conditions on the selected municipal roads
   through eliminating about 2,600 critical spots by constructing concrete hydraulic structures (bridges and
   culverts) and municipal feeder roads; (ii) rehabilitating about 1,500 kilometers (Km) of the paved
   roads through performance-based (CREMA) contracts (contracts that combine road rehabilitation and
   routine road maintenance); (iii) improving safety conditions on unpaved roads through (a) eliminating critical
   spots on the unpaved roads; and (b) surfacing about 50 km of unpaved roads to facilitate access to the
   national trunk road; and (iv) the institutional strengthening of the Infrastructure Secretariat (SEINFRA) in
   transport planning, management, logistics and road safety.

   2. Enhanced efficiency of public services. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$62.25 million. The
   actual cost was US$47.75 million. The difference between the appraisal estimates and the actual cost was
   due to the cancellation of counterpart funding. This component financed capacity building activities. There
   were four sub-components:

   a. Modernization of the State of Tocantin's (SoT) administration. This sub-component planned to support
   the SoT's Planning and Public Management Secretariat (SEPLAN) to improve public sector efficiency
   through: (i) introducing results-based management methodology; (ii) decentralizing administrative services
   to regions and strengthening the municipalities' capacities; (iii) improving the land use planning processes



                                                                                                      Page 2 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    BR MST Tocantins Integrated Sust. Reg. (P121495)



  and natural resource management policies; and (iv) improving work conditions of civil servants through
  rehabilitating public premises in accordance with the criteria set forth in the Operational Manual.

   b. Fostering local and regional development. This sub-component planned to support pilot activities aimed
  at promoting rural businesses in selected regions through: (i) Technical Assistance (TA) to the SoT's
  Agriculture, Livestock and Agricultural Development Secretariat (SEAGRO) for promoting agribusiness
  sector to the subsistence producers; (ii) TA to the SoT's Environmental and Sustainable Development
  Secretariat (SEMADE) for preparing a renewable energy policy; and (iii) TA to the SoT's Planning and
  Public Management Secretariat (SEPLAN) for developing ecotourism.

  c. Improvement of environmental management. This sub-component planned to support the SoT's
  Environmental and Sustainable Development Secretariat (SEMADES) through: (i) TA for improving the
  environmental licensing system, monitoring and enforcement activities, and its water rights registration
  system; (ii) financing studies for evaluating public policies for conservation and sustainable use of natural
  resources and developing biodiversity; and (iii) financing and piloting activities on water management.

  d. Improvement of the quality, relevance and returns in the education system. This sub-component planned
  to support the SoT's Education Secretariat (SEDUC) through pilot activities in municipalities through: (i)
  supporting the selected municipalities in providing quality care child development; (ii) improving education
  quality and providing targeted teacher training; and (iii) improving the returns to schooling through
  supplementary courses in upper secondary schools and improved education materials.

  3. Project Management. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$8.00 million. The actual cost was
  US$5.00 million. This component planned to finance support for project management.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project cost. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$375.00 million. The actual cost was US$289.25
  million. The difference between the appraisal estimate and the actual cost was due to the cancellation of
  counterpart funding and exchange rate changes during implementation (discussed below).

  Project financing. The project was financed by an IBRD loan of US$300.00 million. US$289.25 million was
  disbursed. US$10.00 million of the loan was cancelled.

  Borrower contribution. The Borrower contribution was planned at US$75.00 million at appraisal. The team
  clarified that their actual contribution was US$5.00 million.

  Dates. The project was approved on July 26, 2012, became effective on February 14, 2013, and was to
  close on March 31, 2019. However, the project closed 33 months behind schedule on December 31, 2021.

  Other changes. There were three Level 2 restructurings during the project lifetime.

  The main change was made through the first project restructuring on January 11, 2017. The project
  envisioned US$75.00 million by way of counterpart funding. Due to the economic crisis in 2014, the SoT
  could not provide the funding. This resulted in suspension of many contracts the following year. This
  restructuring eliminated counterpart funding. Despite the elimination of counterpart funding, the project



                                                                                                     Page 3 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BR MST Tocantins Integrated Sust. Reg. (P121495)



   scope was not altered, as the Brazilian Real (B$) was much weaker than estimated at appraisal.
   This enabled financing for the planned activities with the loan.

   Through the second restructuring on February 13, 2019, the closing date was extended by 21 months
   from March 31, 2019, to December 31, 2020, to accommodate the prior delays.

   The main changes made through the third restructuring on December 23, 2020, are as follows:

         The closing date was extended by a year from December 31, 2020, to December 31, 2021, for
          completing the activities that were delayed following the restrictions in the wake of the COVID - 19
          pandemic.
         New activities were added to strengthen the expected outcomes in the wake of the COVID - 19
          pandemic.
         US$10.00 million of the IBRD loan allocated for some activities was cancelled as the activities were
          deemed to be unachievable by the closing date.
         Selected intermediate indicators were modified as the State was not able to measure some
          indicators because of methodological issues.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country and sector context. The State of Tocantins (SoT) created under the 1988 constitution, is one of
Brazil's smallest and fastest growing state, with an average annual 7% growth in the years before appraisal.
The State's economy was comprised mainly of agricultural products (20.8%) and agro-industries (23.6%)
and most of its exports came from a limited range of agriculture-based goods. Overall accessibility and
logistics were the major bottlenecks for diversifying exports, as the State's main production centers are
located several hundred kilometers (km) away from its consumption centers.

Alongside this, the SoT's socio-economic indicators were below the national average. Its Gross Domestic
Product (GDP) per capita at US$5,600 is 16th among Brazil's 26 states, and 11% of its population were
below the poverty line. Access to early education was limited and the test scores in the State's primary and
secondary schools were below the national average. The state is home to two vulnerable groups, including
13,100 indigenous people living in six main indigenous territories. As a recently created state, the State
lacked systematic management strategies for managing human resources and developing results-based
planning methodologies, exacerbated by ineffective coordination across its many agencies.

Alignment with the Government strategy. The SoT's four-year multiannual plan (Plano Pluri Annual,
PPA) for 2012-2015 articulated the need for sustaining growth and fostering inclusiveness. The State
strategy was to boost economic development through improving transport and logistics in an integrated
fashion from local to feeder roads and to the main transport corridors. On the social and environmental
front, the strategy aimed at decentralization and empowerment of rural population. The SoT's development
agenda articulated in the PPA for 2020 - 2023 reiterated the need for promoting regional development




                                                                                                   Page 4 of 18
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      BR MST Tocantins Integrated Sust. Reg. (P121495)



               through improving infrastructure, logistics, water access and promoting ecotourism. The project objectives
               were aligned with the State's PPA.

               Alignment with the Bank strategy. At appraisal, the PDO was aligned with all the four strategic objectives
               of the Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for 2011 - 2015: (i) increasing efficiency of public investments;
               (ii) improving quality and expanding delivery of public services to low-income households; (iii) promoting
               regional development through infrastructure investments and supporting the private sector in frontier areas;
               and (iv) improving management of natural resources for biodiversity conservation. The PDO continue to be
               aligned with three focus areas of the current Bank's Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for 2018 - 2023:
               Focus Area two " fostering private sector investment and productivity growth" through "mobilizing greater
               investment in infrastructure to improve service delivery"; Focus Area three " promoting inclusive and
               sustainable development " through "promoting socio-economic development of small rural producers and
               vulnerable groups"; and Focus Area one " promoting government effectiveness ' through " increasing
               effectiveness of service delivery in education".

               Previous Bank experience. The Bank has financed two prior projects in SoT: (i) the Second State
               Highway Development Project, which focused on rehabilitating the main road network; (ii) the Tocantins
               Sustainable Regional Development Project, which focused on regional sustainable development. While this
               project was being prepared, the Bank also had an ongoing Sustainable Cerrado Initiative Project aimed at
               increasing biodiversity conservation.

               This project aimed to scale-up the Bank's support to the SoT's sustainable development by supporting
               transport infrastructure investments and institutional strengthening activities aimed to improve the State's
               and regional development in a socially inclusive and environmentally friendly fashion. The intended project
               beneficiaries were the regional populations located in Western Tocantins which did not benefit under the
               previous Bank-financed project.

               That said, this multisector project with six sectors (transport, agriculture, governance, environment,
               education and tourism) and more than 600 activities across eight executing agencies was overly ambitious,
               given the scarcity of qualified personnel and political instability in the new State. While transport
               infrastructure investments could conceivably contribute to agricultural development, there was little synergy
               between the various sectors supported by the project. The activities aimed to achieve outcomes of the
               States' development agenda without a proper calibration of its capacity. A more streamlined approach
               would have been appropriate given the weak implementation capacity of the state.

               The PDO formulation was broad and pitched at a level that was high given the limited implementation
               capacity of the newly formed State. Therefore, the relevance of the PDO is rated substantial.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                                                                                                                       Page 5 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BR MST Tocantins Integrated Sust. Reg. (P121495)




OBJECTIVE 1
Objective
To foster improved effectiveness of road transport in support of the Borrower's integrated and territorially
balanced development agenda.

Rationale
Theory of change. Infrastructure investments (such as eliminating critical spots on municipal feeder roads,
rehabilitating paved roads with CREMA contracts and surfacing unpaved roads) together with the institutional
strengthening of the Infrastructure Secretariat for transport planning, logistics management and road safety
were expected to improve the road condition. These activities were expected to contribute to improve
accessibility of the remote populations in the State to employment opportunities, services and markets, and to
the long-term outcome of the State's integrated and territorially balanced development agenda. The causal
links between activities, outputs and outcomes were logical and the intended outcomes were
monitorable. The theory of change assumes that (i) there will be citizens engagement to select the municipal
roads to be improved, and (ii) companies will have adequate capacity to perform CREMA contracts.

Outputs (ICR, pages 17 - 18 and page 56).

      2,250 km of the road network in Western Tocantins were rehabilitated under CREMA contracts. This
       surpassed the target of 1,500 km.
      5,500 km of municipal feeder roads were provided with all season access to trunk corridors through
       fixing 22 critical spots with bridges and culverts and paving 60 km of roads. This exceeded the target
       of 20 critical spots and 50 km of roads respectively.
      Road safety interventions were incorporated in design of unpaved roads (such as signaling over 480
       km of roads).
      TA was provided to the Road Agency (AGETO) in transport planning, procurement, environmental
       safeguards and road safety.

Outcomes. (ICR, pages 17 -19 and 46 - 47).

The outputs described above were expected to: (i) increase the percentage of the State road network in good
condition (with an International Roughness Index of less than 3.5); (ii) increase the vehicle km travelled on the
State's paved roads; and (iii) increase the share of the rural population with access to an all-season
road measured by the Rural Access Index (RAI) (the share of rural population living within two km of an all-
season road).

      The percentage of the State's road network in good condition increased from 9% at the baseline in
       2012, to 100% at project closure as targeted.
      The number of vehicles per km travelled on the State paved roads increased from 260,000 to
       5,750,000 km, substantially exceeding the target of 2,320,000 km.
      The share of rural population in Western Tocantins with access to an all-season road went up from
       85% at the baseline to 100%, exceeding the target of 92%.

Given that the outcomes were either realized or exceeded, efficacy of this PDO is rated as substantial.



                                                                                                   Page 6 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BR MST Tocantins Integrated Sust. Reg. (P121495)




Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To enhance efficiency of selected public services, in support of the Borrower's integrated and territorially
balanced development agenda.

Rationale
Theory of change. The activities in this component supported diverse sectors such as the state
administration, local development, environmental management and education.

      Activities aimed at institutional strengthening of the Planning and Management Secretariat (SEPLAN)
       (introducing results-based methodology, municipalities' capacity building), were expected to
       modernize the State's administration.
      Activities aimed at institutional strengthening of the Agriculture, Livestock and Agricultural
       Development Secretariat (SEAGRO), were expected to promote local development. Activities aimed
       at institutional strengthening of the Environmental and Sustainable Development Secretariat (SEDUC)
       for conducting pilots on conservation and sustainable use of natural resources and water resource
       management, were expected to improve SEDUC's management.
      Activities such as developing education municipal plans for childhood development and identifying
       strengths and weaknesses in the quality of teaching in schools were expected to improve the
       institutional strengthening of the Education Secretariat (SEDUC).

The activities together were expected to increase the efficiency of public service delivery in the State, and
thereby to the long-term development outcome of supporting the State's integrated and territorially balanced
development agenda. The theory of change explicitly assumes a stable political environment and that the
state has enough skilled personnel to conduct pilots.

One shortcoming with the theory of change is the lack of synergy between the sectors supported by the
project. While transport infrastructure investments aimed at increasing access to the remote populations can
be expected to help in increasing agricultural production, the link between the various sectors supported by
the project is tenuous. Moreover, the activities supported by the project were output-oriented and there were
no concrete key outcome indicators for monitoring project performance.

Modernization of the State Administration.

Outputs (ICR, pages 19 - 25).

      617 public servants in 31 state units (secretariats, agencies and Institutes) were trained on strategic
       planning, monitoring and evaluation and human resources management for introducing results-based
       methodologies. There were no targets for this indicator.
      At the state level. The Government signed five results-based agreements with selected state
       agencies: (i) the Secretariat of Housing and Urban Development; (ii) the Secretariat of Health; (iii) the
       State Police Department; (iv) the Tocantins Land Institute; and (v) the Agriculture Defense Agency.

                                                                                                    Page 7 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BR MST Tocantins Integrated Sust. Reg. (P121495)



       The agreements specified indicators, baselines and targets to be realized over four years. However,
       the results were not monitored due to the shortcomings in monitoring arrangements.
      At the municipal level. The project aimed to enhance the municipalities' capacities to adequately
       maintain the local feeder road network through the formation of intermunicipal consortia. As this
       approach proved to be fruitless, it was replaced by the signing of direct cooperation agreements
       between SoT and the municipalities for road maintenance activities. The cooperation agreements
       between the state and the municipalities were however not signed by the municipalities when the
       project closed.

Outcomes.

The project activities were output oriented. It is unclear the extent to which the outputs contributed to
modernizing the state administration.

Fostering local development. Activities in this sub-component aimed to support agricultural and tourism
development in the State.

Outputs (ICR, pages 19 - 25).

      The project supported the upgrading of 213 local subsistence farmers to market farming through
       building small farmers' skills on agricultural techniques and commercialization of activities (such as
       through packaging) and supporting their integration into the Government food-purchase programs).
       This exceeded the target of 120.
      The Secretariat supported the livestock program through acquiring and distributing genetic material to
       improve herd quality. 239 small cattle ranchers benefitted from this program. Targets were not
       specified for this indicator.
      Seven selected municipalities were provided with seven equipment for constructing slaughterhouses.
       Though the project did not originally aim to mobilize private financing directly, at the time of the 2020
       restructuring the SoT decided that the partially completed slaughterhouses were to be redesigned and
       awarded to the private sector as concessions, modelling the successful case of other Brazilian
       states. The slaughterhouses were not completed when the project closed. According to the
       information provided by the team, out of the six, one slaughterhouse has been finalized by the private
       sector to date.
      The project supported the community-based sustainable tourism program in the Jalapao region
       through capacity building on business management, hospitality and gastronomy while highlighting the
       appeal of the community's cultural heritage. This program benefitted 197 members of the traditional
       Quilombola communities of Mumbuca and Prata. No targets were specified for this indicator.

Outcomes.

The activities were output oriented, and it is not clear the extent to which the project activities aided in
realizing the outcome of fostering local development.

Environmental Management.

Outputs. (ICR, pages 22 - 23).



                                                                                                      Page 8 of 18
                     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                     BR MST Tocantins Integrated Sust. Reg. (P121495)




                        New Information Technology (IT) systems were provided by the State Environmental Secretariat
                           (SEMARH) and its operational affiliate - the Tocantins Nature Institute (Naturatins) to reduce the
                           average time for issuing environmental licenses.
                          With project support, the State adopted four instruments from the Brazilian Forestry Code (Law 12,651
                           of 2012) for enforcing environmental legislation. The four instruments were: (i) Rural Environmental
                           Cadaster (CAD); (ii) Degraded Areas Recovery Program (PRA); (iii) Framework for monitoring and
                           control of deforestation and wildfires; and (iv) Natural capital management tool.
                          A native seedlings production site for reforestation was constructed with a capacity for 100 to 200
                           thousand seedlings per year to support the recovery of degraded areas.
                          The project sponsored a pilot to improve environmental monitoring and enforcement by using drones.
                          Three water management pilots were completed in the selected state river basins. The river basin
                           plans were adopted as part of the National Water Resources Policy.

                  Outcomes.

                  The average time taken by Naturatins to issue environmental licenses was reduced from 100 days at the
                  baseline to 36 days at project closure, exceeding the target of 40 days.

                  Improvement of Education Services.

                  Outputs (ICR, pages 23 - 24).

                        The Education Secretariat (SEDUC) trained six municipalities to develop early childhood components
                         in their education program. The six municipalities adopted municipal education plans featuring early
                         childhood development. There were no targets for this indicator.
                        The project's flagship education program, called the Road to Knowledge (PEC) was implemented in
                         the lagging regions as targeted. This program aimed to improve the quality of educational services
                         and facilities in ten state-run schools located along a high-traffic, long-haulage federal highway
                         targeted by the project. The schools were selected for the high degree of child and teenage
                         vulnerability in the communities they served. The ICR (page 24) noted that previous diagnostic
                         pointed to a high incidence of children and teenagers being coopted to prostitution, drug trafficking
                         and other violence hazards, associated with the heavy volumes of long-haul traffic along BR -153. The
                         ten selected schools incorporated gender-related activities aimed at preventing women and girls from
                         victim to sexual exploitation and abuse. In total, 3640 students benefited from these interventions. 150
                         teachers were trained, representing 85% of the target (slightly short of the target of 90%).

                  Outcome.

                  There is no concrete evidence that the project contributed to the improvement of education services.



                  Rating
                  Modest


OVERALL EFF TBL




                                                                                                                   Page 9 of 18
               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
               BR MST Tocantins Integrated Sust. Reg. (P121495)



 OBJ_TBL




           OVERALL EFFICACY
           Rationale
           The project supported activities in five sectors (transport, environment, education, public administration and
           local development). There is sufficient evidence that the project activities contributed to realizing PDO 1 (to
           foster improved effectiveness of road transport). However, the project supported only output-oriented
           activities with regard to PDO 2 (enhancing efficiency of selected public services). Given that there is little
           evidence of the extent to which the project contributed to enhance the efficiency of selected public services,
           overall efficacy on a four-point scale is a weak substantial.



           Overall Efficacy Rating
           Substantial



 5. Efficiency
Economic Analysis. An economic analysis was conducted for infrastructure investments in municipal feeder
roads and for paved roads using CREMA contracts. These activities accounted for 78% of the project cost.

Municipal feeder roads. The methodology for the municipal roads network was a producer surplus approach in
which the main benefits were assumed to come from increased agricultural production due to the improved
access. The Net Present Value (NPV) at 12% discount rate at closure was US$98.00 million, as compared to
the NPV of US$48.00 million at appraisal. The ex-post Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR) was 95.1%, as
compared to the ex-ante EIRR of 22.4%. The rather striking difference between the ex-post EIRR and the ex-
ante EIRR was due to two factors: (i) the project's actual cost on feeder roads was 60% of the appraisal
estimate, due to a lower-than-expected number of critical spots on the municipal feeder roads that were required
to provide year-around accessibility; and (ii) the original growth forecasts for agricultural activities were
conservative. For instance, the initial estimate for planted area increase was 40% "with the project", whereas the
actual planted area increased by 263% in the targeted municipalities. In addition, the actual increase in selected
crops production was 304% as compared to the forecast of 85%, due partly to the price increases in core
commodities.

Paved roads with CREMA contracts. The economic analysis for the paved roads was conducted with the
Highway Development Management (HDM -4) model. The methodology entailed a consumer surplus approach,
and the project benefits were assumed to come from transport cost and travel time savings. For the CREMA
roads, the initial goal was rehabilitation of 1,500 km of roads. The project however rehabilitated 2,250 km of
roads. The NPV at 12% discount rate was US$176.0 million at appraisal and the ex-ante EIRR was 25%. The
ICR (paragraph 65) notes that the economic analysis for this sub-component was not conducted at closure as it
was not possible to access specific data and configurations used in the analysis at appraisal.

Administrative and operational issues during implementation. The cancellation of US$75.00 million by way
of counterpart funding contributed to delays in the initial years. However, the cancellation did not undermine the
project scope, as the cancellation was offset by the significant depreciation of the B$ relative to the US$ during
implementation.



                                                                                                              Page 10 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      BR MST Tocantins Integrated Sust. Reg. (P121495)



Implementation progress was very slow, with only 15.7% of the loan disbursed by the Mid-Term Review in
November 2015. These delays were due to a combination of factors, including slow preparation of project
documents and the procurement policies of the State - partly caused by the multi-sectoral nature of the
project and weak implementation capacities of some of the state agencies. Delays in counterpart funding
contributed to delays in implementing the institutional strengthening activities. The delays in the initial years
exacerbated by factors over which the project had no control such as frequent changes in political leadership
and the physical restrictions following the COVID-19 pandemic contributed to the time overruns. Few activities
and safeguard commitments remained incomplete (discussed in section 10) and at closure US$10.00 million of
the undisbursed loan was cancelled.

In sum, efficiency is rated as weak substantial, due to the administrative inefficiency.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      0
 Appraisal                                                  22.40
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      0
 ICR Estimate                                               95.10
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The relevance of the PDO to the Government and the Bank strategy is rated as substantial. Efficiency is weak
substantial, due to the administrative inefficiency. Overall efficacy is also a weak substantial. While the
outcomes in the transport sector were substantially achieved, it is unclear the extent to which the project
activities aided in the efficiency of selected public services. Taking these into account, overall outcome is rated
as moderately satisfactory in the IEG's six-point rating scale.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Government commitment risk. There is moderate risk to the sustainability of development outcomes
pertaining to road maintenance arrangements. Though this project aided in mainstreaming CREMA schemes

                                                                                                      Page 11 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      BR MST Tocantins Integrated Sust. Reg. (P121495)



for ensuring the quality of roads, the (ICR, paragraph 129) notes that the continuation of network coverage
depends on State budget appropriations which have to be secured every year. Furthermore, it is unclear
whether the municipalities have the capacity to maintain the local feeder roads improved under the project.
This is particularly so, given that the envisioned mitigation measures of establishing intermunicipal consortia
for road maintenance or direct agreements between the State and the municipalities did not succeed in this
project.

Climate change risk. There is modest risk to the sustainability of development outcomes due to climate
change conditions. The hazard to road assets from extreme weather events and the consequent disruption
of transport connectivity, represent risks to the sustainability of outcomes. The ICR (paragraph 130) notes
that damages relative to erosive processes had already materialized during the final year of implementation
and required remedial works that remain to be completed as a post-closing commitment.

Political risk. There is risk that the institutional improvements of the project could be reversed due to
political uncertainties and turnover of civil staff.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The Bank prepared this project based on the experiences from the previous Bank financed projects in
  SoT. Lessons incorporated included: (i) while the previous projects supported laying the foundation for
  growth, this project responded to the broader challenges of a maturing state, such as combining
  infrastructure investments at the state and municipal levels, and institutional strengthening of the state's
  secretariats; (ii) fostering results-based approach; and (iii) an implementation time frame of six years to
  mitigate the potential negative impacts of political changes (PAD, paragraphs 29 - 31). The project was
  based on sound analytical work such as the preliminary results from the project's evaluation at
  preparation, which formed the basis for the cost-benefit analyses and the Bank's diagnostic work that
  informed programs and activities for component two activities.

  The implementation arrangements made at appraisal proved to be appropriate during implementation.
  The Secretariat of Planning and Public Management Modernization (SEPLAN) was overall in charge of
  coordination. The Project Management Unit (UGP) was in charge of implementation. The UGP had
  executed Bank-financed projects and its staff were familiar with Bank procedures (PAD, paragraph 24).

  The preparation team identified several risks at appraisal, such as design risk with a multisector project
  and sustainability risk. Mitigation measures incorporated at design included, hiring qualified staff to
  supervise procurement and safeguards-related issues, upfront implementation readiness of the road
  investment component and the reliance on a strong institutional champion, SEPLAN. With mitigation
  measures, the overall risk was rated as moderate at appraisal (PAD, paragraph 31). Appropriate
  arrangements were made at appraisal for safeguards and fiduciary compliance (discussed in section 10).

  There were significant shortcomings at Quality-at-Entry. One, the multisector project involving six sectors
  was overly ambitious in the context of a new state. The project activities overstretched the State's
  capacity to coordinate the activities of the different sector activities with limited synergies. Two, although
  infrastructure investments can contribute to limit gender gaps, the design did not consider this important

                                                                                                      Page 12 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BR MST Tocantins Integrated Sust. Reg. (P121495)



  element. The gender-based activities were included during implementation at State request. Three, the
  induced environmental impacts (such as the lasting environmental damage from land-use change
  induced by road investments) were not adequately considered at design. The ICR (paragraph 119)
  provides an example of the Manuel Alvers bridge and notes that the ease of river crossing after the
  bridge opens is most likely to attract additional population and lead to increased agricultural land and
  deforestation. And four, there were significant M&E design shortcomings with no relevant indicators at
  outcome level to measure achievements under PDO 2 (discussed in section 9).



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The continuity of leadership was more or less maintained with two Task Team Leaders (TTLs) during the
 lifetime of the project. Supervision missions were held twice year. However, field visits were completely
 interrupted from March 2020 to the end of the project due to COVID-19 pandemic. During this period, the
 Bank relied on virtual missions. The supervision team adjusted to the State's needs by including road
 safety and gender-related activities and rehabilitation of additional roads under CREMA contracts. Given
 the delays in the initial years of the project due to the lack of counterpart funding, the supervision team
 reallocated the loan among project activities and extended the closing date to counter the delays in the
 initial years of the project. The support provided by the team aided in fiduciary compliance (discussed in
 section 9).

 One minor shortcoming was that the shortcomings in M&E design were not rectified during implementation.

 Bank performance at Quality-at-Entry was moderately unsatisfactory and quality of supervision was
 satisfactory. Overall Bank performance is moderately satisfactory, given that overall outcome of the project
 was moderately satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The theory of change, although sound to capture the complexities of a multi sectoral project, did not clearly
 articulate the synergies between sectors. The key outcome indicators for PDO 1 - the share of rural
 population with access to all-season roads, the percent of CREMA roads that were in good condition and
 vehicle km travelled in the roads - were straightforward, specific, relevant, with clearly calculation

                                                                                                   Page 13 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BR MST Tocantins Integrated Sust. Reg. (P121495)



 methodologies and hence monitorable. Given that road safety was an important sub-component one
 activities, there were no indicators to measure the extent to which the project contributed to road safety.

 The PDO 2 was defined more generically to encompass activities across five different sectors. These
 indicators were more output-oriented than proper outcomes. Certain outcome-related aspects of
 component two activities were left out such as the actual achievement of results agreed between the SoT
 and the line secretariats. Indicators for component two outcomes fell short of capturing the extent to which
 the project activities contributed to local development such as to tourism development and the renewable
 energy policy to Environment and Sustainable Development Secretariat.



b. M&E Implementation
  During the project restructurings, some of the indicators were modified in view of the data limitations of
  the implementing agency. However, no indicator was added to monitor road safety features, even though
  they became an important sub-component of component one activities. No effort was made to identify
  relevant indicators at outcome level under the second objective.

  The PIU was in charge of coordinating M&E. The infrastructure secretariat was responsible for measuring
  and monitoring transport indicators while component two activities were monitored by the Planning
  Secretariat and the other implementing agencies. As a consequence of this decentralization, the PIU was
  only responsible for compiling the information and resubmitting it to the Bank. The PIU lacked incentives
  to closely monitor the data. The ICR (paragraph 101) acknowledges that the indicators were only
  measured when necessary and were occasionally of dubious quality.



c. M&E Utilization
  The M&E framework was used for monitoring project performance. The information collected throughout
  the project allowed to monitor progress towards achievement of outcomes, especially in the transport
  component.

  In sum, overall M&E is rated as modest in view of the shortcomings in M&E design and M&E
  implementation.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as a Category B (partial assessment) project under the World Bank safeguard
   policies. Eight safeguard policies were triggered at appraisal: Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01);
   Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04); Forests (OP/BP 4.36); Pest Management (OP 4.09); Physical Cultural
   Resources (OP/BP 4.11); Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10); Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12); and

                                                                                                    Page 14 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    BR MST Tocantins Integrated Sust. Reg. (P121495)



  Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) (PAD, page vi). The following discussion of safeguards is based on the
  detailed discussion provided in the PAD (14 - 15) and the ICR (pages 39 - 40).

  Environmental Assessment, Natural Habitats, Forest, Pest Management, and Safety of Dams. The
  project was not expected to have large scale and irreversible impacts. An Environmental and Social Impact
  Assessment (ESIA), an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and Environmental
  Management Plans (EMPs) were prepared and publicly disclosed at appraisal to address environmental
  impacts and impacts on Natural Habitats, Forests, Physical Cultural Resources, and Safety of Dams. A Pest
  Management Framework was prepared to address the pest management safeguards.

  The project compiled with the World Bank safeguard policies for most of the implementation period.
  However, the environmental assessment was downgraded to moderately unsatisfactory in 2021. This was
  due to the many environmental activities that were delayed or pending implementation. A Post Closing
  Action Plan was agreed between the Bank and the State to ensure completion when the project closed. The
  ICR notes that the project was in compliance with these safeguards when the project closed. The team also
  clarified that there were no issues with the safeguards on Natural Habitats, Forests, Pest Management and
  Safety of Dams.

  Involuntary Resettlement and Indigenous Peoples, and . Land acquisition and involuntary resettlement
  were not expected. However, as localized impacts were possible, a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF)
  was prepared and publicly-disclosed at appraisal. As the location of the municipal works and the impacts to
  indigenous peoples were unknown at appraisal, an Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF) was
  prepared and publicly-disclosed.

  The ICR noted that some activities on Indigenous Peoples were not complete when the project closed. The
  team clarified that Government was moving forward to relaunch the work to finish the work as soon as water
  falls allow the continuation of work. The team also clarified that the Government wants to prepare a new
  project, and project preparation work cannot start until the safeguards post closing Action plan is completed.

  Physical Cultural Resources. The team clarified that there were no issues with the safeguards on
  Physical Cultural Resources.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management. The Bank conducted a financial assessment of the Project Management Unit
  (UGP) at appraisal. UGP had executed Bank-financed projects and its staff were familiar with Bank
  policies. The assessment concluded that the arrangements were adequate, and the financial risk was rated
  as moderate at appraisal (PAD, pages 35 -36).

  The ICR (paragraph 113) notes that financial management was satisfactory throughout the project due to
  the sound financial management arrangements and the qualified staff. The PIU complied with the terms of
  the loan agreement. There were no cases of ineligible expenses. The team clarified that the last audit
  report was received on September 14th, 2022, within the agreed deadline and that the external audits were
  unqualified.



                                                                                                  Page 15 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BR MST Tocantins Integrated Sust. Reg. (P121495)



   Procurement. The Bank conducted a procurement assessment of the UGP, the Secretariat of Planning
   and Public Management (SEPLAN) and the Infrastructure Secretariat (SEINFRA) at appraisal. UGP had
   experience with executing Bank-financed projects. The assessment concluded that the overall
   procurement risk was moderate (PAD, page 44).

   The ICR (paragraph 110) notes that the overall procurement performance was satisfactory. However, there
   were instances of procurement delays which were rectified with Bank support. The ICR also notes that
   there was a specific procurement shortcoming relating to the slaughterhouses' concession in 2019. The
   final audit of 2018 found no bidding documents for slaughterhouses. An investigation by the INT however
   found no integrity issues and that it was only a human error. The ICR does not report of any case of
   misprocurement.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   There were no unintended impacts.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                      IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
                               Moderately
Outcome                                                 Moderately Satisfactory
                               Satisfactory
                               Moderately
Bank Performance                                        Moderately Satisfactory
                               Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                 Modest                   Modest

Quality of ICR                 ---                      Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR draws the following lessons from the experience of implementing this project, with some
adaptation of language.

1. If synergies between project components are carefully examined and articulated in multi
sectoral projects, there is a higher potential for project success. An integrated approach to
development that involves transport may exhibit potential for exploring synergies and building on
mutually reinforcing benefits. In this project, while there were clearly synergies between transport
infrastructure investments and developing agribusiness, the synergies between transport and public
administration and education were tenuous at best.



                                                                                                   Page 16 of 18
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       BR MST Tocantins Integrated Sust. Reg. (P121495)



2. A strong commitment of funding for road maintenance may help in ensuring sustainability
of outcomes in road sector projects. In this project, performance-based (CREMA) contracts for
paved roads embedded an assurance of adequate maintenance for five years. The lesson is that
even longer contracts could address the maintenance commitment even further. This would however
require stronger assurances of stable funding from road agencies.

3. Roads projects supporting rural accessibility have the potential for improving all season
access through proactively addressing the effects of climate change. The lesson is that a
program aiming to improve all season access of rural populations needs to consider in detail the
adverse impacts of floods and landslides and incorporate erosion-prevention measures into road
works design.

4. If a project design incorporates mechanisms for seeking upfront assurance of budget
availability for counterpart funding activities, there is a higher possibility for smooth
implementation without delays. This project faced difficulties in the initial years as the State faced
difficulties in providing the counterpart funding.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is well-written and clear. The theory of change provided in the ICR clearly articulates the causal links
between activities, outputs and the intended outcomes. The analysis and evidence provided in the ICR is
adequate to validate project performance. The ICR candidly acknowledges the issues that were encountered in
implementing a multi-sector project in the newly created State. The ICR provides useful information in Annex
eight on testimonials from project stakeholders and the photographs provided enables the reader to visualize
the project's achievements. The ICR draws good lessons from the experience of implementing this project.

One minor shortcoming with the ICR is its length. The main body of the text at about 45 pages, which is almost
three times the recommended length of 15 pages.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                   Page 17 of 18
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
BR MST Tocantins Integrated Sust. Reg. (P121495)




                                                                                Page 18 of 18
