     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     WB&G:Strengthen Fiscal Res & Bus Environ (P164427)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0022714

1. Operation Information



 Operation ID                              Operation Name
 P164427                                   WB&G:Strengthen Fiscal Res & Bus Environ

 Country                                   Practice Area (Lead)
 West Bank and Gaza                        Macroeconomics, Trade and Investment



 Non-Programmatic DPF

 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)                    Total Financing (USD)
 TF-A9743,TF-B1405                         01-Feb-2020                                            64,227,196.00

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 07-Feb-2019                               01-Jun-2020

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                Co-financing (USD)

 Original Commitment                           64,227,196.00                                     64,227,196.00

 Revised Commitment                            64,227,196.00                                     64,227,196.00

 Actual                                        64,227,196.00                                     64,227,196.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Antonio M. Ollero          Paul Holden                   Jennifer L. Keller              IEGEC




2. Program Objectives and Pillars/Policy Areas
DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives

According to the Program Document (page 15), the program development objective of the West Bank and
Gaza Strengthening Fiscal Resilience and Business Environment Development Policy Grant was
"to strengthen revenue and land administration and the intergovernmental revenue framework, improve the
business environment and foundations for a digital economy, and enhance sustainability and creditworthiness
of local service providers."

                                                                                                   Page 1 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      WB&G:Strengthen Fiscal Res & Bus Environ (P164427)




For the purpose of this ICR Review, the program development objective is restated into the following three
objectives:

Objective 1 - To strengthen revenue administration, the intergovernmental revenue framework, and land
administration.
Objective 2 - To improve the business environment and lay the foundations for a digital economy.
Objective 3 - To enhance the sustainability and creditworthiness of local service providers of electricity, water,
and medical services.


b. Pillars/Policy Areas
The operation had three pillars.

Pillar 1 - Strengthening Revenue Administration, the Intergovernmental Revenue Framework,
and Land Administration aimed to improve tax collection by linking the management information systems for
domestic and border taxation to create a single unified taxpayer base, improve the intergovernmental revenue
framework by delegating the collection of property taxes and related penalties to local government units, and
strengthen the oversight of land administration by amending the Palestinian Land Authority Law and
constituting a governing board for the agency.

Pillar 2 - Improving the Business Environment and Laying the Foundations for a Digital
Economy aimed to streamline the procedures for the issuance of municipal business licenses by amending
the Law on Crafts and Industries of 1953, simplify the procedures for the purchase and registration of land by
businesses by issuing a circular governing land purchase permits by the Council of Ministers, and
promote the creation of new electronic payments systems that would support digital economic activity by
having the Palestine Monetary Authority adopt regulations for licensing digital payments providers.

Pillar 3 - Enhancing the Sustainability and Creditworthiness of Local Service Providers for Electricity,
Water, and Medical Services aimed to encourage payments by consumers of electricity bills by adopting
procedures by which electricity providers can cut off services due to accumulated customer debt, improve the
finances of the water sector by restructuring the debt on water bills owed by at least 90 local governments to
the Ministry of Finance, and contain the explosive growth in health spending by facilitating the use of the
National Reference Price tool in contracting for external medical services.


c. Comments on Program Cost, Financing and Dates

Program Cost. The program was US$30 million at appraisal. According to the Program Document (page 4),
the operation was expected to directly leverage other donor financing in the amount of approximately US$45
million through the Palestinian Reform and Development Plan (PRDP) Trust Fund.

Program Financing. The program was financed with a grant of US$30 million from the Trust Fund for Gaza and
the West Bank, administered by the International Development Association, to the Palestinian Liberation
Organization, for the benefit of the Palestinian Authority. The operation obtained an additional grant of
US$34.227 million from the PRDP Trust Fund, administered by the Bank. Both grants were fully disbursed.


                                                                                                       Page 2 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     WB&G:Strengthen Fiscal Res & Bus Environ (P164427)



Dates. The program was approved on February 7, 2019, became effective on February 22, 2019, and closed
four months later than its original closing date on June 1, 2020.


3. Relevance of Design

a. Relevance of Objectives

 Relevance to Country Development Constraints. The program objective was relevant to development
 constraints faced by West Bank and Gaza related to fiscal revenues, the business environment, and utility and
 medical service providers. These development constraints are articulated in various economic and sector
 analytic reports written by the Bank (the Bank does not produce a Systematic Country Diagnostic on the West
 Bank and Gaza that would have unified these analyses).

       Highly reliant on "clearance revenues" collected by the Government of Israel and on budget support
        from international donors, West Bank and Gaza faced significant domestic revenue mobilization
        constraints: (a) it lacked a unified taxpayer database with the bifurcation of the revenue management
        information system between inland and border taxes; (b) the revenue and expenditure assignments
        for local governments were misaligned – with revenues at a low 5 percent of GDP, half derived from
        sales of electricity and utility services provided by Israeli companies, four-fifths of all local governments
        could provide only 12 of the 27 services mandated of them, according to the "Public Expenditure
        Review of the Palestinian Authority” (World Bank, 2016); and (c) property taxation was weak,
        principally because of poor land administration – there were no property valuations in 1994-2009, and
        when they resumed in 2009, the valuations used the dated "replacement value" rather than the modern
        "area assessment" methodology, according to the "Public Expenditure Review of the Palestinian
        Authority” (World Bank, 2016).
       A poor business environment posed serious obstacles to private sector activity: (a) municipal business
        licensing was burdensome – exacerbated by the territorial, political, and administrative divisions
        between West Bank and Gaza, problems with business licenses and permits were tagged as a major
        constraint to conducting business by 27 percent of all enterprises, according to the “West Bank and
        Gaza Investment Climate Assessment - Fragmentation and Uncertainty" (World Bank, 2014); (b) land
        purchases and land registration by businesses were cumbersome and detrimental to economic
        activity – as much as US$35 billion of collateral value was locked in unregistered land in a financial
        system where only registered land could be pledged as collateral for loans, according to the "The
        Socio-Economic Effects of Weak Land Registration and Administration System in the West Bank”
        (World Bank, 2018); and (c) the economy lacked digital payments service providers and instruments to
        enable digital economic activity – only 14 percent of the adult population made or received a digital
        payment in 2014, compared to the average 33 percent in the Middle East and North Africa region,
        according to the "Global Findex Database 2017" (World Bank, 2017).
       Providers of electricity, water, and medical services faced financial sustainability problems: (a)
        customers repeatedly failed to pay their electricity bills, accumulating debts with electricity service
        providers. The poor condition of the electricity network, the inability of technicians to fix engineering
        problems, and the dearth of payment platforms discouraged customers from paying their bills,
        according to the “Assessment and Action Plan to Improve Payment for Electricity Services in the
        Palestinian Territories” (World Bank, 2014); (b) municipal water providers failed to collect on water bills
        or otherwise diverted water bill collections to municipal budgets, accumulating debts with the Ministry of
        Finance and Planning – as a result, the Palestinian Authority had to shoulder the cost of bulk water

                                                                                                       Page 3 of 21
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    WB&G:Strengthen Fiscal Res & Bus Environ (P164427)



      supplied to municipal water departments in the amount of US$35 million annually, according to
      “Toward Water Security for Palestinians: West Bank and Gaza Water Supply, Sanitation and
      Hygiene Poverty Diagnostic” (World Bank, 2017); and (c) "outside medical referrals" had risen sharply
      in number and costs, rendering government health spending unsustainable.

Relevance to Government Priorities. The program objectives were aligned with the medium-term priorities
expressed in West Bank and Gaza's National Policy Agenda 2017-2022 - Putting Citizen's First (NPA).

     The first program objective was aligned with the second NPA pillar, "Government Reform," which
      aimed to achieve effective and efficient financial management by "mobilizing revenue by expanding the
      tax base, enhancing tax collection, and rationalizing expenditures;" attain responsive local
      governments by "expanding LGU taxation, revenue-raising and resource management mandates;" and
      improve services to citizens by "establishing a comprehensive approach to land administration that
      optimizes land use, completes land registration, and efficiently manages state lands."
     The second objective was aligned with the third NPA pillar, "Sustainable Development," which aimed to
      improve the business environment and promote industry by "cutting red tape for business through
      smart regulation" and by "supporting and promoting the digital economy."
     The third program objective was aligned with the third NPA pillar, "Sustainable Development," which
      aimed to deliver better health care services by "ensuring the fiscally sustainability of the health care
      system."

Relevance to Bank Group Strategy. The program objectives were consistent with the Bank Group strategy
in West Bank and Gaza as articulated in the Assistance Strategy for FY18-21 for the West Bank and Gaza
(AS).

     The first program objective was consistent with the first AS pillar, "Setting the Conditions for Increased
      Private Sector Investments and Job Creation," which focused among others on "public financial
      management of the Palestinian Authority aimed at improving the confidence of the private sector for
      making investments in the West Bank and Gaza."
     The second program objective was consistent with the second AS pillar, "Private Sector Enhancement
      Facility to Realize Private Sector Investments," which focused among others on "business environment
      reform" as well as "financial sector reforms for increased access to finance and markets."
     The third program objective was consistent with the third AS pillar, "Addressing the Needs of the
      Vulnerable and Strengthening Institutions for Improved Citizen-Centered Service Delivery," which
      focused among others on "basic service delivery, including water and sanitation."

The program objectives were aligned with those advanced by the Support for Fiscal Stability and Public
Financial Management Development Policy Grants I-VII (P111078, P113621, P118593, P123437, P129742,
P147687, P152257, and P156865), implemented from 2008 to 2016, and the Fiscal Stability and Business
Environment Development Policy Grant (P161525), implemented from 2017 to 2019. Like this operation,
these predecessor reform programs were supported by the PRDP Trust Fund, the mechanism administered by
the Bank that channels budget support funds from multiple donors to implement the policy agenda of the
Palestinian Authority.

     The first program objective was aligned with the objectives to "strengthen the fiscal position of the
      Palestinian Authority" and "improve public financial management" advanced by P111078, P113621,
      P118593, P123437, and P129742; "reduce the recurrent fiscal deficit" and "improve the effectiveness


                                                                                                   Page 4 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     WB&G:Strengthen Fiscal Res & Bus Environ (P164427)



        and transparency of public finances," by P147687 and P152257; and "improve public revenue
        performance" and "improve the transparency of public finances," by P156865.
       The second program objective was aligned with the objectives to "improve the business climate,"
        advanced by P147687 and P152257; and "improve the business environment," by P161525.
       The third program objective was aligned with the objective to "improve the transparency of fiscal
        transfers to local service providers," advanced by P156865.

The relation of the prior actions supported by this operation to the prior actions implemented under the
predecessor reform programs are traced in Section 8.A.


b. Relevance of Prior Actions

Rationale

 Prior Actions
 Objective 1 - Strengthen Revenue Administration, the Intergovernmental Revenue Framework,
 and Land Administration
 PA1 - The Ministry of Finance and Planning has taken the necessary actions to improve tax collection
 and operational efficiency, by connecting existing management information systems for domestic
 and border taxation (RMIS and ASYCUDA), as evidenced by the issuance of official letter No. 5426, from
 the General Directorate of Revenue to the General Manager of the Revenue IT Department, informing the
 completion of the merger of RMIS and ASYCUDA
 PA2 - The President has taken the necessary actions to strengthen domestic revenue collection by LGUs
 by authorizing the Cabinet, in cooperation with the MOFP, to delegate the MOFP’s responsibilities to
 collect property taxes and related penalties to LGUs, as evidenced by the enactment of Law No. 12,
 dated May 3, 2018, amending the 1954 property tax law.
 PA3 - The Cabinet has established strategic and policy oversight mechanisms for institutions in land
 administration, as evidenced by the adoption of Decision No. 17/229/18 signed by the Prime Minister on
 November 22, 2018, referring the draft amendments to the Palestine Land Authority Law for approval by
 the President.
 Objective 2 - Improve the Business Environment and Lay the Foundations for a Digital Economy
 PA4 - The Ministry of Health has streamlined the procedures for issuance of business licensing, reflecting
 the amendments to the Law on Crafts and Industries of 1953, as evidenced by the issuance of: (a)
 Cabinet decision No. 1 for the year 2018, approving the amendments to the annexes of the Law on Crafts
 and Industries dated April 3, 2018; and (b) Guidelines and instructions for business licenses, issued by
 the MOH dated July 25, 2018.
 PA5 - Cabinet has taken the necessary steps to reduce the land registration procedures for businesses,
 as evidenced by the issuance of Circular 6-15 dated February 2, 2017, describing the streamlined
 procedures necessary for obtaining a purchase permit.
 PA6 - The PMA Board of Directors has adopted regulations enabling the establishment of new electronic
 payments systems, fostering competition and reducing costs, as evidenced by the minutes of the PMA
 Board meeting signed by the Governor on July 17, 2018, approving regulations for the licensing of
 payment service providers.
 Objective 3 - Enhance the Sustainability and Creditworthiness of Local Service Providers of
 Electricity, Water, and Health Services

                                                                                                   Page 5 of 21
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    WB&G:Strengthen Fiscal Res & Bus Environ (P164427)



PA7 - The Cabinet has set forth procedural steps to follow before service providers can cut off electricity
following the accumulation of debt, including a grievance mechanism and protection of poor and
vulnerable population, as evidenced by the issuance of official instructions dated April 17, 2018,
published in the Official Gazette on April 22, 2018, that include the following provisions: (a) specification
of exact periods of unpaid bills (30 days to households and 60 to non-households; (b) objections from the
consumer to the distributor; (c) instructions on how to file a complaint; (d) instructions on how to
reconnect power back to consumers; (e) guidelines on resolving disputes between the consumer and the
distributor; and (f) exemptions.
PA8 - The Intra-agency Committee has taken the necessary steps to strengthen payment discipline and
improve financial viability of the water sector by rescheduling the debt for unpaid water bills owed by
LGUs to the MOFP for at least 90 LGUs, as evidenced by: (a) the issuance of an Official Letter signed by
the Head of the Intra-agency Committee and dated October 28, 2018 enclosing a report describing the
balances of the municipalities after debt rescheduling; and (b) seven debt rescheduling agreements
entered between the LGU and the Intra-agency Committee, selected on a sample basis.
PA9 - The Ministry of Health has directed its Service Purchasing Unit to plan and implement training and
capacity building to make the National Price Reference List tool ready to be used for medical referrals
with domestic non-MOH healthcare providers when negotiating with at least three hospitals, as evidenced
by the issuance of Directive No. 32/110/1139/18, dated October 30, 2018


Objective 1 - Strengthen Revenue Administration, the Intergovernmental Revenue Framework, and Land
Administration

      PA1, PA2, and PA3 aimed to strengthen revenue administration, the intergovernmental revenue
       framework, and land administration. By merging the MIS for domestic and border taxation, the
       Palestinian Authority would create a unified taxpayer database out of two previously separate systems
       that were each easily prone to tax evasion. Delegating property tax collections to local governments
       could help strengthen the intergovernmental revenue framework. Improving oversight of the Palestinian
       Land Authority and the Land and Water Settlement Commission could strengthen land administration.
      PA1 aimed eliminate the division between domestic and border tax information systems, which hobbled
       revenue administration: (a) the Palestinian Authority collected VAT on imports and sales while customs
       taxes and duties were collected (on behalf of the Palestinian Authority) by the Government of Israel,
       which controlled the territories' borders; (b) the inland system, the Revenue Management Information
       System (RMIS), and the customs system, the Automated System for Customs Data (ASCUYDA), were
       separate and independent systems that could be manipulated by taxpayers (taxpayers reportedly paid
       one type of tax but not the other). This prior action would strengthen revenue administration: (a)
       following the merger of the Inland Tax Department and the VAT Department (supported by the
       Improving Public Revenue Performance and Sustainability Development Policy Grant), the unification of
       RMIS and ASCUYDA would create a single taxpayer database that covered all of the Palestinian
       Authority's principal tax revenue streams – VAT, customs taxes, and the income tax; (b) the single
       taxpayer database would help expand the tax base and strengthen tax revenue administration. The
       relevance of this prior action is rated satisfactory.
      PA2 aimed to improve the inter-governmental framework for revenue administration and strengthen
       domestic revenue collection by delegating the collection of property taxes and penalties to municipal
       governments: (a) the collection of property taxes and penalties were the responsibility of the Ministry of
       Finance under the 55-year old Property Tax Law of 1954; meanwhile, (b) local governments had the
       mandate to provide critical public services, but lacked their own revenues to fulfill these obligations. The


                                                                                                    Page 6 of 21
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    WB&G:Strengthen Fiscal Res & Bus Environ (P164427)



      prior action would strengthen the inter-governmental framework for revenue administration: (a) the
      devolution of property tax collection to local governments would address the misalignment of revenue
      and expenditure assignments; (b) it would also help diminish the practice of net lending and begin to
      shape a viable financing model for local governments. The relevance of this prior action is rated
      satisfactory.
     PA3 aimed to strengthen land administration and property taxation by establishing policy and strategy
      oversight at two land administration institutions: (a) 55 percent of land in the West Bank was not formally
      registered, impeded by the Palestinian-Israeli conflict over land rights, the difficult settlement
      process, unclear and disputed ownership among family members, and absentee ownership; (b)
      incomplete land registration adversely affected property taxation – the effective tax rate was 1.8 percent
      for unregistered land compared to 4.5 percent for registered land– resulting in significant fiscal losses;
      (c) it also made the collection of taxes from land transactions difficult as property rights were not formally
      transferred; and (d) it discouraged real estate development. This prior action would strengthen land
      administration and property taxation with institutional reform at the two land agencies: (a) following the
      approval by the Cabinet of the Roadmap for Reforming the Palestinian Land Sector and the creation of
      the Land and Water Settlement Commission (as the agency responsible for the first-time registration of
      land), it was opportune to reform the institutional structure of the Palestinian Land Authority, which was
      responsible for recording land titles, property transfers, and mortgages and managing state-owned
      property; (b) a Board of Directors for the Palestinian Land Authority and the Land and Water Settlement
      Commission would conduct policy, direct strategy, and assume oversight of the two institutions; (c)
      overall, institutional capacity building would strengthen land administration, advance land registration,
      and improve property taxation. However, because this prior action did not require signing of the
      draft amendments by the President, its relevance is rated moderately satisfactory.

Objective 2 - Improve the Business Environment and Lay the Foundations for a Digital Economy

     PA4, PA5, and PA6 aimed to improve the business environment and lay the foundations for a digital
      economy. By simplifying the procedure to obtain a municipal business license, the Palestinian Authority
      would address a problem tagged by more than a quarter of all enterprises as a major constraint to
      conducting business. Similarly, by simplifying the procedure to obtain permits to purchase land and
      register land ownership, the Palestinian Authority would facilitate land purchases for habitation and
      investment. By establishing the legal framework to license mobile payment service providers, the
      Palestinian Authority would promote access to digital finance by individuals, enterprises, and
      institutions, and help lay the foundations for a digital economy that would be supported by a functional
      digital payments and remittance system.
     PA4 aimed to simplify the burdensome procedure to obtain municipal business licenses: (a) business
      licensing was governed by the 65-year old Law of Crafts and Industries of 1953; (b) it took an average
      43 days to incorporate a limited liability company, including 36 days to obtain a municipal business
      license; (c) like obtaining a construction permit and transferring property, business licensing required
      a separate transaction with a different authority, which did not share data with other agencies, raising
      transaction costs for businesses. This prior action: (a) streamlined business licensing to facilitate
      business entry and reduce incentives for informality; and, related to Objective 1, a larger number of
      formal enterprises would enlarge the tax base. The relevance of this prior action is rated satisfactory.
     PA5 aimed to simplify the cumbersome procedure to obtain permits to purchase land and register land
      ownership: (a) purchase permits were required by law ostensibly to prevent the acquisition of
      Palestinian land by Israelis; and (b) the number of days to obtain a purchase permits was 30 days, on
      average. This prior action would improve the business environment: (a) the requirement for a security


                                                                                                     Page 7 of 21
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    WB&G:Strengthen Fiscal Res & Bus Environ (P164427)



      check would be waived for Palestinian companies and associations; and (b) the average time to obtain a
      land purchase permit could then be cut by half. The relevance of this prior action is rated satisfactory.
     PA6 aimed to help lay the foundation for a digital economy by addressing an impediment to digital
      economic activity – the lack of digital financial services: (a) following the introduction of 3G
      telecommunications services, it was opportune to encourage the development of mobile digital financial
      services; (b) electronic payments would support digital retail economic activity, which has been shown to
      be robust as evidenced by the use for business purposes of SIM cards, albeit illegally distributed in the
      West Bank by Israeli telecom operators, which were not authorized to operate in the Palestinian
      territories; (c) moreover, digital payments, as part of the retail payments system, would advance the
      third stage in the development of the national payments system after the introduction of the Automated
      Transfer System (in the first stage) and securities settlement (in the second stage). This prior action
      would set the legal framework by which the Palestine Monetary Authority would license mobile
      payments services providers: (a) with Palestinian cellular providers launching high-speed data services
      in the West Bank in 2018 after a lengthy ban on the operation of 3G networks, the enabling regulatory
      framework would facilitate organization by private providers of transaction accounts and the creation of
      electronic payment instruments; (b) digital mobile payments would facilitate transactions among
      individuals, businesses, and even public services; and (c) digital mobile payments would advance the
      digitalization of the financial services industry. The relevance of this prior action is rated satisfactory.

Objective 3 - Enhance the Sustainability and Creditworthiness of Local Service Providers of Electricity,
Water, and Medical Services

     PA7, PA8, and PA9 aimed to enhance the sustainability and creditworthiness of local services providers
      for electricity, water, and medical services. By setting clear rules by which providers can cut off
      electricity services, the Palestinian Authority would incentivize customers to pay for electricity services
      under the pain of being denied services, helping repair the finances of electricity service providers. By
      rescheduling the debt of local governments to the MOFP for water bills, the Palestinian Authority would
      begin to clear water bill arrears with the MOFP, helping repair the finances of both the water
      service providers and the MOFP, which had to cover the costs of the unpaid bills. By facilitating the use
      of the National Reference Price Tool in negotiations for external medical services, the Palestinian
      Authority would help rationalize medical referral pricing and spending, helping the finances of the
      medical service providers and the government. The three prior actions would strengthen the fiscal
      sustainability of the central government, which had to cover the costs of unpaid electricity, water, and
      medical services (the "net lending problem"), and strengthen the financial sustainability of electricity,
      water, and medical service providers.       .
     PA7 set the rules by which electricity services could be cut off as a result of customer non-payment: (a)
      electricity service providers suffered from financial leakages from unpaid electricity bills; (b) the absence
      of rules on services cutoffs enabled customers to continually postpone payments to electricity service
      companies. Following the opening of dedicated accounts at local governments for electricity revenue
      collection (supported by the West Bank and Gaza Fiscal Stability and Business Environment
      Development Policy Grant), this prior action would help improve electricity bill collection. The takeover
      by the Palestinian Electricity Transmission Limited of single-buyer functions from the Israel Electric
      Corporation and the signing of long-term contracts between the two parties, together with the creation of
      new, or merger of existing, distribution companies, should help shore up the finances of the electricity
      sector. The relevance of this prior action is rated satisfactory.
     PA8 aimed to enhance the financial sustainability of water service providers by restructuring the
      accumulated debt owed by local governments to the Ministry of Finance for unpaid water bills. Water
      service providers were unable to collect water and wastewater tariffs in full despite obtaining water from

                                                                                                    Page 8 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     WB&G:Strengthen Fiscal Res & Bus Environ (P164427)



        the West Bank Water Department at 20 percent below cost. Municipal water service providers also
        diverted water tariff collections to municipal budgets. Consequently, arrears built up in the books of the
        Ministry of Finance and Planning; and the Government of Israel withheld "clearance revenues" due the
        Palestinian Authority for the unpaid water and wastewater bills. This prior action would enhance the
        sustainability of water services providers: (a) debt rescheduling agreements would be concluded
        between local governments and the inter-agency committee consisting of the Palestinian Water
        Authority, West Bank Water Department, and the Ministry of Finance; (b) this prior action is part of the
        series of reforms to improve the operations and finances of water services – the creation of water
        utilities separate from local governments; the cost recovery of investment capital, and the coverage of
        operating and maintenance costs. The relevance of this prior action is rated satisfactory.
       PA9 aimed to enhance the sustainability of medical services by facilitating and piloting the use of the
        National Reference Price Tool in negotiations with hospitals for external (non-Ministry of Health)
        medical referral contracts (the transfer of patient care from one clinic to another). The number of
        "outside medical referrals" (typically to hospitals in Israel and private medical facilities in the West Bank
        and Gaza, East Jerusalem, Jordan, and Egypt) had risen sharply from 8,123 in 2000 to 74,654 in 2017.
        Costs rose from US$10 million in 2000 to US$210 million in 2014. At the same time, "outside medical
        referrals" did not use standard categories of medical conditions, and resorted to ad-hoc pricing
        arrangements, resulting in costly health expenditures. This prior action would enhance the financial
        sustainability of medical services. The National Reference Price Tool would help health authorities
        negotiate contracts with service providers that would be more cost-effective for patients, providers, and
        the government. The relevance of this prior action is rated satisfactory.



Rating

Satisfactory


4. Relevance of Results Indicators

Rationale

 Results       Associated Relevance        Baseline          Actual Value Actual
                                                         Target                       Achievement
 Indicator     Prior Action Rating                                        Change in Rating
                                                                          Results
                                                                          Indicator
                                                                          Relative to
                                                                          Target
 Objective 1 - Strengthen Revenue Administration, the Intergovernmental Revenue Framework,
 and Land Administration
 RI1 -        PA1        Moderately     NIS2,750  NIS2,982 NIS2,524       -97.4       Negligible
  Increase in            Unsatisfactory million   million    million      percent of
 gross                                  (2017)    (2019)     (2020)       target
 domestic tax
 revenues



                                                                                                       Page 9 of 21
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    WB&G:Strengthen Fiscal Res & Bus Environ (P164427)



RI2 -          PA2       Moderately     0         3-5        2           40-66.7      Modest
 Number of               Unsatisfactory (2017)    (2019)     (2020)      percent of
LGUs that                                                                target
have piloted
collection of
property
taxes
RI3 -          PA3       Highly                                                       Negligible
 Supporting              Unsatisfactory
the above
result
Objective 2 - Improve the Business Environment and Lay the Foundations for a Digital Economy
RI4-           PA4       Satisfactory 36          10         6           115.4        High
 Number of                              (2017)    (2019)     (2020)      percent of
days on                                                                  target
average to
issue a
business
license
RI5 -          PA5       Moderately     30        15         15          100 percent Substantial
 Number of               Satisfactory (2017)      (2019)     (2020)      of target
days on
average to
obtain a
land
purchase
permit
RI6 -          PA6       Moderately     0         5          5           100 percent Substantial
 Regulatory              Unsatisfactory (2017)    (2019)     (2020)      of target
authorities
have
reviewed
licensing
applications
for mobile
payments
providers
under the
new
framework
Objective 3 - Enhance the Sustainability and Creditworthiness of Local Service Providers of
Electricity, Water, and Health Services
RI7 - Share PA7          Satisfactory 86          95         92          66.7 percent Substantial
of electricity                          (2017)    (2019)     (2020)      of target
that is
purchased
from

                                                                                           Page 10 of 21
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    WB&G:Strengthen Fiscal Res & Bus Environ (P164427)



wholesale
suppliers is
collected
and paid by
LGUs
RI8 -        PA8         Moderately     0           15           30           200 percent Substantial
 Percentage              Unsatisfactory (2017)      (2019)       (2020)       of target
of unpaid
debts for
water owed
by LGUs to
the MOFP is
restructured
RI9 -        PA9         Moderately     0           3            5            166.7        Modest
 Service                 Unsatisfactory (2017)      (2019)       (2020)       percent of
Purchasing                                                                    target
Unit of the
MOH has
completed
negotiations
for
contracting
medical
services
using the
NPR tool
with
domestic
private
healthcare
providers

Objective 1 - Strengthen Revenue Administration, the Intergovernmental Revenue Framework,
and Land Administration

     RI1 only partly measures the impact of the prior action on progress toward achievement of the
      targeted outcome. Although it can be argued that improvement in tax revenue administration from
      a merger of RMIS and ASCUYDA could help raise gross domestic tax revenues, there are many
      other factors that drive an increase in gross domestic tax revenues. The suggestion by the ICR
      (page 22) to use instead the "increase in tax revenues as a percentage of GDP" would consider
      the effect of economic growth on the indicator, but does not address the attribution issue
      altogether. There are many other factors driving an increase in tax revenue, including the
      continuing effects of the merger of the Income Tax Department and the VAT Department, an
      action supported earlier by the Improving Revenue Performance and Sustainability
      Development Policy Grant (P156865). The results indicator is rated moderately unsatisfactory.
     RI2 only partly measures the impact of the prior action on progress toward achievement of the
      targeted outcome. The number of local governments that pilot the collection of property taxes falls
      short of the intended result – that local governments have actually taken over property tax

                                                                                                Page 11 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     WB&G:Strengthen Fiscal Res & Bus Environ (P164427)



        collection from the Ministry of Finance. As the ICR (page 22) correctly argues, the piloting of
        property tax collection was "not enough to contribute to the achievement of the project objective"
        and might belie the weak capacity of the participating local governments at tax collection and
        administration. The results indicator is rated moderately unsatisfactory.
       RI3 was not relevant to the impact of the prior action – establishing policy and strategy oversight
        at land institutions (PA3) – toward achievement of the objective of strengthening land
        administration. It is not clear what "supporting the above result," means. The results indicator is
        rated highly unsatisfactory.

 Objective 2 - Improve the Business Environment and Lay the Foundations for a Digital Economy

       RI4 was adequate to measure the result of simplifying the procedures to register a business. The
        reduction in the number of days to issue a business license, measured on a de jure basis, would
        reflect the improvement in the business environment. The results indicator is rated satisfactory.
       RI5 was mostly adequate to measure the result of simplifying the procedure for obtaining a land
        purchase permit. The reduction in the number of days to obtain a land purchase permit would
        reflect the improvement of the business environment. The results indicator is rated moderately
        satisfactory.
       RI6 was mostly adequate to measure the result of adopting regulations for the establishment of
        new electronic payments systems. The review of licensing applications for mobile systems
        providers under the new regulatory framework would indicate that the foundations for digital
        economic activity were being built. However, the approval of licensing applications, rather than
        mere regulatory review, would have served as a more powerful results indicator for this outcome.
        The results indicator is rated moderately unsatisfactory.

 Objective 3 - Enhance the Sustainability and Creditworthiness of Local Service Providers of
 Electricity, Water, and Health Services

       RI7 was mostly adequate to measure the result of raising bill collections from electricity service
        customers. This results indicator is rated satisfactory.
       RI8 was partly adequate to measure improvement in the financial sustainability of water service
        providers. However, while restructuring may facilitate the clearance of accumulated debts, it does
        not itself result in repayment. This results indicator is rated moderately unsatisfactory.
       RI9 only partly measured the impact on the objective (of financial sustainability and
        creditworthiness of health services) of the action directing the Ministry of Health Service
        Purchasing Unit to plan and implement training and capacity building activities to make the
        National Price Reference (NPR) tool ready for use when negotiating medical referral
        contracts. This results indicator only counts the number of negotiations completed, without saying
        anything about the results of the negotiations and their impact on fiscal sustainability. This results
        indicator is rated moderately unsatisfactory.



Rating

Moderately Unsatisfactory



                                                                                                     Page 12 of 21
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  WB&G:Strengthen Fiscal Res & Bus Environ (P164427)



   5. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               To strengthen revenue administration, the intergovernmental revenue framework, and land administration.


               Rationale
                    The achievement of R1 is rated negligible. Gross domestic tax revenues declined from NIS2,750 in
                      2017 to NIS2,524 in 2020, failing to meet the target of NIS2,982. According to the ICR (page 24),
                      domestic tax revenues were negatively affected by spillover effects from the withholding by the
                      Government of Israel for six months in 2019 and another six months in 2020 of transfers of "clearance
                      revenues" – the value-added tax, excise taxes, and customs revenues collected by Israel for the
                      Palestinian Authority under the terms of the 1994 Oslo Accords and the Protocol of Economic
                      Relations. Moreover, more work is reportedly needed to fully integrate RMIS and ASCUYDA.
                     The achievement of R2 is rated modest. Only two local governments piloted the collection of property
                      taxes (Beit Jala and Assira al Shamaliyeh), two-thirds of the lower-end of the target (three) and one-
                      fifth of the upper-end of the target (five). According to the ICR (pages 24-25), the fiscal crisis in 2019
                      and 2020 and the COVID-19 outbreak in 2020 delayed the start of the capacity building program that
                      would have equipped the local governments with the skills for property tax collection. Poor relations
                      between the central and local governments were also a factor.
                     The achievement of R3 is rated negligible. According to the ICR (page 23), the result was "not
                      achieved," although it is not clear what result was being measured (see Section 4). Although the prior
                      action associated with R3 – the adoption of by the Prime Minister of Decision No. 17/229/18 referring
                      the draft amendments to the Palestine Land Authority Law for approval by the President (PA3) – was
                      completed, the draft amendments have not yet been signed by the President.

               With most (two out of three) of the pillar results indicator targets rated negligible, and the remaining rated
               modest, the efficacy of this pillar is rated unsatisfactory.



               Rating

               Unsatisfactory

               OBJECTIVE 2
               Objective
               To improve the business environment and lay the foundations for a digital economy.


               Rationale
                    The achievement of R4 is rated high. The average number of days to issue a business license was
                      reduced from 36 to 6 days, exceeding the target of 10 days. Additionally, according to the ICR (page
                      25), the cost of obtaining a municipal business license was reduced from JD 120 to JD 25.



                                                                                                                   Page 13 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   WB&G:Strengthen Fiscal Res & Bus Environ (P164427)




      The achievement of R5 is rated substantial. The average number of days to obtain a land purchase
       permit from the Council of Minister through the Land Authority was reduced from 30 days to 15 days,
       meeting the target.
      The achievement of R6 is rated substantial. The number of licensing applications for mobile systems
       providers that were reviewed by the regulatory authority under the new framework was five, meeting
       the target. Although the results indicator – the number of licensing applications reviewed – is rated
       moderately unsatisfactory, additional evidence indicates that the licensing applications were approved
       and all licensees were operational. According to the ICR (page 26), the Palestine Monetary Authority
       has since granted licenses to the five applicants – JawwalPay, PalPay, Middle East Payments
       Services, MalChat, and MadfooatCom. Moreover, all five mobile payment providers are fully
       operational and have issued 324,083 e-wallets so far, which are in use in the Palestinian
       territories. Hence, the objective to lay the foundations for a digital economy was achieved.

With most (all three) of the RI targets rated substantial or higher, and no RI target is negligible, the efficacy of
this pillar is rated satisfactory.



Rating

Satisfactory

OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
To enhance the sustainability and creditworthiness of local service providers for electricity, water, and health
services

Rationale
     The achievement of R7 is rated substantial. The share of electricity purchases from wholesale
       suppliers that was paid by local governments rose from 86 percent in 2017 to 92 percent in 2020, two-
       thirds of the target increase to 95 percent. According to the ICR (page 26), the economic dislocation
       caused by COVID-19 negatively affected the ability of consumers to make timely payments for
       electricity bills.
      The achievement of R8 is rated substantial. The percentage of unpaid debts for water owed by local
       governments to the Ministry of Finance that was restructured rose from 0 percent in 2017 to 30
       percent in 2020, exceeding the target of 15 percent. The restructured debt were owed by 93 local
       governments and amounted to new Israeli shekel (NIS) 380 million of the total NIS 1,277 owed.
      The achievement of R9 is rated modest. The number of negotiations for contracting medical services
       that was completed by the Ministry of Health Service Purchasing Unit with domestic private healthcare
       providers using the NPR tool rose from zero in 2017 to five in 2020, exceeding the target of
       three. Additionally, according to the ICR (page ), the Ministry of Health has since implemented the
       NPR pricing covering 50 medical procedures with five local medical service providers – the Najah
       National University Hospital, Makassed, Augusta Victoria, St. John, and Al Ahli.

With the RI targets rated modest or higher, the efficacy of this pillar is rated moderately satisfactory.




                                                                                                     Page 14 of 21
                         Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                    Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                         WB&G:Strengthen Fiscal Res & Bus Environ (P164427)




                      Rating

                      Moderately Satisfactory


OVERALL EFF TBL OLD




Overall Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
Rationale

With the efficacy of the first objective rated unsatisfactory, the second, satisfactory, and the third, moderately
satisfactory, the overall efficacy of the project is rated moderately satisfactory.



Overall Efficacy Rating
Moderately Satisfactory


      6. Outcome

      Rationale

      The relevance of prior actions is rated satisfactory. The prior actions unifying the taxpayer databases,
      delegating property tax collection to LGUs, and strengthening oversight over the land administration agencies
      would make moderate to major contributions to strengthening revenue administration, the intergovernmental
      revenue framework, and land administration and are rated moderately satisfactory to satisfactory. The prior
      actions simplifying municipal business licenses and land purchase permits and setting the rules for licensing
      mobile payments service providers would make major contributions to improving the business environmental
      and laying the foundations for the digital economy and are rated satisfactory. The prior actions setting the rules
      for cutting electricity services, rescheduling debt on water bills, and facilitating using the pricing tool to negotiate
      medical referral service contracts would make major contributions to enhancing the sustainability of electricity,
      water, and medical service providers and are rated satisfactory.

      The overall efficacy is rated moderately satisfactory. The degree of achievement of the objective
      to strengthen revenue administration, the intergovernmental revenue framework, and land administration is
      rated unsatisfactory. The degree of achievement of the objective to improve the business environmental and
      lay the foundations for the digital economy is rated satisfactory. The degree of achievement of the objective to
      improve the business environmental and lay the foundations for the digital economy is rated moderately
      satisfactory.

      The outcome is rated moderately satisfactory


      a. Rating

      Moderately Satisfactory

                                                                                                               Page 15 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      WB&G:Strengthen Fiscal Res & Bus Environ (P164427)




7. Risk to Development Outcome

The risks to the sustainability of the development outcomes are substantial across a wide range of risk
categories, each of which makes the continuation of policy and structural reforms doubly difficult.

Political Risk. Political risk remains elevated in West Bank and Gaza, driven by the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict, the Fatah and Hamas rivalry, and deepening public disillusionment with the ruling
political factions. Questions about the ability of the Palestinian Authority to address the territories' critical
problems, the formation of new competing party lists by former Fatah officials, and the postponement of
parliamentary elections scheduled for May 2021 have added to political instability. This would likely strain the
ability of the government to sustain and broaden national and intergovernmental fiscal reforms.

Security Risk. Security risk remains high in the Palestinian territories, as reflected in the retention of West
Bank and Gaza on the Bank's FY21 List of Fragile and Conflict-Affected Situations. Protests, confrontations,
and clashes arising from worsening relations with Israel in Gaza (after the 11-day conflict in May 2021) and
in East Jerusalem (over incursions of holy sites) could worsen insecurity. Insecurity would make it more
difficult to initiate and complete land transactions.

Institutional Capacity Risk. The devolution of property tax collection to local governments as well as the
mandates for better collection of electricity and water tariffs would require extensive capacity building at local
governments. At the local government level, institutional capacity risks are tangled with issues about the
viability of the current local government finance model.

Macroeconomic Risk. The economy is estimated to have contracted by 11.5 percent in 2020, dragged
down by the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic and the inability of the authorities to marshal traditional fiscal
and monetary policy tools to mitigate the crisis – West Bank and Gaza is highly reliant on "clearance
revenues" and donor budget support, has limited fiscal space, and lacks a national currency. The economic
recovery might remain weak in the near-term, punctuated by the poor state of Palestinian Authority finances
– the deficit reached US$182 in Q1-2021 from US$40 million in Q1-2020, while donor budget support fell to
zero in Q1-2021 from US$70 million in Q1-2020. Macroeconomic risk clouds prospects for an improved
business environment and a robust digital economy.

COVID-19 Risk. Difficulty in acquiring vaccines – only about 9 percent of the population was vaccinated by
early August 2021 – imperils West Bank and Gaza's ambition to inoculate 70 percent of the population. The
social costs of the health crisis have been enormous, with the unemployment rate hitting about 23 percent in
the fourth quarter of 2020 and the poverty rate reaching about 29 percent in 2020. The social and poverty
impacts would worsen with a lengthy COVID-19 crisis. COVID-19 risk would exacerbate macroeconomic
risk, with follow-on effects on the business environment.


8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Bank Performance – Design

Rationale


                                                                                                       Page 16 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     WB&G:Strengthen Fiscal Res & Bus Environ (P164427)




Analytical Foundations. The operation was informed by analytic work produced by the Bank as well as
by the Palestinian Authority.

      PA1 and PA2 – "Public Expenditure Review of the Palestinian Authority” (2016) and “The
         Performance of Palestinian Local Governments” (2017).
        PA3 – "The Economic Effects of Restricted Access to Land in the West Bank" (2014) and "The
         Socio-Economic Effects of Weak Land Registration and Administration System in the West Bank”
         (2018).
        PA4 and PA5 – “West Bank and Gaza Investment Climate Assessment - Fragmentation and
         Uncertainty" (2014) and "Doing Business Report” (2017).
        PA6 – “The Telecommunication Sector in the Palestinian Territories: A Missed Opportunity for
         Economic Development” (2016).
        PA7 – “Assessment and Action Plan to Improve Payment for Electricity Services in the Palestinian
         Territories” (2014) and “Securing Energy for Development in the West Bank and Gaza” (2017).
        PA8 – “Toward Water Security for Palestinians: West Bank and Gaza Water Supply, Sanitation and
         Hygiene Poverty Diagnostic” (2017).
        PA9 – “Report on Policy Directions for Outside Referrals – Technical Assistance on Health
         Financing” (2013) and The Master Plan for Organizing Medical Referrals to Service Providers
         Outside the Public Sector (2016).

Linkages with Other Bank Operations. This operation formed part of the Bank's long engagement with
West Bank and Gaza in the three pillars supported by this operation. The prior actions broadened the
scope of reforms implemented under the Support for Fiscal Stability and Public Financial Management
Development Policy Grants I-VII and the immediately-preceding Fiscal Stability and Business Environment
Development Policy Grant.

      PA1, involving the merger of the MIS for domestic and border taxation, followed previous prior
         actions to strengthen tax administration, including by unifying the income tax and VAT services for
         large taxpayers (under P123437), merging the VAT Administration and the Customs Administration
         (P129742), merging the income tax collection and VAT collection departments of the MOFP
         (P156865), and establishing a new Tax Identification Unit (P129742).
        After expanding the number of municipalities in which the Palestinian Authority collected property
         taxes from 25 to 34 (P118593), PA2 would delegate the collection of property taxes and related
         penalties from the MOFP to local governments, restructuring the inter-governmental revenue
         framework.
        PA4, which would amend the annexes to the Law on Crafts and Industries, comprised a set legal
         and regulatory reforms to improve business licensing, together with the enactment of a new
         Companies Law to simplify business registration (P161525) and the amendment of the Law on
         Crafts and Industries of 1953 to update the three-tier system for granting business licenses
         (P161525).
        A waiver of land titling registration fees and charges for first-time land purchases (P156865) and
         the simplification of land registration procedures for businesses under PA5 would facilitate land
         purchases and land registration in the West Bank and Gaza, helping unlock the economic potential
         of unregistered land in the territories.
        To secure the viability of electricity services, the government initiated a series of Bank-supported
         measures to reform various aspects of the electricity market. The measures included: a program to

                                                                                                    Page 17 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      WB&G:Strengthen Fiscal Res & Bus Environ (P164427)



       reduce net lending (subsidies to local governments) for electricity services (P111078), the creation
       of the Northern Electricity Distribution Company to take over electricity distribution from municipal
       governments in the northern part of the West Bank (P111078), including in Nablus (P118593), the
       provision of "compensation" to municipalities to end their reliance of electricity revenues (P113621),
       the grant of authority to the Palestinian Energy and Natural Resources Authority (PENRA) to set
       electricity tariffs (P113621), the setting by the Palestinian Energy Regulatory Commission of
       performance targets for electricity distribution companies (P123437), the model agreement among
       PENRA, one municipality, and two distribution companies to facilitate the payment of electricity bills
       to electricity distribution companies (P156865), and the opening by local governments of separate
       bank accounts to deposit funds collected for the payment of electricity bills to PETCO
       (P161525). Part of the measures, PA7 would focus on consumers and set the steps for cutting off
       electricity services because of accumulated electricity debt.
      After local governments opened separate bank accounts to deposit funds collected for the payment
       of water bills to the West Bank Water Department (P161525), PA8 would tackle the larger problem
       of rescheduling the accumulated debt of local governments to the MOFP, which had previously
       covered local government dues to the West Bank Water Department.
      The Ministry of Health started to rationalize the medical referral practice in 2013 by expanding the
       membership of medical referral committees (P129742), centralizing the medical referral audit
       function (P129742), restricting medical referrals to essential cases (P129742), facilitating the
       medical referral process with three Israeli hospitals (P156865), and prescribing the use of the
       Referral Manual for medical referrals to institutions outside of the public health system
       (P156865). PA9, which promoted the use of the National Reference Price Tool in negotiations with
       external medical referral service providers, would add to these efforts.

Stakeholder Consultation. The Program Document (pages 31-32) reported that the Palestinian Authority
conducted formal consultations with the private sector and civil society on the reforms supported by this
operation. The reforms were reviewed by the Sector Strategy Teams of representatives from the private
sector and civil society and focused on questions of alignment with the National Policy Agenda 2017-2022
– Putting Citizens First.

Donor Coordination. Donor coordination was conducted within the governance framework for the Trust
Fund for Gaza and the West Bank and the PRDP Trust Fund which financed this operation. Specifically,
according to the Program Document (pages 31-32), the Bank consulted the donors of the PRDP Trust
Fund prior to finalizing the policy and results matrix. Additionally, the Bank consulted with the European
Union, which provides the single largest contribution to the Palestinian Authority budget through
its Palestino Européen de Gestion et d'Aide Socio-Economique mechanism, to ensure the alignment of this
operation with the European Union's Results Oriented Framework for reforms and with the United
Kingdom's Department for International Development to satisfy the latter's terms of conditional
support. Finally, the Bank used the formal aid coordination mechanism for the Palestinian territories
established in 2005, including that of the Ad-Hoc Policy Committee, to verify the coherence of this
operation with the OECD-DAC Paris Declaration on Aid Effectiveness.



Rating

Satisfactory


                                                                                                    Page 18 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      WB&G:Strengthen Fiscal Res & Bus Environ (P164427)



b. Bank Performance – Implementation

Rationale

Monitoring. Although this was a stand-alone operation, its link to the immediately-preceding Fiscal Stability
and Business Environment Development Policy Grant and the lengthy sequence of Support for Fiscal Stability
and Public Financial Management Development Policy Grants I-VII argued for its treatment as the equivalent of
a "programmatic series" aimed at strengthening the fiscal position of the Palestinian Authority and improving the
business environment in the West Bank and Gaza. Toward this end, the Bank constructed a multi-year
monitoring matrix of expected results that "not only included targets for the first year of implementation, but also
anticipated actions for the next two years," according to the Bank staff.



Rating

Satisfactory

c. Overall Bank Performance

Rationale

Program design is rated satisfactory. Program implementation is rated satisfactory. Overall Bank
performance is rated satisfactory.


Overall Bank Performance Rating

Satisfactory

9. Other Impacts

a. Social and Poverty

The ICR did not cite any ex-post social and poverty impacts. The operation had no social and poverty impacts,
according to the Bank staff.



b. Environmental

The ICR did not cite any ex-post environmental impacts. The operation had no environmental impacts, according
to the Bank staff.




                                                                                                     Page 19 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      WB&G:Strengthen Fiscal Res & Bus Environ (P164427)



c. Gender

The operation benefitted women through greater access to financial services, according to the Bank staff. Women
received 26 percent of all e-wallets issued, while holding only 16 of all regular bank accounts.



d. Other

---

10. Quality of ICR

Rationale

The quality of the ICR was substantial.

The assessments of both the relevance of the prior actions and the efficacy of the results
indicators were candid and evidence-based. In addition to the results indicators, the ICR
offered additional evidence to support its assessment that certain completed prior actions faced outcome
sustainability risks if follow-up measures remained lacking – for example, the integration of RMIS and
ASCUYDA needed further work (PA1), and the President had yet to sign the amendment to the Palestine Land
Authority Act that was submitted by the Prime Minister (PA3). The ICR also added evidence to support its
assessment that the efficacy of certain results indicators were derailed by adverse developments external to the
operation – for example, the "clearance revenue" standoff with Israel in 2019 and 2020 affected the gross
domestic revenue performance (RI1), and the outbreak of COVID-19 in 2020 postponed capacity-building
activities for property tax collection by local governments (RI2).

The lessons drawn by the ICR were also supported by evidence and would be useful for future development
policy operations in West Bank and Gaza.

The ICR did not attempt to clarify the meaning of the outcome indicator "supporting the above result" (RI3), but
simply stated that the results indicator was "opaque and not easily understood by itself" and that "the target of
the reform was not achieved."



a. Rating

Substantial

11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
 Ratings                         ICR                   IEG
                                                                                 Disagreement/Comments



                                                                                                    Page 20 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      WB&G:Strengthen Fiscal Res & Bus Environ (P164427)



                                 Moderately
Outcome                                                Moderately Satisfactory
                                 Satisfactory
                                 Moderately
Bank Performance                                       Satisfactory
                                 Satisfactory
Relevance of Results                                   Moderately
                                 ---
Indicators                                             Unsatisfactory
Quality of ICR                   ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

Three lessons are drawn from the ICR (pages 34-35), with some adaptation.

Development policy operations with a programmatic character but structured as stand-alone operations
offer an effective way to implement reforms in fragile, conflict and violence settings. This operation was
the ninth PRDP-funded development policy grant which supported reforms aimed at strengthening public
financial management and improving the environment for private sector development in the West Bank and
Gaza. An ICR had earlier rated the efficacy of the Series of Trust Fund Grants for the PRDP Multi-Donor Trust
Fund to be substantial and concluded that they "deepened reforms as shown by measured results." This stand-
alone operation supported prior actions that built upon earlier reforms and which, as single-action measures,
were suited to the institutional constraints with the authorities.

Results frameworks and M&E designs that consider the programmatic nature of continuing reforms are
more robust in their ability to measure the outcome of development policy operations. In this operation,
it was difficult to disentangle the impact of the new rules on electricity cutoffs (PA7) on higher collection and
payment of electricity bills by local governments (RI7) apart from the impact of the opening of dedicated
accounts at local governments for the collection and payment of electricity tariffs. Periodic reporting of results
indicators over time for successive operations or the use of results indicators with incremental or marginal
targets would be suitable alternatives.

Person-level results indicators that are disaggregated by gender, age-group, and location, among other
socio-economic characteristics of beneficiaries, provide a way of gauging the social and poverty
impacts of a reform program. This operation lacked person-level indicators that would have measured the
impact of business environment reforms on the employment of women or entrepreneurial activity by
women. This operation also lacked person-level indicators that would have measured the impact of reforms in
the electricity, water and medical service sectors on the access of poor households to these services, including
those residing in Gaza compared to those residing in the West Bank. Lacking these details, the ICR could not
assess the actual social and poverty impacts of the operation.


13. Project Performance Assessment Report (PPAR) Recommended?

No




                                                                                                     Page 21 of 21
