     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Fiscal and Social Resilience DPF (P162452)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0022638

1. Operation Information



 Operation ID                               Operation Name
 P162452                                    Fiscal and Social Resilience DPF

 Country                                    Practice Area (Lead)
 Haiti                                      Macroeconomics, Trade and Investment



 Non-Programmatic DPF

 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                   Total Financing (USD)
 IDA-D3790                                  30-Jun-2020                                           19,952,075.12

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 20-Sep-2018                                30-Jun-2020

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                               Co-financing (USD)

 Original Commitment                              20,000,000.00                                             0.00

 Revised Commitment                               20,000,000.00                                             0.00

 Actual                                           19,952,075.12                                             0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Ranga Rajan                 Clay Wescott                 Jennifer L. Keller              IEGEC
 Krishnamani



2. Program Objectives and Pillars/Policy Areas
DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives

The Program Development Objective (PDO) of this single-tranche, standalone Development Policy Financing
(DPF) operation as stated in the Program Document (page v):




                                                                                                   Page 1 of 14
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Fiscal and Social Resilience DPF (P162452)



" To support the government's efforts to strengthen fiscal management and enhance the efficiency of
social spending to better protect the vulnerable households."

For the purposes of this ICRR, the project objectives are taken to be:

(1). Strengthen the capacity for fiscal management.

(2). Enhance the efficiency of social spending to better protect the vulnerable households.


b. Pillars/Policy Areas
As stated in the Program Document, the pillars of the operation align to the two main objectives of the
operation.

Pillar 1. Strengthen fiscal management.

Pillar 2. Enhance the efficiency of social spending.


c. Comments on Program Cost, Financing and Dates

Program Financing. An IDA credit of US$20.00 million financed this operation. By the time the operation closed,
it had disbursed US$19.95 million. In addition, the European Union provided parallel financing of US$40.00
million by way of budget support to Haiti at appraisal.

Dates. The Bank approved the operation on September 20, 2018, and the project became effective September
26, 2018. The operation closed on schedule on June 30, 2020.


3. Relevance of Design

a. Relevance of Objectives

 Country context. Haiti is one of the poorest countries in the world, with over six million Haitians unable to
 meet their basic consumption needs in 2012. This situation was due to a combination of factors such as, the
 history of political instability, the weak institutional capacity of the state, recurring fiscal contractions, and
 frequent natural disasters. As a result, the World Bank classifies Haiti as a fragile state, due to its institutions'
 weakness and vulnerability to instability, conflict and violence. However, the Bank team
 determined the macroeconomic situation before appraisal to be robust enough to support a DPF, with real
 Gross Domestic Product (GDP) recovering over the previous year, driven mainly by the increases in
 remittances inflows and favorable agricultural conditions.

 The Bank prepared this operation against a backdrop of violent social unrest, following the government' s
 failed attempt to eliminate fuel subsidies on July 6, 2018. The government believed the fuel price reform
 was necessary for closing an unexpected financial gap of US$60 million during the fiscal year. This action
 sparked violent protests and forced the government to reverse the measure. Continuing the fuel subsidies
 further undermined the government' s ability to provide essential services. The Bank team clarified that Haiti

                                                                                                          Page 2 of 14
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Fiscal and Social Resilience DPF (P162452)



did not have a fully monitored economic program with the International Monetary Fund (IMF), and hence had
no access to IMF funding. This operation was part of an international operation to help stabilize Haiti' s macro-
fiscal situation and preserve social stability following the social unrest. The Bank processed a US$20 million
grant, and the European Union approved a US$40 million grant to close the financing gap.

Government strategy. The PDOs are well-aligned at appraisal with the approach articulated in the
government' s 2015-2018 Memorandum of Economic and Financial Policies. This strategy underscored the
need for promoting macroeconomic stability through mobilizing domestic resources, reducing the government
deficit and improving public financial management as the government' s main priorities.

Bank strategy. The Bank financing for this operation was a good use of Bank resources, given the
unexpected financing gap that would have undermined the government 's ability to
deliver essential services. At appraisal, the PDOs were well-aligned with the current Country Partnership
Framework (CPF) for 2016-2019. The CPF specifically emphasized the importance of adjusting to tighter fiscal
conditions and protecting priority expenditures on social sectors. The second focus area of the
CPF highlighted the need for building human capital through effective delivery of social services in sectors
such as education (CPF, page 30). The cross-cutting theme of the CPF underscored the need to strengthen
governance and increase the transparency and accountability of public institutions (CPF, page 37).

This DPF operation addressed urgent development challenges facing the economy at appraisal: to improve
the institutional capacity for raising domestic resources from their current low level and strengthen public
financial management; and to continue delivery of essential public services to the poor and vulnerable
segment of the population.


b. Relevance of Prior Actions

Rationale

Pillar 1. Strengthen fiscal management.

Prior action 1. The government installs the ASCYUDA at all ports, airports, border checkpoints and industrial
parks for raising fiscal revenue by way of customs duties.

Haiti has one of the lowest domestic resource mobilization rates in the Latin American Caribbean Region, at
just 14 percent of GDP. Haiti' s most significant fiscal revenue comes from customs duties, accounting for four
percent of GDP. Haiti 's customs processes and valuation assessments at appraisal allowed for considerable
discretion by the customs authorities.

This prior action aimed to raise the revenue collected through customs duties. ASCYUDA would help automate
the customs processes, provide real-time information and reduce the scope for discretion for customs valuation
purposes. Therefore, the relevance of this prior action is satisfactory.

Prior action 2. The Ministry of Finance (MOF) publishes the list of tax and customs exemptions granted to
companies disaggregated by sector for the last five years from 2012.




                                                                                                    Page 3 of 14
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Fiscal and Social Resilience DPF (P162452)



Revenue lost due to tax and customs exemptions was a significant drain on fiscal revenue in Haiti. Publication
of a complete list of tax and customs exemptions would enable the government to assess the costs and
benefits of preferential tax treatments fully and inject greater transparency into the use of such exemptions.

This prior action required the MOF to publish on its website the list of preferential tax and customs exemptions
granted to companies. In addition to assessing the costs and benefits of exemptions, this prior action
would increase awareness of the revenue foregone due to such exemptions and discourage the granting of
exemptions that lack a legal basis or policy justification. Therefore, publication of the tax and customs
exemptions is a good step towards improving control over tax expenditures and strengthening fiscal
management. Still, it will only have the desired effect of enhancing fiscal management if the government
reduces exemptions lacking a legal basis or policy justification. Therefore, the relevance is moderately
satisfactory.

Prior action 3. The government expands the coverage of the Single Treasury Account (STA) by
consolidating the existing individual bank accounts of the agencies and departments of the central government.

Before the appraisal, government ministries, agencies and institutions maintained over 800 bank accounts at
multiple commercial banks. Given the constrained fiscal environment and the need to manage revenues and
expenditures mainly on a cash basis, having so many accounts posed a significant challenge to cash
management and budgetary transparency.

This prior action aimed to improve the central government' s cash management practices. The government
created an STA in 2016 but could not consolidate all the existing accounts of agencies and departments in the
STA. This prior action aimed to extend the coverage of the STA to the remaining ministerial funds and
expand the scope of the STA to other government agencies that hold individual accounts. An STA would
help better manage cash and strengthen fiscal management. Relevance is satisfactory.

Pillar two. Enhance the efficiency of social spending.

Prior action # 4. This prior action entrusted the Ministry of Social Affairs and Labor as the only institution
responsible for consolidating the unified beneficiary registry, including the registries managed by the Fund for
Social and Economic Assistance and the United Nations Development Program.

The Haitian authorities and external donors launched many social protection programs following the 2010
earthquake. However, these programs were uncoordinated, and the programs administered by government
agencies had overlapping objectives and target populations. This made it challenging to identify duplication and
analyze the overall distribution of spending of social programs provided by the multiple agencies.

This prior action aimed to consolidate the beneficiary registries into a unified registry under the Ministry of
Social Affairs. A unified registry will help identify duplication, reduce fragmentation, and better target
the beneficiaries of the social programs. Relevance is satisfactory.

Prior action # 5. This prior action sought to enact legislation for establishing the National Education Fund
(FNE) to stabilize the education sector' s financing.

Haiti established the FNE in 2012 to support low-income families with school-aged children and extending
tuition waivers to private primary schools. However, the FNE lacked a clear mandate, institutional
structure, governance arrangements, and operational rules. In addition, the budget allocated to FNE was ad-


                                                                                                       Page 4 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Fiscal and Social Resilience DPF (P162452)



 hoc and lacked transparency and accountability. As a result, there was no clear indication of how many
 students benefitted from the FNE, and FNE discontinued its school-fee waiver program.

 This prior action required the government to enact a law formally mandating the FNE to mobilize domestic and
 external resources to expand access to formal education among poor households. This law required FNE to
 publish rules for allocating resources and reactivate the school waiver program This prior action would help in
 increasing the number of children from poor households receiving waivers. Relevance is satisfactory.

 Prior action # 6. The government submits a draft of legislation to the Parliament establishing and regulating the
 operations of the National Solidarity Fund for integrating people with disabilities.

 The World Health Organization (WHO) estimates that over 800,000 people in Haiti had a disability before the
 2010 earthquake. The earthquake inflicted physical and psychological injuries on 300,000 people, contributing
 to a sharp increase in long-term physical and mental disabilities. Haiti enacted a law in 2012 law to
 integrate people with disabilities into the labor market, imposed a fine for discriminatory hiring practices, and
 provided financial advantages for those caring for people with disabilities.

 This prior action complemented the 2012 law through financial incentives to promote the economic and social
 inclusion of people with disabilities. However, this prior action was weak because there was a significant risk
 that the Parliament would not pass the law. Therefore, the relevance is moderately unsatisfactory.

 The prior actions were appropriate first steps along the results chain for realizing the intended objectives,
 given the volatile political context at appraisal and the short time frame in which the Bank team prepared this
 operation.



Rating

Moderately Satisfactory


4. Relevance of Results Indicators

Rationale

Pillar One: Strengthen fiscal management. There were three results indicators (RIs).

Results indicator one measured customs revenue as a percentage of GDP. The Bank expected that
installing ASYCUDA at all customs offices would increase fiscal revenue and reduce the scope for
discretion by the customs authorities. This indicator was measurable. The relevance is satisfactory

Results indicator two measured the number of annual updates on tax exemptions published by the MOF
on its website. Building on the publication of exemptions from 2013-2017 supported by PA2, this indicator
measured subsequent updates. While publication may indicate the revenue foregone due to the customs
and tax exemptions, this indicator does not measure whether the authorities have reduced exemptions
that lack a legal basis or policy justification. A better indicator would have to specify the number or
percentage of tax or customs exemptions that were removed during the operation. The relevance
is unsatisfactory

                                                                                                     Page 5 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Fiscal and Social Resilience DPF (P162452)



Results indicator three measured the additional number of individual bank accounts held by entities and
agencies of the central government that were consolidated into the STA. The STA is widely considered a
step towards better cash management (although not the only one). This indicator has a specified target
and could be verified. The relevance is satisfactory.

Pillar # 2. Enhance the efficiency of social spending.

Results indicator four measured the number of beneficiary registries consolidated into the Ministry of
Social Works and Labor' s unified Information system. While this indicator would help
increase transparency about who benefits from the social protection programs and this indicator could be
verified, it is unclear how this indicator would help better target the intended beneficiaries of the social
programs. A better indicator would have been to specify the number of beneficiaries who benefitted from
the social protection program during the operation. The relevance is moderately unsatisfactory.

Results indicator five measured the number of children getting school-fee-waivers. This indicator was
verifiable. This was an appropriate indicator to ensure that the FNE and its new institutional framework
supported by PA5 was delivering waivers to eligible children. This indicator could be verified. The
relevance is satisfactory.

Results indicator six measured the number of job placements for people with disabilities. The indicator
was appropriate for measuring that the draft law supported by PA6 had been adopted by Parliament, and
that the institutional framework put in place under the law was achieving part of its mandate. This indicator
could be verified. The relevance is satisfactory.

Table. Results Indicators (RIs), the Prior Actions they support, baseline, target values, actual
change in RI relative to target and RI achievement rating.

                                             Baseline       Target              Actual change
                                                                      Actual                         RI
                    Associated     RI       (including (including                in RI relative
      RIs                                                           value as of                 achievement
                       PAs     relevance     units and   Units and                to targeted
                                                                    target date                    rating
                                               dates)       dates)                  change
                                  Objective 1. Strengthen fiscal management
 RI 1. Customs
                                                                                          180%
  duties as a                                3.5 percent   4.0 percent 4.9 percent
                       PA 1         S                                                  of targeted          High
 percentage of                                 (2017)        (2019)      (2019)
                                                                                        change.
      GDP
                                                                                        Published
RI 2. The number
                                                                                        update for
of annual updates
                                                               1.0          1.0           2018.
on tax exemptions                            0.0 update
                                                            published    published
 published by the      PA 2        HU        published                                                  Negligible
                                                             update       update      No published
    Ministry of                                (2017)
                                                             (2019)       (2019)       update in
  Finance on its
                                                                                      subsequent
     website.
                                                                                          years
    RI 3. The          PA 3         S         0.0 (2017)   872 (2019) 796 (2019)      Over 91% of       Substantial
  government                                                                            targeted
   integrates                                                                           change.
   additional

                                                                                                     Page 6 of 14
                   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                   Fiscal and Social Resilience DPF (P162452)



               accounts into the
                    STA.
                                           Objective 2. Enhance the efficiency of social spending
      RI 4. Percentage
     of beneficiaries of
      social programs
                                                                                                       27% of
      registered in the                                    15 percent     30 percent 19 percent
                                    PA 4         MU                                                   targeted        Modest
      Ministry of Social                                     (2017)         (2019)     (2019)
                                                                                                       change
      Affairs and Labor
          Information
     System (SIMAST)
      RI 5. Number of
     students receiving                                                                                94% of
                                                                           997,272     939,962
     school fee waivers             PA 5          MS        0.0 (2017)                                targeted      Substantial
                                                                            (2019)      (2019)
     under the National                                                                               change.
      Education Fund
      RI 6. Number of
       people with job
     placements under
                                                                                                       25% of
         the National
                                    PA 6          MS        0.0 (2017)   200 (2019)    49 (2019)      targeted        Modest
     Solidarity Fund for
                                                                                                      change.
        Integration of
         People with
           disabilities

   Rating

   Moderately Satisfactory

   5. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
EFFICACY_TBL




                OBJECTIVE 1
                Objective
                Strengthen fiscal management.
                Supported by PAs 1 -3. Outcomes measured by RIs 1-3.

                Rationale
                Under this objective, prior actions supported reform in three areas.

                Customs revenue: By the end of the operation, the government installed the ASYCUDA in the customs
                offices and industrial parks. Customs duties as a share of the GDP improved from 3.5% in 2017 to 4.9%
                when the operation closed on June 30, 2019. This exceeded the target of 4.0%. Therefore, the achievement
                of this result is high.

                Publication of the list of tax and customs exemptions on the MOF website. The MOF published on its
                website one customs and tax exemptions report on its website in 2018 for the past five years (2013 -


                                                                                                                 Page 7 of 14
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Fiscal and Social Resilience DPF (P162452)



2017). That said, the government's control over expenditure continued to deteriorate, and the
MOF discontinued the publication of such data in 2018. Therefore, the achievement of this result is negligible.

Consolidation of the individual accounts of the central government into the STA. By the end of the
operation in June 2020, the STA had integrated 796 additional accounts from different government
agencies into the STA compared to a target of 872. As a result, the government realized over 91% of the
targeted change by the expected date. Even though this was a good achievement, the ICR (page 15) states
that "cash management has deteriorated further, and no significant savings have been realized." Clearly,
more work is needed to improve cash management beyond setting up STA accounts. However, the STA
accounts are a credible step along the results chain, and therefore the achievement of this
result is substantial.



Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Enhance the efficiency of social spending to protect vulnerable households better.
Supported by PAs 4 -6. Outcomes measured by RIs 4 -6.

Rationale
The program supported interventions in three areas: better targeting of beneficiaries of social programs,
an increase in the number of students receiving school fee waivers financed by the National Education Fund,
and an increase in the number of people with disabilities placed in jobs under the National Solidarity Fund for
the Integration of People with Disabilities program.

Better targeting of beneficiaries of social programs. As of June 30, 2020, the Ministry of Social Programs
and Labor' s information system (SIMAST) registered 19% of the beneficiaries, up from 15% in September
30, 2017. This is well short of the target of 30%. Given that the government realized only 27% of the targeted
change and the RI had shortcomings, the achievement of this result is negligible.

The number of children receiving school-fee waivers. The National Education Fund reactivated the
school-fee waiver program. By the end of the operation on June 30, 2019, 939,962 students had received
school-fee waivers, short of the target of 997,272. Given that 94% of the targeted change in the RI was
realized by the target date, the achievement of this result is substantial.

Job placement of people with disabilities. Forty-nine people with disabilities benefitted from the job
placement program administered under the National Solidarity Fund to integrate people with disabilities. This
represented 25% of the targeted change of two hundred people. Therefore, the achievement of this result is
modest.



Rating


                                                                                                  Page 8 of 14
                         Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                         Fiscal and Social Resilience DPF (P162452)




                      Moderately Satisfactory


OVERALL EFF TBL OLD




Overall Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
Rationale

Efficacy of objective one is rated as moderately satisfactory, based on ratings achieved for raising revenue by
way of customs duties (high), publication of tax and customs exemptions by the MOF (negligible), and increase in
the number of accounts integrated into the STA (substantial).

Efficacy of objective two is rated as moderately satisfactory, based on ratings achieved for an increase in the
number of students receiving school-fee waivers (substantial), job placement of people with disabilities (modest)
and an increase in the number of beneficiaries registered with SIMAST (negligible).

Combining the achievement ratings on both objectives gives a moderately satisfactory rating for efficacy.



Overall Efficacy Rating
Moderately Satisfactory


      6. Outcome

      Rationale

      The prior actions were in most cases appropriate first steps along the results chain for realizing the intended
      objectives, given the volatile political context at appraisal and the short time frame in which the Bank team
      prepared this operation. Therefore, the overall relevance of prior actions is moderately satisfactory.

      Regarding the first objective, "strengthening fiscal management": (i) Revenue raised through customs
      duties exceeded the target; (ii) The additional number of accounts of agencies and entities integrated into the
      STA is rated as substantial; and (iii) The MOF stopped publishing on its website the list of tax and customs
      exemptions since 2018 and is therefore rated as negligible. Taking these ratings into account, efficacy of the
      first objective is rated as moderately satisfactory.

      Regarding the second objective, "enhancing the efficiency of social spending to protect the vulnerable
      households better": (i) The number of students receiving school fee waivers is rated as substantial; (ii) The
      number of people with disabilities with job placements is rated as modest; and (iii) The number of people
      registered in the Ministry of Social Programs and Labor' s information system is rated as negligible. Taking
      these ratings into account, efficacy of the second objective is rated as moderately satisfactory.

           Combining the achievement ratings on both objectives gives a moderately satisfactory rating for outcome.



                                                                                                           Page 9 of 14
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Fiscal and Social Resilience DPF (P162452)



a. Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

7. Risk to Development Outcome

Sustainability risk. There is a high risk to the development outcome’s sustainability, given the possibility of
policy reversals or the government not carrying through with subsequent actions to move along the results
chain. For example, consolidating the registries into a unified beneficiary registry, enacting legislation for
establishing the National Education Fund, and submitting to the parliament draft legislation for establishing
the National Solidarity Fund for integration of people with disabilities mean building institutions that are not in
themselves sufficient for realizing the intended development outcomes of enhancing the efficiency of social
spending to protect the vulnerable households better.

Macroeconomic stability and fiscal policy risk. The Government of Haiti approved the budget for 2021
with significant delays. The budget incorporated the subsidies to the energy sector (representing 12.9% of
the total budget expenditures). The budget is moreover unrealistic in terms of expected revenue and
financing. Under more realistic assumptions, there will be a budget deficit of 8.9% of GDP and a financing
gap of 4.7% of GDP (ICR, page 21), which is a moderate risk.

Social risk. There is a high risk for the social protection programs, given that the Ministry of Social
Education budget allocation was reduced from 11.6% in 2019 to 9.4% in 2020.


8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Bank Performance – Design

Rationale


Given urgency in the country context, the Bank expedited the preparation of this operation, which
was prepared in a little over four weeks. The analytical underpinnings of the prior actions were sound and
permitted the team to identify relevant policy areas and their problems. The analytical foundations
were based on:

(i) the 2011 World Development Report, Conflict, Security and Development for implementing operations in
fragile states and conflict-affected nations;

(ii) Haiti: Systematic Country Diagnostic (World Bank, 2015); Haiti: Country Diagnostic, Trade Background
Note (World Bank, 2014) and Haiti; Diagnostic Trade Integration Study (World Bank, 2013).
These analytical works highlighted the potential raising customs revenue through installing ASCYUDA and
reducing the scope for discretion by customs officials.

(iii) Haiti: Public Expenditure Review (World Bank, 2016). This analytical work highlighted the need for:
(i) strengthening control over expenditures through requiring the MOF to publish a list of exemptions on its
website to increase awareness of the revenue foregone due to such exemptions and discourage the

                                                                                                        Page 10 of 14
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Fiscal and Social Resilience DPF (P162452)



granting of exemptions that lack a legal basis or policy justification; (ii) strengthening the central
government's cash management through consolidation of the accounts of the government ministries and
agencies into a single STA; and (iii) consolidation of the beneficiary registries into a unified registry for
identifying duplication, reducing fragmentation and better target the beneficiaries of the social programs.

(iv) Investing in people to fight poverty in Haiti (World Bank, 2014) and Providing an education of quality in
Haiti (P155191). These analytical works identified the need for stabilizing education financing and
improving transparency and accountability in allocating resources in the education sector; and

(v) Disability in post-earthquake Haiti: prevalence and inequality in access to services (2014). This
analytical work identified the need for increasing the supply of programs for benefitting people with
disabilities.

The Bank prepared this operation based on its ongoing dialogue with Haitian authorities, and experience
from the previous Bank-financed Economic Reconstruction and Growth DPF operation in Haiti. An
important lesson incorporated at design from the previous Bank-operation was engaging with a cross-
section of government ministries and individual departments to maintain public sector commitment. (The
experience of the previous Bank operation showed that the Ministry of Economy and Finance could
not hold line ministries accountable for implementing the reforms). In addition, the Bank prepared this
operation in close collaboration with other international partners such as the IMF (in the areas of fiscal and
monetary policies), and with the European Union, the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development and Canada (in areas of domestic resource mobilization and ASYCUDA).

At appraisal, the team identified several high risks, including political risks, domestic and external
macroeconomic risks and fiduciary and stakeholder risks. The design incorporated risk mitigation
measures such as, focusing on a narrow range of impactful but feasible reforms that relied on relatively
uncontroversial policy actions, and excluding reforms that were deemed to be excessively sensitive or
contentious. The preparation team acknowledged that the Bank could not mitigate several risks in
the country context. However, the Bank management considered that the short and long-term benefits of
the operation outweighed the risks (Program Document, paragraph 8).

There were moderate shortcomings in Bank performance at design. First, while the team perceived the
urgency at appraisal (social unrest and imminent fiscal collapse), the Bank team underestimated the risk
associated with a stand-alone DPO in a fragile context. Given the weakness of the existing governance
structure, a single-tranche DPF also carried a higher risk of not achieving the results and improper use of
resources, compared to either an investment lending or a program-for-results
instruments. Second while critical for the overall objectives, some targets were not realistic and could not
be achieved within the short time frame of this operation.



Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

b. Bank Performance – Implementation

Rationale

                                                                                                      Page 11 of 14
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Fiscal and Social Resilience DPF (P162452)




The operation disbursed rapidly to reduce the perceived risk of fiscal crisis and the need to protect the poor and
vulnerable in Haiti. Although the operation provided unearmarked funding, the team tried to track the use of the
Bank funds within the Haiti management system. The team was also committed to encouraging the government
to follow up on agreements, even after disbursement of the grant, when the government was no longer
responsive, due to continued political instability.



Rating

Satisfactory

c. Overall Bank Performance

Rationale

Based on the ratings for Bank performance for design and implementation, overall Bank performance is
moderately satisfactory.


Overall Bank Performance Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

9. Other Impacts

a. Social and Poverty

This operation created a new job placement program (the National Solidarity Fund) to integrate people with
disabilities.



b. Environmental

This operation did not include any policies that could directly or indirectly influence the environment, forest or
natural disasters.



c. Gender

Gender impacts were not identified in the ICR.




                                                                                                      Page 12 of 14
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Fiscal and Social Resilience DPF (P162452)




d. Other

There were no observed unintended impacts.




10. Quality of ICR

Rationale

The ICR is concise and well-written. The ICR provides a clear description of the country context when the Bank
team prepared this operation. It candidly discusses the reasons for using a Development Policy Financing
operation, given the weak institutional capacity in the country context. It also candidly discusses the issues with
the prior actions. Finally, the ICR draws suitable lessons from the experience of implementing this operation.



a. Rating

Substantial

11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                    IEG
                                                                                  Disagreement/Comments
                                                                                  The rating for the outcome is
                                 Moderately
Outcome                                                Moderately Satisfactory    validated by the IEG 's system of
                                 Unsatisfactory
                                                                                  rating.
                                                                                  The rating is based on the
                                 Moderately
Bank Performance                                       Moderately Satisfactory    ratings for Bank performance for
                                 Unsatisfactory
                                                                                  design and implementation.
Relevance of Results
                                 ---                   Moderately Satisfactory
Indicators
Quality of ICR                   ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR draws the following lessons from the experience of implementing this operation.

1. Fragile, disaster-prone countries benefit from long-term engagement and financial assistance from
the international community. In the case of this DPF, the design could draw on the Bank’s extensive analytical
work and experience in Haiti to formulate prior actions that were appropriate first steps along the results chain



                                                                                                     Page 13 of 14
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Fiscal and Social Resilience DPF (P162452)



for realizing the intended objectives, given the volatile political context at appraisal and the short time frame in
which the Bank team prepared this operation.

2. Budget support to countries with weak public financial management systems and overall weak
governance may not be the best tool for achieving lasting results. While DPF operations can deliver funds
quickly, tracking funds and ensuring that the funds support achieving the intended results is complex. In the
case of this operation, program funds were not used for nearly six months, indicating that financing was not the
immediate, binding constraint.


13. Project Performance Assessment Report (PPAR) Recommended?

No




                                                                                                       Page 14 of 14
