     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Disaster Risk Management DPL-CAT DDO (P157489)



                                                                              Report Number: ICRR0022818

1. Operation Information



 Operation ID                            Operation Name
 P157489                                 Disaster Risk Management DPL-CAT DDO

 Country                                 Practice Area (Lead)
 Serbia                                  Urban, Resilience and Land



 Non-Programmatic DPF

 L/C/TF Number(s)                        Closing Date (Original)                  Total Financing (USD)
 IBRD-87380,TF-A2296,TF-A4344,TF-        31-Oct-2020                                          81,244,201.51
 A7621

 Bank Approval Date                      Closing Date (Actual)
 03-May-2017                             31-Oct-2020

                                         IBRD/IDA (USD)                              Co-financing (USD)

 Original Commitment                         70,000,000.00                                    6,278,457.39

 Revised Commitment                          76,467,986.13                                    6,255,825.51

 Actual                                      81,244,201.51                                    6,339,221.96




 Prepared by               Reviewed by                 ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Ranga Rajan               Fernando Manibog            Victoria Alexeeva              IEGSD
 Krishnamani



2. Program Objectives and Pillars/Policy Areas
DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives

The Program Development Objective (PDO) of this Development Policy Operation (DPO) as stated in the
Program Document (PD, page i):



                                                                                               Page 1 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Disaster Risk Management DPL-CAT DDO (P157489)



" To strengthen Serbia's institutional and legal framework to effectively manage the physical and
fiscal impact of natural hazards".

For the purpose of this evaluation, the individual objectives of this DPO are identified as follows:

PDO 1. Strengthening the institutional and legal framework to effectively manage the physical impact of
natural hazards.

PDO 2. Strengthening the institutional and legal framework to effectively manage the fiscal impact of natural
hazards.


b. Pillars/Policy Areas
The PDOs were to be achieved through reforms under three policy areas/pillars (PD, page i).

Pillar 1. Strengthening Serbia's legal and institutional framework for post-disaster reconstruction and disaster
and climate risk management.

Pillar 2. Strengthening Serbia's technical capacity for planning and implementing disaster and climate risk
management activities.

Pillar 3. Reducing the fiscal impact and strengthening the Borrower's financial capacity to respond to the
adverse impact of natural hazards, particularly those exacerbated by climate change.


c. Comments on Program Cost, Financing and Dates

Financing. An IBRD loan of US$70.0 million financed this DPO with a Catastrophe Deferred Drawdown
Operation (CAT- DDO). In addition, there was financing from three Trust Funds (TFs): US$1.0 million (TF -
A4344); US$4.3 million (TF -A2296); and US$1.0 million (TF- A7621). With this, the Bank financing for this
operation was US$76.4 million. The amount disbursed was US$81.2 million. According to the clarifications
provided by the team, the difference between the appraisal estimate and amount disbursed was the loan was
disbursed in EUR.

Dates. The Bank approved the operation on May 3, 2017, and it became effective on January 29, 2018. The
operation closed as scheduled on October 31, 2020.


3. Relevance of Design

a. Relevance of Objectives

 Country context. Serbia is vulnerable to natural hazards, especially weather-related ones. This operation was
 prepared in the wake of the floods of May 2014, which caused significant damages and losses amounting
 to 4.8% of the Gross Domestic Product (GDP). The disaster disproportionately affected the
 poor, with estimates showing 125,000 people pushed into poverty, a 7% increase over the previous years'
 poverty headcount. Serbia was also sensitive to future climate and precipitation change, with weather-related

                                                                                                       Page 2 of 17
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Disaster Risk Management DPL-CAT DDO (P157489)



events expected to become more frequent. Having a Disaster Risk Management Strategy (DRM),
and contingent financing to secure access to immediate liquidity to meet recovery needs following a natural
hazard was important in the country context.

Government strategy. In the years before appraisal, the Government started adopting measures for moving
towards a proactive DRM approach to disasters (as opposed to an emergency-driven reactive approach). The
Government adopted the National Disaster Risk Management Program (hereafter NDRMP) in December
2014, identifying DRM as a national priority and approved a National Action Plan in 2017 for
implementing the NDRMP. The Government also enacted legislation to strengthen the legal framework to
better manage disasters such as the: (I) The Law on Emergency Situations (2009) mandating multi-hazard
vulnerability assessments at national and municipal levels; and (ii) The Law on Amendments to the
Emergency Situations (2011) introducing the concept of risk assessments.

As a potential candidate country for European Union (EU) membership, Serbia also made efforts to align its
legal framework with EU regulations on DRM. For instance, Serbia's Law on Water (2010) was consistent with
the EU Water Framework Directive (EU WFD), and with EU Flood Directive (EFD) that required EU member
states to establish flood risk management plans for river basin districts. Serbia also adopted the Law on
Meteorological and Hydrological activity (2010) which provided the legal framework for weather forecasting,
early warning, weather and climate related information for risk assessments and integrated strategic priorities
of the World Meteorological Organization (WMO).

Bank strategy. The Bank financing for this operation, intended to provide Serbia with a fiscal buffer for:
(i) reducing the impact of future disasters on its fiscal balance; (ii) providing bridge financing for immediate
response, which was an appropriate use of Bank resources, since disasters disproportionately impacts the
poor; and (iii) ensuring that budget resources are not diverted from other development programs. The PDOs
were well-aligned with the Bank's Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for 2016-2020. The CPF recognized
that making Serbia's economy more climate resilient was an important part of the country's development
agenda. DRM was integrated in the CPF as an inherent part of the policy coordination and rationalization
agenda (objective 1b: creating a more effective public administration and improving service delivery), and
mitigating financial risk through the Catastrophic Risk Insurance Facility (objective 2b: creating a more stable
and accessible financial sector). The Bank's CPF for 2022 - 2026 which is currently being finalized, prioritizes
more resilient growth as one of the two higher level objectives and emphasizes the objective of transitioning to
a climate resilient and environmentally sustainable economy.

Previous Bank experience. The World Bank has a long partnership with the Government to build Serbia's
resilience to DRM. The Bank provided financial and technical support for a Recovery Needs
Assessment following the 2014 floods. Subsequently, the Bank provided technical assistance for implementing
the NDRMP (such as, building institutional capacity for risk reduction investments, emergency preparedness,
improving early warning systems, and developing risk financing solutions). When this operation was prepared,
the Bank was financing two ongoing operations: (i) a flood emergency recovery operation for
supporting sectors most affected by floods; and (ii) the West Balkans Drina River Management Project for
improving the capacities of Bosnia, Serbia and Montenegro to manage the transboundary Drina River Basin.
The Bank is also supporting the development of Serbia's catastrophe insurance market through the South
East Europe and Caucasus Catastrophic Risk Insurance Facility (SEEC CRIF).

The Bank team determined that the macroeconomic situation to be robust at appraisal, given the stronger
macro and fiscal development and the strong global demand for emerging market debt at that time. When this
operation was prepared, Serbia had a new three-year of SDR 935.4 million Stand-By-Arrangement (SBA) with


                                                                                                   Page 3 of 17
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Disaster Risk Management DPL-CAT DDO (P157489)



the International Monetary Fund (IMF). The prior actions of this operation were based on sound
analytical underpinnings (discussed below).


b. Relevance of Prior Actions

Rationale

Pillar 1. Strengthening the Borrower's legal and institutional framework for post-disaster reconstruction
and disaster and climate risk management. Reforms in this pillar provided the legal and the institutional
framework for improving the operational capabilities of the newly designated government entities to
develop disaster-related policies.

Prior Action 1. The Government adopted the Law on Reconstruction operationalizing the Public Investment
Management Office (PIMO), and formulated legislation for establishing the Sector of Emergency Management
(SEM) in the Ministry of Interior (MoI) as the dedicated national coordinating entity for DRM issues.

As Serbia lacked an adequate system for responding to the 2014 floods, the Government established the Office
for Flood Affected Areas Assistance and Rehabilitation (FAAARO) as a temporary national entity for managing
reconstruction activities. During a period of 18 months, FAARO proved to
be effective in providing financial assistance to families, small and medium-sized enterprises and farmers,
improving flood protection infrastructure at over 300 sites, and restoring the electric system in affected areas.
The Government instituted the PIMO as the legal successor to FAARO and thereby transformed an ad hoc
structure into a permanent institution with a mandate to manage reconstruction activities.

Although the PIMO was relatively new when this operation was prepared, it was proactively
managing tasks well beyond its mandate (such as formulating the National Disaster Risk Management
Plan). To ensure that the PIMO focused on its mandate, the Government formulated legislation for establishing
the Sector of Emergency Management (SEM), as the first dedicated coordinating entity for addressing DRM
policies.

The analytical underpinnings for this prior action were based on: (i) The Government's 2014 Report (Serbia;
Floods: Rapid Needs Assessment); (ii) The World Bank 2015 Report (Resilient Recovery: An Imperative for
Sustainable Development) that identified the challenges in planning and implementing post-disaster
recovery; (iii) The European Commission 2015 Report (Guidance for Recording and Sharing Disaster Damage
and Loss Data) that provided guidance on evidence-based DRM policies.

In view of the strong analytical work that formed the basis for the Prior Action, as well as the Government's
demonstrated effort to enable PIMO through legislation to manage its challenging tasks, this PA 1 directly
supports Pillar 1 in strengthening the Government's legal and institutional framework for DRM. The relevance of
PA1 is rated as satisfactory.

Pillar 2. Strengthening the Borrower's technical capacity for planning and implementing disaster and
climate risk management activities. Reforms in this pillar aimed to implement the National Disaster Risk
Management Plan.

Prior Action 2. The Government adopted the National Disaster Management Action Plan that prioritized the
activities to be implemented under the NDRMP program. Specifically the reforms aimed at improving

                                                                                                  Page 4 of 17
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Disaster Risk Management DPL-CAT DDO (P157489)



mechanisms for collecting flood risk and disaster damage information and sharing hazard risk information
across agencies.

Flood risk Information. Information on flood risks was required for Serbia's compliance with the EU Flood
Directive. Between 2010 and 2012, the Directorate for Water of the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Water
Management conducted flood risk assessment on 24 flood-prone areas with EU support. This Prior Action
sought to collect this information on the remaining 75 flood prone areas in Serbia.

Disaster damage and loss data. At appraisal, Serbia lacked standards for collecting data on disaster damage
and loss data. To address this gap, the Government supported local self governments in using a standardized
data collection methodology recommended by the post Disaster Damage and Needs Assessment
(PDNA). Following the 2014 floods, the Government applied this methodology for the first time for quantifying
disaster damages, and trained key government stakeholders at the national and local levels on using this
methodology. This Prior Action aimed to collect this information and build the technical capacity of the
relevant stakeholders on applying this methodology.

Sharing hazard and risk information. At appraisal, Serbia did not have adequate mechanisms for sharing
hazard and risk information. There was no central information portal and sharing of spatial data
was cumbersome and resource intensive. The Government enacted the Law on State Survey and Cadaster,
establishing the Serbia National Spatial Data Infrastructure (NSDI) as a single platform for accessing
this information. The NSDI developed a metadata profile that was aligned with the EU INSPIRE Directive and
ensured that all hazard risk information followed the same standard and format.

The analytical underpinnings for this prior action were sound and based on: (i) The World Development Report
of 2014, that provided an analytical framework for managing disaster risks; (ii) The World Bank 2012. The
Sendai Report: Managing Disasters for a Resilient Future. This report identified the priorities to be followed in
the aftermath of natural disasters; (iii) The World Bank 2010. Natural Hazards, Unnatural Disasters: The
Economics of Effective Prevention. This report identified the kinds of preventive actions that governments could
take in the wake of disasters; and (iv) World Bank (forthcoming) Serbia Open Data for Resilience Needs,
for information on data sharing and open data practices relating to DRM.

The data and information collection, risk and hazard information sharing, and strong analytical underpinning of
PA2 are directly relevant in supporting the achievement of Pillar 2. The relevance of PA2 is rated satisfactory.

Pillar 3. Reducing the fiscal impact and strengthening the Borrower's financial capacity to respond to
the adverse impact of natural hazards, particularly those exacerbated by climate change. Reforms in this
pillar aimed to implement a Disaster Risk Financing Program (DRFP).

Prior Action 3. The National Cabinet adopted legislation on a Disaster Risk Finance Program (DRFP) for
implementing financial protection measures for responding to disasters. Specifically the reforms aimed
to maintain fiscal health at the national level for supporting longer term reconstruction needs and ,
develop sustainable disaster financing mechanisms for local self governments.

At appraisal, due to the ongoing fiscal consolidation efforts, the Government did not have adequate fiscal space
for meeting contingencies in the wake of disasters. This necessitated the Government to rely on ex post and
hoc mechanisms to cover the recovery expenses.

This prior action sought to establish a fiscal risk unit within the Ministry of Finance as a centralized authority
for managing fiscal risks (including those due to natural disasters) and overseeing the implementation of the

                                                                                                       Page 5 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Disaster Risk Management DPL-CAT DDO (P157489)



 DRFP. The program set priorities for the Government to become a proactive financial risk manager as opposed
 to being an emergency borrower. The CAT-DDO was a key step to fill the financing gap. Given that local self-
 governments bear significant disaster costs, the PIDO was to incentivize the local self governments to
 develop budgetary protection instruments.

 The analytical underpinnings of this prior action were: (i) The World Bank 2014. Financial Protection against
 Natural Disasters: An Operational Framework for Disaster Risk Financing and insurance; (ii) World Bank 2016:
 Serbia Country Diagnostic. This report provided an overview of disaster risk financing in Serbia and identified
 challenges, including post-disaster funding gap and lack of proactive financing measures; and (iv) World Bank
 2017. Establishing a Fiscal Risk Management Department in the Ministry of Finance of Serbia. This technical
 assistance project reviewed the current fiscal risk management practices in Serbia and outlined options for
 establishing a dedicated unit to centralize such functions.

 The strong analytical work, the adoption of requisite legislation and the establishment of a fiscal risk unit directly
 strengthens the Borrower's financial capacity for DRM and helps reduce its fiscal impact. Hence, the relevance
 of PA3 to pillar 3 is rated as satisfactory.

 The prior actions were appropriate along the results chain for realizing the intended objectives. Assigning equal
 value to each Prior Action, the simple average of the three Prior Actions is five. Therefore, the relevance of
 design is rated as satisfactory.



Rating

Satisfactory


4. Relevance of Results Indicators

Rationale

Pillar 1. Strengthening the Borrower's legal and institutional framework for post-disaster
reconstruction and disaster and climate risk management. There were two Results Indicators (RIs).

RI # 1. The Government adopts the Systemization Act in 2015 and establishes the Office of Public
Information Management Agency (PIMO) as a permanent agency for responding to recovery needs. The
act specified the staffing of the PIMO and their responsibilities. The PIMO was required to submit
annual reports to the Cabinet on post-disaster damage and needs assessments, the amount of post-
disaster assistance, and the number of beneficiaries. The PIMO was required to submit annual
reports, irrespective of whether there was a disaster or not. This indicator, which is verifiable, is a good
step for ensuring PIMO's transparency. The RI is a direct measure of the Pillar's institutional strengthening
goals. Therefore, the relevance of this is indicator is satisfactory.

RI # 2. The Government adopts the Systemization Act and establishes the Sector for Emergency
Management (SEM) in the Ministry of Interior, as the dedicated agency for implementing the Law on
Natural and other Hazard Risk Reduction and Emergency Management. While the PIMO was to respond
to recovery needs, SEM was responsible for implementing the National Disaster Risk Management Plan.


                                                                                                        Page 6 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Disaster Risk Management DPL-CAT DDO (P157489)



This indicator could be verified and directly signals legal and institutional strengthening. Therefore, the
relevance of this indicator is satisfactory.

Pillar 2. Strengthening Serbia's technical capacity for planning and implementing disaster and
climate risk management activities. There were three RIs.

RI # 3. This indicator specified the number of probabilistic national flood risk assessments that were to be
completed when the operation closed. Given that information on national flood risks is required for
planning for disaster and climate risk management activities, this indicator was a direct measure of the
Pillar's achievement and could be measured. Therefore, the relevance of this indicator is satisfactory.

RI # 5. This indicator measured the number of sectors and local self-governments applying the post-
disaster loss and needs assessment methodology for quantifying the disaster damage and loss data. As
data on disaster damages and losses is required for reporting on disaster risk reduction targets, this
indicator is a direct measure of the Pillar's achievement and could be measured. Therefore, the relevance
of this indicator is satisfactory.

RI # 6. This indictor measured the number of sectors and institutions using an open-source geospatial
platform with risk information. Given that there was no central information portal for this kind of information
and the existing mechanism for sharing spatial data was cumbersome, this indicator was a direct measure
of the Pillar's achievement. Therefore, the relevance of this indicator is satisfactory.

Pillar 3. Reducing the fiscal impact and strengthening the Borrower's financial capacity to respond
to the adverse impact of natural hazards, particularly those exacerbated by climate change. There
were three results indicators.

RI # 7. The Government enacted legislation for establishing the fiscal risk unit, in the Ministry of
Finance, tasked with the responsibilities for implementing the national disaster risk financing program, and
adopting instruments such as the CAT - DDO instrument to fill the current financing gap for disasters. This
program would enable the Government to become a proactive financial risk manager. This
indicator directly supports the achievement of the pillar and could be verified. Therefore, the relevance of
this indicator is satisfactory.

RI # 8. This indicator measured the number of local self-governments preparing Disaster Financing Plans,
that set out their current funding mix for natural disasters, and their strategy for securing funds when faced
with disaster shocks. While preparing plans help, they may not be implemented by local self-
governments unless they were mandated by law to do so. Therefore the relevance of this indicator is
moderately unsatisfactory.

RI # 9. This indicator required the fiscal risk unit to submit annually historical post-disaster information to
the Budget Department. This indicator was a direct measure of the Pillar's achievement and could be
verified. Therefore, the relevance of this indicator is satisfactory.

Out of the nine results indicators, eight indicators were direct measures of the Pillar's achievement and
appropriate. Therefore, the overall relevance of the results indicators is satisfactory.

Table. Results Indicators (RIs), the Prior Actions (PAs) they support, baseline values, target
values, actual change in RI relative to target and RI achievement rating.


                                                                                                        Page 7 of 17
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Disaster Risk Management DPL-CAT DDO (P157489)




                                                                            Actual
                                     Baseline       Target
                               RI                              Actual    change in RI     RI
                 Associate          (including    (including
     RIs                   relevanc                          value as of relative to achievemen
                  d PAs             units and     units and
                               e                             target date   targeted    t rating
                                      dates)        dates)
                                                                            change

  PDO 1. Strengthening the institutional and legal framework to effectively manage the impact of
                                          natural hazards.
 RI # 1. The
                                                    PIMO is
   PIMO is                                                         PIMO
                                                  operational                 The PIMO
 operational                                                      submits
                                                 with staff and             increased its
with staff and                       Baseline                     annual
                   PA1        S                     submits                 staffing from       S
   submits                           (2017):0                    reports in
                                                    annual                  42 in 2017 to
   annual                                                       2017, 2018
                                                 reports to the              73 in 2021.
reports to the                                                   and 2019.
                                                    cabinet.
   Cabinet.

  RI # 2. The
 Government
  adopts the                                                                 Sector on
 Systemizatio                        Baseline                 Sector on     Emergency
  n Act and                          (2017): 0               Emergency Management
                                                 Law adopted
 establishes       PA1        S                              Managemen functional with          S
                                                   (2018).
the Sector on                        Law not                      t          additional
 Emergency                           adopted.                established. responsibilities
management.                                                                      .



  PDO 2. Strengthening the institutional and legal framework to effectively manage the physical
                                   impact of natural disasters.

   RI # 3.
 Number of
National flood                       Baseline       Target                  Target value
                   PA 2       S                                    75                           S
     risk                            (2017): 0    (2020):75                   realized.
assessments
 Completed.




                                                                                               Page 8 of 17
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Disaster Risk Management DPL-CAT DDO (P157489)



 RI # 4. The                                   19% of local
                                     Target:
  number of                                        self-
                                     (2020):                 19% of local
 sectors and                                   governments
                                      Three                      self-
  local-self-           Baseline:               developed                 Target value
                PA 2               sectors and               government                        S
governments             (2017): 0                 PDNA                     achieved.
                                  15% of local                s and five
applying the                                     reports
                                       self-                   sectors
    PDNA                                       covering five
                                  governments
methodology.                                     sectors.
 RI # 5. The
  number of
                                                                   146
sectors and
                                                              institutions
 institutions                                                              Target value
                        Baseline     Target                    registered
   using an     PA 2                                 146                   significantly       H
                        (2017): 0   (2020): 5                   as active
open-source                                                                 exceeded.
                                                              users of the
platform with
                                                                platform.
     risk
information.
PDO 3. Strengthening the institutional and legal framework to effectively manage the fiscal impact
                                       of natural disasters.
                                     Target
                                    (2020):
 RI # 7. The
                                   Fiscal risk
 Fiscal Risk
                        Baseline      unit        Unit        Unit is   Target value
     Unit       PA 3                                                                           S
                        (2017): 0 established established. functioning.   realized.
 established
                                     in the
  with staff.
                                  Ministry of
                                    Finance
 RI # 8. The
Government                                        Three
enacts a set                                   municipalitie
                                     Target
    of fiscal                                  s prepared
                                   (2020): At
  incentives            Baseline                plans for
                                  least three                 Adoption
and a model              (2017):               DRF but the               Target value
                PA 3             municipalitie               expected in                       M
Disaster Risk              Not                 plans were                not realized.
                                   s adopted                   2022.
    Finance             enacted.               not adopted
                                    the DRF
   (DRF) for                                    when the
                                    program.
     Local                                      operation
Governments                                      closed.
         .
     RI # 9.    PA 3    Baseline      Target           A        Report     Target value        S
 Submission             (2017): 0 (2020). The    consolidated submitted at   realized.
      of a                           report is    report was the end of
consolidated                      submitted to   submitted to    2020.
   report on                       the Budget     the Budget
   historical                     Department.    Department.
post-disaster

                                                                                              Page 9 of 17
                   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                   Disaster Risk Management DPL-CAT DDO (P157489)



                expenditure
               to the Budget
                Department.




   Rating

   Satisfactory

   5. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               PDO 1. Strengthening the institutional and legal framework to effectively manage the physical impact of
               natural hazards.

               Rationale
               Theory of change. Operationalizing the Public Investment Management Office (PIMO) for reconstruction
               works and establishing a dedicated national entity for planning DRM measures were likely to strengthen
               the institutional framework for managing natural hazards. Flood risk assessments, collecting information on
               natural damages and losses and increasing the number of sectors and institutions using an open-source
               geospatial platform with risk information, were aimed at increasing Serbia's capacity for planning and
               implementing disaster and climate risk management activities that would aid in managing the physical impact
               of natural hazards. These outcomes were likely to contribute to long-term outcome of building of Serbia's
               resilience and its capacity to cope with and recover from adverse natural hazards.

               The PIMO. The PIMO was operational from September 2017. As of October 31, 2021, it was managing
               reconstruction projects funded by the World Bank, the European Investment Bank (EIB), the Council of
               Europe Development Bank (CEB), and the KfW Development Bank. The PIMO submitted annual reports for
               Cabinet approval in 2017, 2018 and 2019. These reports were verified by Bank experts to contain the
               required information to better manage risks. When this operation closed, the PIMO was implementing
               the "EU for Serbia resilient to disasters program" (This program funded by EU (EURO funds of 14 million)
               was to be used for for infrastructure upgrades, procuring necessary equipment, and capacity building at
               various levels). To support its increasing portfolio of activities, the PIMO increased its staffing from 42 in 2017
               to 73 by 2021, with 32 engaged in engineering services, 18 in coordination services and 23 in providing
               managerial, technical and logistical services.

               The Sector for Emergency Management (SEM). The Government enacted legislation for establishing the
               SEM n the Ministry of Interior (MoI) as the national agency for implementing the National Disaster Risk
               Management Plan. The SEU was responsible for overseeing risk the assessments of administrative units


                                                                                                                   Page 10 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Disaster Risk Management DPL-CAT DDO (P157489)



from national to local levels, sector institutions, and large public and commercial enterprises. Following its
mandate, SEM supervised the completion of national and local flood risk assessments, that enabled the local
governments to develop rescue plans and disaster risk reduction investment plans. Of the 174 local self
governments, the MoI approved the disaster risk assessments of 132. Of these, 65 received approval for
developing protection and rescue plans.

National flood risk assessments. The Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Water Management
completed flood risk assessments of 75 identified flood prone areas in October 2020. The assessments
complied with the EU Flood Directive and covered 2,750 kilometers (km) of river reaches. The assessments
concluded that 115 towns and municipalities (with a population of 5.5 million, about 75% of Serbia's
population) are prone to potential flooding. This assessments strengthened Serbia's capacity for mitigation
works such as dikes or retention areas, restricting buildings in high-flood zones, improving hydro
meteorological forecasting, and helping in determining contingency reserves in the national budget.

Number of sectors and local self-governments applying the post-disaster loss and needs assessment
(PDNA) methodology. The ICR (paragraph 53) observes that 23 local governments were affected by
floods in June 2019. Nineteen of the affected local governments applied this methodology to quantify the
damages and losses and developed subsequent recovery programs based on the data collected by the
affected municipalities. The PDNAs covered five sectors: housing, agriculture, public facilities, economy and
infrastructure. The ICR notes that most local governments continue to apply this methodology for
quantifying data on damages, even though they are not mandated to do so.

Number of sectors and institutions using an open source geospatial platform with risk information.
Following the adoption of the law on National Infrastructure of Geospatial Data on April 2018, the Government
developed GeoSerbia - a national Spatial Data Infrastructure (SDI) - to improve access to spatial data
(electronic geographic data) for risk assessment and decision making at the national and local levels. The
Geodetic Authority of Serbia (RGA) is responsible for operating GeoSerbia. When the operation closed,
GeoSerbia had 73 metadata sets, 285 datasets and 39 data set services, with data on population, education
and health institutions, seismic weather maps, landslide locations, cultural heritage sites, nature resources,
climatological stations and river banks. This data was available to the public and state institutions. When the
operation closed, there were 146 institutions registered as active users of the platform (including 25
ministries/government agencies, 107 municipalities and cities, four bodies of the autonomous province and
nine public enterprises and companies). The institutions represented sectors like environment, agriculture,
real estate, urban planning, geology, water and transport. The PIMO developed the Disaster Risk Information
System (DRIS) on this platform as part of the larger Disaster Risk Registry platform that is now being used to
create a consolidated centralized repository of risk information at the national level.

The efficacy of this PDO is satisfactory.



Rating

Satisfactory

OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Strengthening the institutional and legal framework to effectively manage the fiscal impact of natural hazards.

                                                                                                 Page 11 of 17
                         Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                         Disaster Risk Management DPL-CAT DDO (P157489)




                      Rationale
                      Theory of change. Reforms aimed at establishing a fiscal risk unit, developing incentives and a Disaster Risk
                      Financing Plan for local self-governments and preparing an annual consolidated report on historical post-
                      disaster expenditure data were likely to strengthen the institutional and legal framework to manage the fiscal
                      impact of natural hazards and aid in Serbia to cope with and recover from natural disasters.

                      Fiscal Risk Unit. Following the adoption of the Systemization Act in March 2018, the Ministry of Finance
                      (MoF) established a new group in the Department for Macroeconomics and Fiscal Analysis for managing
                      fiscal risks. The group has since then been elevated to a sector. This sector unit with a staff of fourteen
                      people, was tasked with the responsibility of quantifying the disaster-risk related contingent liabilities.
                      Following the setting of this unit, the Bank through a Swiss State Secretariat for Economic Affairs (SECO)
                      financed Technical Assistance project supported production of a fiscal risk statement in the last quarter of
                      2020 to enhance management of the fiscal impact of natural hazards and national budget planning.

                      Disaster Risk Financing for local self-governments. Three pilot municipalities - Ucize, Paracin, and
                      Kraljevo - prepared disaster risk financing plans. These plans build on previous work supported by the Bank
                      Technical Assistance program, on assessing the legal framework for disaster risk financing at the municipal
                      level, and enabling them to rely less on public spending through leveraging risk financing solutions. However,
                      there were delays in adopting the plans - mainly because the local self governments were not mandated to
                      adopt the plans.

                      Historical post-disaster expenditure data. The fiscal sector collected data from almost thirty State-owned
                      enterprises (SOEs) on disaster-related expenditures. The consolidated data and the post-disaster database
                      were delivered to the Budget department at the end of 2020. This data was to support national budget
                      planning and managing the fiscal impacts of natural hazards through quantified information.

                      Drawdown of CAT-DDO Instrument. Since program effectiveness, Serbia requested three withdrawals.
                      First, on July 10, 2018, the MoF requested a partial drawdown of EUR 30 million based on the Government's
                      decision on June 21, 2018, declaring a natural disaster due to the flooding caused by sudden heavy rainfall.
                      Second, on June 20, 2019, the MoF requested a partial drawdown of EUR 15 million, following the
                      Government's decision on June 6, 2019, declaring a natural disaster due to flooding caused by heavy rains
                      and hailstorms. and third, on March 20, 2020, the MoF requested a drawdown of EUR 20.77 million to
                      support the Government in taking measures to manage the impact of COVID - 19 pandemic. Disbursements
                      for these withdrawals were fully processed upon confirmation of the Borrower's compliance with the
                      drawdown trigger.

                      Given that two of the three outcomes were realized, efficacy of this PDO is satisfactory.



                      Rating

                      Satisfactory


OVERALL EFF TBL OLD




Overall Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

                                                                                                                       Page 12 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Disaster Risk Management DPL-CAT DDO (P157489)



Rationale

Efficacy of PDO 1 is rated as satisfactory, based on the substantial ratings for operationalization of the
PIMO, establishment of the SEM, for completion of national flood risk assessments and the number of sectors
and institutional applying the PDNA methodology, and the high for the number of sectors and institutions using an
open-source platform with risk information.

Efficacy of PDO 2 is rated as satisfactory based on the substantial ratings for establishment of the fiscal risk unit
and submission of a consolidated report on historical post-disaster expenditure. However, the rating is modest
for developing disaster risk financing for local self governments.

Combining the achievement ratings for the three PDOs gives a Satisfactory rating for efficacy.



Overall Efficacy Rating
Satisfactory


6. Outcome

Rationale

The prior actions were appropriate first steps along the results chain for realizing the intended objectives. Of the
nine results indicators, eight indicators were a direct measure of the Pillar's achievement and could be verified.

Combining the achievement ratings for the two objectives gives a Satisfactory rating for outcome.


a. Rating

Satisfactory

7. Risk to Development Outcome

Institutional risk. The ICR (paragraph 70) observes that the DRM sector roles are now anchored in Serbian
Law and local development plans. The PIMO established in 2015 as the lead agency for reconstruction s
financed partly through budgetary allocations and external sources. The SEM within the MoI and the fiscal
risk unit in the MoF also have budgetary allocation. However, although the annual budgets for PIMO and
SEM has been growing since their inception, overall financing of these institutions remains low relative to
their growing mandates. In the case of SEM, allocated funds do not adequately cover operational costs such
as staffing and equipment. In the case of the fiscal management unit, there is a need to strengthen staffing to
enable execution of its mandate effectively. There is moderate risk that the institutional capacity of these
entities could be undermined due to lack of adequate funding.




                                                                                                       Page 13 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Disaster Risk Management DPL-CAT DDO (P157489)



Technical risk. There is moderate technical risk that that activities like the GeoSerbia platform may be
compromised due to the lack of operational, technical and financial capacities of line ministries. Further,
capacity building activities are still required to improve DRM at the local levels.


8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Bank Performance – Design

Rationale


As this operation was the first CAT- DDO in the Europe and Central Asia region, the Bank prepared this
operation based on the experiences from previous Bank-financed CAT-DDO operations in Latin America
and the Caribbean, East and South Asia and Africa. The analytical underpinnings of this operation were
sound, and design of this operation was able to draw on the analytical works such as, the completed post
disaster needs assessments (2014), the ongoing Emergency Recovery Loan Operation, the World Bank
Technical Assistance program (National Risk Management Program (P154128), and the findings of the
Southeast Europe and Caucasus Catastrophe Risk Insurance Facility. The prior actions of this operation
were based on sound analytical underpinnings (discussed in Section 3).

The Bank prepared this operation in close coordination with Serbia's Ministry of Finance (MOF), and with
other Development Partners such as: (i) The European Commission (EC), the Global Facility for Disaster
Reduction and Recovery (GFDRR), the Swiss Agency for Development and Cooperation (SDC) for
developing the National Disaster Risk Management Program; (ii) The United Nations (UN), SDC and
GFDRR for developing the National Action Plan; (iii) The SDC for reforms on open data and data sharing;
and (iv) The disaster risk financing program was developed through a partnership between the Swiss State
Secretariat for Economic Affairs (SECO) and the World Bank's Disaster Risk Insurance and Insurance
Program that aimed to build the financial resilience of middle-income countries (PD, paragraph 67).

Several risks were identified at appraisal, including moderate macroeconomic and institutional capacity
risks, and low risk regarding the technical design, given the Bank's substantial ongoing technical
assistance for Serbia. With mitigation measures, the overall operation risk was assessed as moderate at
appraisal (PD, page 27). These measures proved to be adequate during implementation.



Rating

Satisfactory

b. Bank Performance – Implementation

Rationale

Five Implementation Status Results (ISR) Reports were filed during the operation's lifetime of just over two
years. The in-country presence of the Bank team enabled the Bank to constantly track the progress of reforms,

                                                                                                     Page 14 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Disaster Risk Management DPL-CAT DDO (P157489)



coordinate between government and other development partners, engage in high-level policy dialogue and
mobilize additional resources to advance reforms when the need was identified (ICR, paragraph 67). The Bank
team's regular engagement with counterparts also helped in providing just-in-time support in the event of
disasters. This enabled the Bank to handle the withdrawal request for disbursement of CAT - DDO funds and
providing immediate liquidity after a disaster event (ICR, paragraph 69).



Rating

Satisfactory

c. Overall Bank Performance

Rationale

Overall bank performance is assessed as satisfactory.


Overall Bank Performance Rating

Satisfactory

9. Other Impacts

a. Social and Poverty

This operation supported Serbia's most vulnerable population, by contributing to a faster emergency response
and avoiding disruptions to service delivery. Through the CAT- DDO instrument, the operation provided
immediate liquidity to the Government, that were critical to avoid disruptions in provision of social assistance, in
the aftermath of the flood and hail events in 2018 and 2019.



b. Environmental

This operation did not include any policies that could directly or indirectly influence the environment, forests and
other natural resources (PD, paragraph 71).



c. Gender

It is unlikely that the operation had an impact on gender indicators.




                                                                                                      Page 15 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Disaster Risk Management DPL-CAT DDO (P157489)




d. Other

There were no observed unintended impacts.




10. Quality of ICR

Rationale

The ICR is well-written. The ICR provides a clear description of the country context when the Bank prepared
this operation. The theory of change articulated in the text is clear and clearly shows the links between the
prior actions, the chosen results indicators and the intended outcomes. The ICR provides a clear description of
the CAT-DDO instrument. The ICR draws suitable lessons from the experience of implementing this project.



a. Rating

Substantial

11. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                   IEG
                                                                                Disagreement/Comments
Outcome                         Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Bank Performance                Satisfactory          Satisfactory
Relevance of Results
                                ---                   Satisfactory
Indicators
Quality of ICR                  ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR draws the following main lessons from the experience of implementing this operation.

1. Strong institutional champions can be very helpful for advancing a complex reform program requiring
coordination across all involved agencies. The Public Investment Management Office (PIMO) in this
operation provided the impetus for inter-agency coordination of disaster risk management related policy actions
and the Ministry of Finance (MOF) was crucial to advocate the need for innovative risk financing mechanisms
and associated institutional reforms, leading to the development of CAT-DDO operation.

2. An enabling political environment at international level can be useful for incentivizing national
reforms. As a potential candidate for membership within the European Union (EU), Serbia was making efforts

                                                                                                  Page 16 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Disaster Risk Management DPL-CAT DDO (P157489)



to align its legal framework with the EU regulations and directives. The alignment of the operation with EU
regulations added incentives in this operation for achieving the results such as the completion of the flood risk
assessment (EU Flood Directive) and the establishment of the GeoSerbia (INSPIRE Directive).

3. Solid analytical foundation and ongoing support by an overarching technical assistance program can
help in designing an effective program. In the case of this operation, the Bank's technical assistance program
proved to be helpful in designing the prior actions and the indicators for achieving the intended outcomes.

4. Besides providing immediate liquidity in the aftermath of a disaster, a CAT-DDO instrument can also
be useful for enabling improvements in underlying systems and institutions. The CAT-DDO supported the
Government in this operation through three separate withdrawals triggered by different types of emergency
events. This operation through the specification of prior actions and pillars also helped in strengthening
institutions for risk management.


13. Project Performance Assessment Report (PPAR) Recommended?

No




                                                                                                     Page 17 of 17
