     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     4M Mekong Int. Water Resources MGMT (P104806)



                                                                              Report Number: ICRR0023243

1. Project Data



 Project ID                              Project Name
 P104806                                 4M Mekong Int. Water Resources MGMT

 Country                                 Practice Area(Lead)
 Lao People's Democratic Republic        Water


 L/C/TF Number(s)                        Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-61180,IDA-H6750,IDA-H7620,TF-       31-Mar-2018                                         49,040,873.14
 93258,TF-94553,TF-98965

 Bank Approval Date                      Closing Date (Actual)
 08-Mar-2012                             28-Feb-2022

                                         IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                         26,000,000.00                                    1,132,700.00

 Revised Commitment                          50,555,370.62                                    1,087,286.81

 Actual                                      49,040,873.14                                    1,087,286.81




 Prepared by               Reviewed by                 ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Kishore Laxmikant         Fernando Manibog            Ramachandra Jammi              IEGSD (Unit 4)
 Nadkarni




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) was "to establish key examples of integrated water resources
   management practices in the lower Mekong Basin at the regional, national, and sub-national levels, thus
   contributing to more sustainable river basin management in the lower Mekong". (Financing Agreement dated
   April 4,2012 - Schedule 1 and Project Appraisal Document dated February 2, 2012 - para. 30).



                                                                                               Page 1 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     4M Mekong Int. Water Resources MGMT (P104806)



   At a Level 1 restructuring in July 2017, the original PDO was revised "to improve water resource and fisheries
   management in selected areas of the Lower Mekong Basin". (Financing Agreement dated July 26, 2017 -
   Schedule 1 and Project Paper dated July 6, 2017 - para. 18).

   As discussed below in Section 2 under Restructurings, the PDO was revised to provide greater clarity
   and make it more outcome oriented. A PDO indicator was revised since it included implementation of joint
   action plans which was beyond the purview of the Lao PDR alone. The definitions of some indicators were
   revised to provide greater clarity. The original targets for some of the PDO indicators were increased, and
   additional PDO and Intermediate Results Indicators (IRIs) were included. These changes did not result in a
   lowering of the overall ambition of the Project. Consequently, a split rating is not undertaken in the ICRR.

   For the ICRR, the PDO is parsed as follows:

   Objective 1: To improve regional integrated water resource management in the Lower Mekong Basin.

   Objective 2: To improve national and subnational water resource management in the Lao Peoples'
   Democratic Republic.

   Objective 3: To improve river basin and fisheries management in the Lao Peoples' Democratic Republic".

   The concept of sustainability is already embedded in the definition of Integrated Water Resources
   Management as stated in the 1995 Mekong Agreement, hence there is no need to repeat it in the PDOs as
   parsed above. Specific examples of the Project's increased ambition are discussed below in the Efficacy
   Section (Section 4).




b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  27-Jul-2017

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   (Reference PAD paras. 37 to 39 and ICR paras. 12 to 14).

   The project components at appraisal are indicated below. Any changes in these components during project
   implementation are discussed later in Section 2 under the respective restructurings.



                                                                                                   Page 2 of 23
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    4M Mekong Int. Water Resources MGMT (P104806)



  Component 1: Regional Water Resources Management (estimated cost at appraisal US$8 million; actual
  cost at closing US$7.5 million): This component was to promote integrated water resources management
  (IWRM) at the regional level. It consisted of four sub-components: Subcomponent 1.1: facilitating
  transboundary dialogue on critical water resources and fisheries management issues among the Lower
  Mekong Basin (LMB) countries to promote regionally harmonized solutions. Subcomponent 1.2:
  establishing a regional approach on environmental and disaster risk management; Subcomponent 1.3:
  promoting understanding of regional IWRM principles to a broad range of stakeholders; and Subcomponent
  1.4: facilitating implementation of the project activities at the national level, supporting integration of the
  entire set of project activities under the Lao People's Democratic Republic (Lao PDR) Phase 1 of the
  Mekong Program, and providing technical assistance (TA) for the preparation of Phase II (Cambodia and
  Vietnam) of the Mekong Program.

  Component 2: National Water Resources Management (estimated cost at appraisal US$6.01 million;
  Additional Financing USD$12.0 million; actual cost at closing US$17.9 million): At appraisal, this component
  was to support legal, institutional, and human resources strengthening to implement IWRM and improve
  water resources planning in Lao PDR. It consisted of two subcomponents: Subcomponent 2.1: developing a
  new Water Resources Law (WRL) governing the regional implementation of the IWRM in the Mekong River;
  and Subcomponent 2.2: installing essential institutional capacity for water quality monitoring (WQM),
  hydrological and meteorological (hydro-met) modeling, and collection and analysis of the hydro-met
  networks. Although implemented at the national level, the component was aimed to benefit all the LMB
  countries given that the Lao PDR accounts for more than one-third of the flow of the Mekong River.
  Therefore, strong and accountable systems at the national level were considered to be key to sound water
  management at the regional level, considering upstream and downstream impacts. The component was
  revised at restructuring resulting in a total of five sub-components. (See Changes to Components under the
  Second Restructuring below).

  Component 3: Improved Floodplain and Aquatic Resources Management (estimated cost at appraisal
  US$12.58 million; Additional Financing US$13.0 million; actual cost at closing US$23.1 million): This
  component was to pilot a common approach among the LMB countries. It consisted of two
  subcomponents: Subcomponent 3.1: sustainable floodplain management; balancing livelihood support for
  local communities with enhancing regional and local ecological and biodiversity values in wetlands which
  are of basin-wide significance; and Subcomponent 3.2: sustainable co-management of fisheries in key
  spawning and feeding habitats of regional significance. Under the Lao PDR phase of the Mekong Program,
  two wetlands on southern Lao PDR and regionally significant fishing grounds were selected as the project
  sites. (In the context of the Project, the term 'aquatic resources' referred principally to fisheries
  management).



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost: At appraisal, the project cost was estimated at US$26.59 million. During project restructuring,
  including Additional Financing, the project cost was revised to US$52.13 million. The increase in project
  cost was due to cost overruns for some components and additional costs resulting from the expansion of
  scope and activities under the Additional Financing in July 2017. At project completion, the actual project
  cost was estimated at US$48.50 million. (ICR Annex 3). However, there are some discrepancies in the
  figures of costs and financing between the Data Sheet and Annex 3. The ICR's Data Sheet indicates a total
  cost of US$50.13 million.


                                                                                                    Page 3 of 23
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  4M Mekong Int. Water Resources MGMT (P104806)



Financing: At appraisal, the Project was financed by two IDA grants totaling US$26 million. This was
increased in July 2017 by Additional Financing of US$26.13 million through an additional IDA grant
of US$25 million and three Trust Fund grants totaling US$1.132 million. Out of the total amount of US$51
million committed under the IDA grants, US$47.95 million was disbursed and the balance of US$3.05
million was cancelled. Out of the total amount of US$1.132 million financed under the Trust Funds,
US$1.087 million was disbursed and the remaining balance was cancelled.

Borrower Contribution: At appraisal, the planned contribution from the Borrower was US$0.59 million.
During restructurings, the planned contribution was eliminated.

Dates: The Project was approved on March 3, 2012. The planned effectiveness date was April 15,
2012, and the actual effectiveness date was May 15, 2012. The original closing date was March 31, 2018.
The closing date was extended twice, and the actual closing date was February 28, 2022. The extensions
of the closing date were to allow adequate time for completion of activities added under the Additional
Financing in 2017 as well those delayed during project implementation, including by the impacts of the
COVID pandemic in 2020 to 2021.

Mid-Term Review (MTR): An MTR was carried out in January 2016. Findings of the MTR were utilized in
the Level 1 restructuring in July 2017 (discussed below under Restructurings).

Restructurings: (Reference ICR paras.15 to 26): The Project underwent five restructurings as follows:

First Restructuring: (March 18, 2014 - disbursed amount US$4.31 million): This was to amend the
Financing Agreement for the IDA grant to the Mekong River Commission (MRC). The amendment was to
enable the provision of facilitation and coordination support for the preparation of the Cambodia and
Vietnam phases of the overall Mekong Program.

Second Restructuring: (July 6, 2017 - disbursed amount US$21.88 million): This was a Level 1
restructuring, including Additional Financing of US$25 million. The restructuring included a revision of the
PDO and expansion of the scope of Components 2 and 3 required to strengthen the institutional and
implementation capacity of the Ministry of Natural Resources and Environment (MONRE) and associated
agencies to deal with the increased responsibilities placed on them by the decentralization of activities from
the Mekong River Commission (MRC) to the individual country level.

Change in the PDO: The PDO was revised "to improve water resource and fisheries management in
selected areas of the Lower Mekong Basin". The change in the PDO was to set a higher level of outcome
for the project without changing its substance, and for the Project to hold itself accountable for actual
improvements in WRM rather than just establishing examples of WRM. Fisheries management was to be
measured explicitly given the role of fisheries in overall WRM. WRM practices were to continue to be
applied at the regional, national, and subnational levels. (ICR para. 26).

Changes in PDO Indicators: PDO Indicator 1 was changed to clarify that the Project will support the
formulation and approval of Joint Action Plans by the respective countries. The actual implementation of the
plans will be undertaken by the respective countries with support from the separate national projects under
the Mekong Program. PDO Indicator 2 was corrected to measure the number of WRM instruments applied
rather than the number of river basins where they were applied. The definition of "applied" was changed to
approval of the instruments by the Minister of MONRE (Ministry of Natural Resources and Environment)
rather than by the River Basin Coordinating Committee given the decision of the Government of Lao PDR
(GoLPDR) to drop the establishment of River Basin Coordinating Committees in the River Basin Decree. A

                                                                                                 Page 4 of 23
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  4M Mekong Int. Water Resources MGMT (P104806)



new PDO Indicator 3 was added (reflecting an upgrade of existing Intermediate Results Indicator) to
measure the number of new or upgraded hydro-met stations that produce information that is applied for
WRM. For PDO Indicator 4, the indicator was made core and the target area was increased due to the
expansion of scope from 40 rehabilitated irrigation schemes covering 5,415 hectares(ha) to 59 irrigation
schemes covering 7,815 ha. A new PDO Indicator 5 was added (reflecting an upgrade of the original
Intermediate Results Indicator 3) to reflect the importance of fisheries management in the PDO. A new PDO
Indicator 6 was added (reflecting an upgrading of Intermediate Results Indicator 8) to reflect the importance
of flood protection.

Changes in Intermediate Results Indicators (IRIs): IRI 1 (number of approved proposals) was changed to
"number of Joint Issues Papers prepared" to focus on agreement on issues (rather than proposals as
originally formulated) for the three core transboundary projects. For IRIs 2 and 4, changes were made for
greater clarity and precision. IRIs 3,5 and 6 remained unchanged but the target was increased for IRI
6. Five new IRIs (Nos. 7 to 11) were added to measure (i) number of regulations piloted at the basin level;
(ii) area (ha) provided with improved flood protection; (iii) number of farmers reached with agricultural assets
or services (a core indicator); (iv) number of functioning Irrigation Water Users Associations (WUAs); (iv)
number of people engaged in the formulation of Fisheries Management Plans (FMPs); (v) number of
villages receiving livelihood support under the fisheries component (a core indicator). Revisions were made
to IRIs 12 and 13 for greater clarity.

Changes in Components: (Reference Project Paper dated July 2017, paras. 17 and 19 to 22). The scope of
the existing Components 2 and 3 was increased with activities financed under the Additional Financing. The
changes were necessitated, in part, by the reorganization of the MRC and the consequent decentralization
of functions such as hydro-meteorological metering, water quality monitoring, and fisheries monitoring to the
member countries. For Component 2, these included additional technical assistance and equipment
financing to support improvement of (i) the legal and regulatory regime on WRM; (ii) water quality and
aquatic ecosystem modeling; (iii) water resources analytics; (iv) hydrological and meteorological services;
and (v) project management support. For Component 3, these included additional technical assistance and
financing for improved planning and upgrading of infrastructure required for (i) river basin management; (ii)
sustainable irrigation and flood management, and (iii) fisheries management.

Other changes: The closing date was extended by three years from March 31,2018 to March 31,2021 to
allow adequate time for completion of the activities, including those added under the Additional Financing.
Other changes included reallocations, procurement, and revised implementation schedule.

Third Restructuring (January 14, 2018 - disbursed amount US$26.04 million): Changes included
reallocations and updated implementation schedule.

Fourth Restructuring: (March 18, 2021 - disbursed amount US$41.59 million): Changes included
upgrading of IRI 8 (improved flood protection) to a PDO Indicator and dropping of IRI 6 (number of
functioning River Basin Coordinating Committees - RBCCs) due to the GoLPDR's decision to remove the
establishment of RBCCs under the River Basin Decree. Other changes included reallocations between
components. The closing date was extended by 11 months from March 31,2021 to February 28,2022 to
allow for completion of activities affected by implementation delays, including the impact of the COVID19
pandemic.




                                                                                                  Page 5 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     4M Mekong Int. Water Resources MGMT (P104806)



   Fifth Restructuring: (February 28, 2022 - disbursed amount US$47.57 million): This was to reallocate
   amounts and cancel the unutilized balance under the IDA grants.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
(Reference PAD paras. 1 to 7 and ICR paras. 1 to 7).

Regional Context: At the time of appraisal in 2012, protecting the Mekong River Basin's rich ecosystem
and significant socioeconomic and cultural value, while exploiting its hydropower potential, was one of the
key challenges facing the Mekong Countries. The river basin was of great importance for fisheries and local
communities, especially in the Lower Mekong Basin (LMB) countries of Lao PDR, Cambodia, and Vietnam,
which were highly dependent on fish catch for food security. At the same time, hydropower development
was taking place at a rapid pace throughout the basin, creating competing demand for water
resources. The Mekong River was facing hydrological challenges, including highly seasonal discharge
patterns, upstream development, and increasing climatic events. These challenges were disproportionately
affecting poor rural communities. Fisheries were identified as a key resource among LMB countries and
capture fisheries were of particular importance in providing food and animal protein. Climate change was
recognized as a key challenge to water resource management in the LMB countries. Improved forecasting
of weather patterns, including floods and droughts, and longer-term climate forecasting, were critical
requirements. Given the hydrological connectivity and significant upstream and downstream effects along
the Mekong River, the governments of the LMB countries recognized that it was critical to establish greater
transboundary coordination, along with leadership by national-level institutions. The countries had entered
into a Mekong Agreement in 1995 under which a Mekong River Commission (MRC), an intergovernmental
organization, was established to foster regional dialogue and cooperation in the LMB. The MRC started a
regional analysis of climate change impacts on the hydrology of the Mekong, but the available data and
information collection systems were inadequate to capture the complexities of the LMB. At the same time,
the LMB countries recognized the need to upgrade their own hydrometeorological (hydromet) networks to
address the risks posed by both present and future weather events, share information among the riparian
countries, and develop regional and improved national systems for flood and drought forecasting and
warning. To address these issues, it was assessed that it was essential to establish an effective regional
framework for integrated water resource management (IWRM) that would: (i) establish regional procedures
for water utilization; and (ii) set up hydrological models to help develop water resources investments,
considering upstream and downstream impacts. In the early 2000s, the World Bank, along with the
Australian Aid Agency, supported capacity-building in the MRC through a Mekong Water Utilization
Program (WUP). However, it was later recognized that achievements were being constrained by the limited
WRM capacity in the MRC member countries. This led to the development of a Mekong Integrated Water
Resources Management Program (MIWRMP) which made a strategic shift to support the member
countries. The Program was to be implemented in two phases with Phase1 to cover the Laos PDR and
Phase 2 Cambodia and Vietnam. (This was modified later - Phase 2 was to cover Vietnam and Phase 3
Cambodia. All three phases have now been completed and the respective Implementation Completion and
Results Reports - ICRs - have been prepared). An innovative feature of the Program was that it would
integrate three pillars: (i) a regional pillar to finalize water utilization procedures; upgrade trans-boundary

                                                                                                     Page 6 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     4M Mekong Int. Water Resources MGMT (P104806)



hydrological models; and improve communication among stakeholders; (ii) a national pillar to support
implementation of IWRM and contribute to capacity-building; and (iii) a third pillar to address emerging
IWRM issues in border areas through the MRC and facilitation of bilateral dialogue. (ICR paras. 1 to 3 and 5
to 7).

Country Context: The Lao PDR and Cambodia are of particular importance in the LMB since almost two-
thirds of the Mekong River flow originates in these countries. The LMB is of special importance for the Lao
PDR since an estimated 96% of the population lives in the LMB. In Lao PDR, water resources were also
facing pressure from rapidly growing urban population and from overall economic growth. The Law on
Water and Water Resources (approved in 1996) provided the basis for the planning, developing, utilizing,
and protecting water resources in the Lao PDR. A Ministry of Natural Resources and Environment
(MONRE) was established in 2013 and natural resources management was consolidated under a single
ministry. Under MONRE, preliminary river basin plans included the creation of river basin committees aimed
at coordinating the needs of different water users. However, the intended outcomes were not realized. The
GoLPDR recognized the need to update the legal and regulatory framework to address these
challenges. With the decentralization of implementation responsibilities to the national level, there was need
to expand, rehabilitate, and upgrade existing infrastructure and facilities. This was to be addressed under
the Project. (ICR paras. 4 and 5).

Alignment with Regional/National Priorities: The Project Development Objective (PDO) was aligned with
the regional and national priorities prevailing at the time of appraisal and continue to be aligned with the
currently prevailing priorities. At the regional level, the PDO and the project activities are well aligned with
the current Basin Development Strategy 2021-2030 and the MRC Strategic Plan 2021-2025. The Project
contributed to more interactive regional planning, coordination of basin management operations,
modernization of data and information acquisition/sharing. as a part of more integrated river basin
management. The PDO is also directly relevant to the sustainable development opportunities identified in
the Basin Development Strategy 2021 and the MRC Strategic Plan 2021-2025 as they relate to fisheries
and aquatic resources, flood and drought mitigation, and irrigation and climate-smart agriculture
development. (ICR para. 28). At the national level, the PDO is well aligned with the overall goal of the Lao
PDR 8th National Socio-Economic Development Plan (NSEDP - 2016-2020) - "green growth development,
effective natural resources management, and regional and international integration", contributing to
Outcome 3 of the NSEDP "Protection of Natural Resources and Environment". The PDO is also well
aligned with the current Lao PDR 9th NSEDP (2021-2025), contributing to Outcome 4 of the NSEDP
"Environmental Protection and Disaster Risk Reduced". (ICR para. 29).

Alignment with Country Assistance Strategy/Country Partnership Framework: The PDO was aligned,
and continue to remain aligned, with the Mekong Program and the World Bank Group (WBG) Country
Partnership Frameworks. The Strategy Note on World Bank Regional Support for the Greater Mekong Sub-
Region prioritized the Mekong Program. The Project was an integral part of the broader Mekong Program,
and the transboundary activities of the Project were directly related to the outcomes of Phase 2 and 3 of the
Program. The PDO was also well aligned with the Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for 2017-2021.
The Project was specifically listed as part of the WBG program, contributing to the CPF's Focus Area 3:
Protecting the Environment and to Objective 3.1: Promoting Environmental protection and sustainable
natural resources management. The CPF (para. 98) recognizes that "Lao PDR's key asset is the Mekong
River and its tributaries. The CPF Indicator 19 (at least three river basin plans approved by MONRE" is
directly linked to the PDO indicator under the Project. The revised PDO raised further the ambition of the
Project in regard to the expected outcomes. (ICR para. 27).



                                                                                                      Page 7 of 23
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                       Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      4M Mekong Int. Water Resources MGMT (P104806)



               Prior Bank Experience: The World Bank (WB) has been engaged for several years in supporting the LMB
               countries in planning and institutional capacity creation for carrying out WRM related activities in the
               Mekong River Basin. In 2006, the WB, in cooperation with the Asian Development Bank (ADB) supported
               the preparation of a Mekong Water Resources Assistance Strategy (MWRAS) for the LMB. Following this,
               the WB was engaged with the LMB governments in policy dialogue on WRM issues in the LMB. In 2009,
               the WB, with GEF financing, supported a Mekong Water Utilization Project (MWUP), which provided
               technical assistance and financing for institutional capacity building, particularly in the MRC. The WB has
               also financed WRM projects in Vietnam and Cambodia.

               Relevance of Project Development Objectives: Given the context described above, the PDO was
               consistent, and remained consistent, with the priorities in the Lao PDR's national programs and the WBG
               Country Partnership Frameworks. However, as discussed earlier in Section 2, the original PDO had certain
               weaknesses in terms of clarity and outcome orientation, which were addressed by revising the PDO under
               a restructuring in 2017. The revisions included modifying a PDO indicator that referred to preparation and
               implementation of Joint Action Plans to formulation and approval of Joint Action Plans since implementation
               of joint plans was beyond the purview of the Lao PDR alone. Overall, although the revision was delayed
               (five years into project implementation), the revised PDO is relevant and consistent with the prevailing
               national and WBG CPF priorities. The changes to the PDO and associated indicators did not result in a
               reduction in the overall ambition of the Project other than in respect of implementation of Joint Action Plans
               which was beyond the purview of the Lao PDR alone.

               The relevance of objectives is rated Substantial while noting the important shortcoming that the objective
               related to IWRM improvement at the regional level proved over-ambitious since it was known at entry that
               the Lao PDR on its own could not enforce implementation of the Joint Action Plans involving other countries
               in the LMB.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To improve regional integrated water resource management in the Lower Mekong Basin.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change: The ICR provides a diagrammatic presentation of the theory of change (TOC) and the
                             causal results chain. Regarding Objective 1, given the hydrological connectivity of the Mekong River, with its
                             upstream and downstream implications, decisions concerning water resources utilization and management of
                             natural and environmental resources need to be made in a cooperative manner between the countries
                             involved (Lao PDR, Cambodia, Vietnam and Thailand). Increasing demand for water resources utilization,
                             and the economic importance of the LMB natural and aquatic resources, including fisheries, required that

                                                                                                                              Page 8 of 23
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   4M Mekong Int. Water Resources MGMT (P104806)



integrated water resources management (IWRM) be made a high priority. Effective IWRM required inter-
country cooperation in agreeing on joint action plans as basis for planning, implementation and monitoring of
IWRM activities. At the regional level, this required the preparation of joint action plans for establishing the
overall framework for IWRM, and preparation and implementation of arrangements for IWRM planning, data
collection and monitoring, and information sharing among the member countries. The MRC had the primary
responsibility for carrying out these functions. At the national level, it required the concerned country to plan,
implement, and monitor the carrying out of IWRM within their territories. Issues of transboundary significance
were to be resolved by the concerned countries through bilateral discussion and negotiations. To achieve the
objective of effective IWRM, the four countries established a joint Mekong Program. to be carried out in
phases. Phase 1 would include a regional component (with the MRC as the prime agency) and a national
component for the Lao PDR (under the overall responsibility of the Ministry of Natural Resources and
Environment - MONRE). Phase 2 would cover Cambodia and Phase 3 Vietnam. (All three phases have been
completed). The MRC was the inter-governmental agency responsible for the regional component. The
Project would provide inputs for financing of technical assistance, equipment and facilities, including capacity
building in the MRC to facilitate transboundary inter-country dialogue; establish approaches for management
of environmental impacts and disaster risks; provide technical assistance for implementation of national
level IWRM activities; and develop a communications outreach. These inputs would enable the MRC to
develop key outputs including Joint Action Plans to deal with critical cross-boundary issues; a harmonized
environmental and disaster risk assessment methodology; greater sharing and utilization of data and
knowledge in the LMB; Joint Issues Papers regarding identified priority transboundary IWRM issues in the
Mekong Basin; and preparation and dissemination of various communication products related to IWRM in the
LMB. The outcome would be improved regional IWRM in the LMB. The longer-term outcome would be
sustainable river basin development in the LMB with the associated social and economic benefits.

The causal links and full results chain in the TOC in regard to Objective 1 were adequate. To measure the
achievement of Objective 1, one PDO indicator and two IR indicators were used. The original PDO, PDO
indicators and Intermediate Results Indicators (IRIs) had some weaknesses. The original PDO was not
adequately outcome oriented, referring to establishing examples of IWRM in the LMB rather than the specific
objective of improvement of regional and national IWRM in the LMB. The original PDO indicator in regard to
Joint Action Plans referred to preparation and implementation of the Plans although implementation of the
Joint Plans was in the purview of the individual countries concerned (and not within the control of the Lao
PDR alone). During a restructuring in 2017, the PDO was revised to clarify that the Project would support the
formulation and approval of the Joint Action Plans. The original two IRIs associated with Objective 1 were
also modified to provide greater clarity. The changes did not result in a reduction in the ambition of the Project
as regards achievement of results realistically within the purview of the Phase 1 Project.

Key assumptions in the result chain were that (i) the countries involved would continue to be committed to
timely and effective preparation and implementation of the jointly agreed plans and actions; and (ii) there
would be adequate willingness and ability at the national level to implement the agreed IWRM actions within
their own territories.

Outputs and Intermediate Results Indicators (IRIs): (as reported in the ICR - Annex 1 Results Framework
and paras. 35 to 40).

Results were measured by two IRIs the targets for which were achieved as follows:




                                                                                                    Page 9 of 23
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   4M Mekong Int. Water Resources MGMT (P104806)



IRI 1-1: Number of Joint Issues Papers prepared and endorsed for identified transboundary IWRM issues in
the Mekong Basin (baseline 0; target 3; actual 3; target achieved).

As targeted, three issues papers and corresponding Joint Action Plans were developed under the Project. (1)
Cambodia and Vietnam - IWRM in Sesan and Srepok. The Cambodia National Mekong Committee and the
Vietnam National Mekong Committee endorsed the Joint Transboundary Action Plan for the Sesan Srepok
River Basins and Mekong Delta in May 2019. A Joint Issues Paper was published for the Sesan Srepok River
Basins which outlines the priority transboundary water resources issues along with identified solutions.
Additionally, a framework for joint transboundary cooperation and a joint cooperation mechanism were
developed for the Sesan Srepok River Basins and Mekong Delta. This resulted in a Joint Transboundary
Action Plan that was made part of the Joint Project of Cambodia and Vietnam 2021-2025 (Phases 2 and 3 of
the Mekong Program, now completed). However, the transboundary activities under the Plan have not been
implemented as yet due to a lack of funds. (ICR para. 36 subpara a). (2) Cambodia and Lao PDR: The
Mekong-Sekong Transboundary Fisheries Management Plan (TFMP) between Cambodia and the Lao
PDR was developed to improve fisheries management in the bordering provinces of Stung Teng and Kratie in
Cambodia and Champasak and Attapeu in the Lao PDR. The TFMP was based on a joint issues paper
developed under the Project and was endorsed by both Cambodia and Vietnam in December 2019. A fish
catch and abundance monitoring program was implemented to monitor and evaluate the performance of the
TFMP, along with an awareness plan to raise awareness at the local levels. However, other activities were
not completed since a funding source remained to be identified. (ICR para. 36 subpara b). (3) Cambodia and
Vietnam: A Joint Issues Paper was developed which identified that transboundary IWRM of the border rivers
was very complex due to extreme variations in natural conditions. However, due to activities under this
component, both parties identified a framework for Joint Transboundary Cooperation along with the
development of a Joint Cooperation Mechanism Paper for IWRM in Sesan-Srepok and the Mekong Delta.
The cooperation mechanisms were included within the Joint Transboundary Action Plan.

IRI 1-2: Number of communication products produced and disseminated by MRC in relation to IWRM
(baseline 0; target 22; actual 27; target exceeded).

The key outputs (ICR paras. 37 to 40) included:

      Preparation of guidelines on Transboundary Environmental Impact Assessment (TEIA) and
       Environmental Impact Assessments (EIA) in transboundary contexts.
      Joint recommendations for identification of mutually agreed transboundary cooperation issues.
      Establishment of procedures for Data, Information Exchange and Sharing; Water Use Monitoring;
       Maintenance of Flows; and Water Quality.

Some community outreach activities were initiated as a part of exchange visits between Cambodia and
Thailand, along with carrying out of a communications program. This contributed to making the decision-
making processes for development within the LMB more transparent.

PDO Indicators: (ICR Annex 1 Results Framework and para. 34).

PDOI 1-1: Joint Action Plans for addressing priority transboundary IWRM issues in the Mekong Basin
(baseline 0; target 3; actual 3; target achieved).

Outcomes:


                                                                                              Page 10 of 23
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   4M Mekong Int. Water Resources MGMT (P104806)



The original PDO indicator referred to preparation and implementation of the Plans which was modified to
formulation and approval of the Plans under the revised PDO indicator. The revised PDO indicator targets
were achieved. Three Joint Action Plans were formulated and approved, namely, one for Cambodia-Lao
PDR and two for Cambodia-Vietnam. The Plans were based on the underlying preparation of Joint Issues
Papers (an IR indicator) setting out the principal issues, modalities for addressing them, and arrangements for
cooperation and information sharing. Communication products were established including procedures and
guidelines for key activities including transboundary and national environmental and disaster risk
assessments; data and information sharing, water use monitoring; maintenance of flows; and water quality
monitoring. However, the original PDO indicator referred to preparation and implementation of the Plans
which was modified to formulation and approval of the Plans under the revised PDO indicator. Beyond the
Results Framework achievements, the regional component also contributed to the preparation of the IWRM-
based Basin Development Strategy which later translated into the MRC Strategic Plan and respective
national indicative plans. (ICR para. 35). These achievements contributed to establishing an IWRM approach
in the Lao PDR and other LMB countries. The ICR reports (para. 36) that the MRC is consolidating the joint
projects from the four LMB countries with finalization expected by end-2022. The Joint Transboundary Action
Plans under this regional component will be included in the consolidated Joint Implementation Plans involving
the countries concerned. (ICR para. 35).

While the Project achieved the revised target in regard to formulation and approval of Joint Action Plans, this
in itself does not achieve the outcome of improved IWRM in a regional context unless there is some
assurance in regard to implementation of the agreed actions. In this regard, the ICR (para. 36) indicates that
the Plans could not be implemented because of a lack of funds. Moreover, the ICR does not provide any
indication of the prospects for their implementation in the near future. Consequently, the ICRR rates the
efficacy of Objective 1 as Modest.




Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To improve national and subnational IWRM in the Lao Peoples' Democratic Republic.

Rationale
Theory of Change: The overall TOC was provided above under Objective 1. Regarding Objective 2, the TOC
was that, for improved IWRM at the national and subnational level in the Lao PDR, it was necessary to
improve the legal and regulatory framework; strengthen institutional capacity; and rehabilitate/upgrade critical
infrastructure and facilities, particularly in view of the added responsibility placed at the national level by the
decentralization of responsibilities following the reorganization of the MRC. The Project would provide inputs
for financing technical assistance and infrastructure/facilities improvement. These inputs would support the
carrying out of key activities including: (i) development of a new Water Resources Law (WRL); installation of
water quality and aquatic ecosystem monitoring equipment; development of water resources analytics
capabilities; strengthening of hydrological and meteorological (hydromet) services including construction of
hydromet stations, installation of early warning systems; and systems for data sharing between LMB

                                                                                                    Page 11 of 23
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   4M Mekong Int. Water Resources MGMT (P104806)



countries. The resulting outputs would include (i) strengthened regulatory frameworks; and (ii) implementation
of a comprehensive monitoring system for IWRM. These outputs would contribute to the outcomes of (i)
improved IWRM for the Lao PDR and (ii) improved river basin and fisheries management in the LMB. The
longer-term outcome would be sustainable river basin development in the LMB with associated social and
economic benefits.

The causal links and results chain in regard to Objective 2 were generally clear. To measure the achievement
of the PDOs, originally one PDO indicator and two IR indicators were used. During the 2017 restructuring,
following the decision by the GoLPDR to drop the establishment of River Basin Coordinating Committees
under the River Basin Decree, revisions were made to the original PDO indicator to drop the reference to
number of river basins and emphasize instead the number of water resource management instruments
applied by MONRE in priority basins located in the Lao PDR. Given the importance of timely and effective
forecasting for IWRM, a new PDO indicator was added regarding the number of new/upgraded hydromet
stations under the Project. The revised PDO indicators and IR indicators were relevant and appropriate. The
changes did not result in a reduction in the overall ambition of the Project.

Key assumptions were that MONRE would continue to have the financial and capacity related resources
required to effectively carry out its responsibilities.

Outputs and Intermediate Results Indicators (IRIs): (ICR Annex 1 - Results Framework and paras. 40 to
44).

Key outputs were the establishment of the following facilities:

      new and upgraded DMH hydromet stations
      national early warning center
      center for modelling development and water resources research

Following the 2017 restructuring, four IRIs were used. Achievements were as follows:

IRI 2-1: Submission of the revised Water Law to the National Assembly: (baseline - not submitted; target -
submitted; actual - submitted; target achieved). The Lao PDR National Assembly approved the revised Water
Resources Law (WRL) in May 2017. The revised WRL is aligned with international agreements relating to
natural resources protection and climate change, including the Ramsar Convention; the Paris Agreement on
Climate Change; and the Vientiane Declaration on International Cooperation. Following its adoption, several
decrees and regulations were enacted in regard to IWRM in the Lao PDR. A National Water Resources
Management Strategy is expected to be approved by the National Assembly in late 2022. (ICR para. 41).

IRI 2-2: Number of sites in priority water basins where NRERI (Natural Resouces and Environment Research
Institute) conducts water quality monitoring, and the information is applied for river basin management:
(baseline 0; target 15; actual 0; target not achieved). NRERI has conducted water quality monitoring in 21
sites located in seven priority sites in the Lao PDR and developed 33 guidelines/manuals to improve analytics
and assessments for water quality management. Water quality monitoring (WQM) is carried out four times a
year. In regard to achievement of the target, the ICR (para. 42) indicates that, although WQM is being carried
out at the targeted sites, and the generated data are being used and shared, this indicator has been
considered to be only partially achieved because, at the time, NRERI had not yet obtained the required full
ISO accreditation in regard to the specified 12 WQM parameters related to this indicator. This was


                                                                                               Page 12 of 23
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   4M Mekong Int. Water Resources MGMT (P104806)



because NRERI's planned full ISO accreditation was delayed, in part due to COVID pandemic in 2020 to
2022. As a result, the ICR conservatively reports this indicator as not being achieved (ICR para. 42).

IRI 2-3: Number of priority river basins where MONRE has applied water resource model packages: (baseline
0; target 7; actual 8, target exceeded). The packages included water modeling and water resource
assessments (WRAs) and were used in the development of River Basin Managment Plans (RBMPs) in the
selected basins. Inputs from the WRAs were used to develop 11 RBMPs. (ICR para. 41).

IRI 2-4: Number of regulations piloted at the basin level: (baseline 0; target 2; actual 2; target achieved).

PDO Indicators: (ICR Annex 1 - Results Framework and paras. 40 to 44).

PDOI 2-1: Number of water resource management instruments applied by MONRE in priority basins located
in Lao PDR: (baseline 0; target 8; actual 15; target exceeded). Resources obtained under the Additional
Financing enabled MONRE to develop 15 WRM instruments (water modeling and water resource
assessments - WRAs) and applied in priority basins in the Lao PDR. (ICR para. 41)

PDOI 2-2: Number of new or upgrade DMH hydromet stations that produce information that is applied for
water resources management: (baseline 0; target 50; actual 89; target exceeded). The increase in number of
hydromet stations was enabled by the reallocation of cost savings realized from cost savings in consultancy
contracts following the project restructuring. (ICR para. 44).

Outcomes:

The Project achieved the objective of improving IWRM at the national and subnational levels in the Lao
PDR. Targets for the two PDO indicators were exceeded. The Water Resources Law (WRL) and supporting
regulations were modified to better support IWRM activities. The capacity for producing relevant and timely
information for WRM for dealing with environmental and disaster risk was enhanced by establishing or
upgrading DMH hydromet stations; and WRM capacity was strengthened in priority river basins through
application of improved water modeling and water resources assessments. In regard to water quality
monitoring (WQM), while the monitoring activities were carried out by the designated institute (NRERI), the
target set could not be achieved as NRERI had not received the required ISO accreditation at the time.




Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
To improve river basin and fisheries management in the Lao Peoples' Democratic Republic.

Rationale
Theory of Change: The overall TOC was provided under Objective 1. Regarding Objective 3, the TOC was
that river basin and fisheries management in an integrated manner were critical for sustainable development

                                                                                                    Page 13 of 23
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   4M Mekong Int. Water Resources MGMT (P104806)



of the river basin and protection of livelihoods of the population who were highly dependent on fisheries. The
Project would provide inputs by financing for technical assistance and infrastructure improvement to support
activities including: (i) provide livelihood support to local communities; (ii) improve and upgrade fisheries; (iii)
develop documents to assist with river basin and fisheries management; (iv) develop water user associations;
and (v) restore flood protection and irrigation infrastructure. The resulting outputs would be: (i) River Basin
Plans implemented by the Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries (MAF); (ii) irrigation and flood protection
infrastructure installed and made operational; and (iii) institutional and technical capacity strengthened,
including for fisheries management. The outcome would be improved management of river basins and
fisheries. The longer-term outcome would be sustainable river basin development in the LMB.

The causal links and results chain in regard to Objective 3 were generally clear. To measure the achievement
of the PDO, originally two PDO indicators and two IR indicators were used. During project restructuring. one
more PDO indicator was added to reflect the importance of flood plain protection. Definitions of the two IR
indictors were modified for clarity. Three new IR indicators were added to measure outputs relevant to
achieving the objective. The revised PDO indicators and IR indicators were relevant and appropriate. The
changes did not result in a reduction in the overall ambition of the Project.

Outputs and Intermediate Results Indicators (IRIs): (ICR Annex 1 - Results Framework and paras. 45 to
48).

IRI 3-1: Number of farmers reached with agricultural assets and services: (baseline 0; target 126,500; actual
251,145; target exceeded). The increase in the number of farmers supported was made possible by the
additional area covered by irrigation services (six more villages than targeted).

IRI 3-2: Number of functioning irrigation Water User Associations (WUAS): (baseline 0; target 59; actual 65;
target exceeded): The ICR reports (para. 45) that the irrigation WUAs were able to improve their operations
by successfully collecting increased revenues from the users which were used for operations and
maintenance of the irrigation infrastructure. This enabled the WUAs to improve the efficiency of their
operations.

IRI 3-3: Number of people engaged in the formulation of Fisheries Management Plans (FMPs): (baseline 0;
target 165; actual 165; target achieved). To increase citizens' engagement, a total of 165 people were
involved in the preparation of Fisheries Management Plans (FMPs) for a cluster of 5 villages involving 20,000
households. To improve fisheries management, community-based fisheries was established in the Mekong
and Xe Kong Rivers, with 110,816 beneficiaries (out of the total of 251,145 beneficiaries under the
Project). (ICR para. 47).

IRI 3-4: Number of villages receiving livelihood support under the Fisheries component: (baseline 0; target
100; actual 117; target exceeded): Each village received approximately US$2,000 worth of livelihood support
in the form of supplies of livestock, poultry, farming materials, and seed. Each Fisheries Management
Committe (FMC) received materials worth approximately US$40,000 to construct small-scale infrastructure
for the community. (ICR para. 48).

IRI 3-5: Number of new or rehabilitated functioning fishery hatcheries: (baseline 0; target 4; actual 3; target
underachieved). Four hatcheries were rehabilitated under the Project of which three were functioning as of
project closing. One was completed in February 2022 and was not fully functional at project closing. (ICR
para. 48).


                                                                                                     Page 14 of 23
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               4M Mekong Int. Water Resources MGMT (P104806)



                            PDO Indicators (ICR Annex 1 - Results Framework and para. 44).

                            PDOI 3-1: Areas provided with irrigation and drainage services: (baseline 0; target 7,815 ha; actual 7,993 ha;
                            target achieved). Irrigation and flood infrastructure were improved for two river basins (XBF- Xebangfai and
                            XBH - Xebanghieng) benefiting 140,429 fishers and farmers. (ICR para. 45).

                            PDOI 3-2: Area provided with improved flood protection: (baseline 0; target 14,500 ha; actual 17,097 ha;
                            target exceeded). Targets for floodgates and irrigation schemes were exceeded, partly due to the improved
                            operations of the WUAs. (ICR para. 45).

                            PDOI 3-3: Number of functional Fisheries Management Committees (FMCs): (baseline 0; target 10; actual 12;
                            target exceeded). FMCs were set up for 12 communities, exceeding the target of 10. The MAF reported that
                            the FMCs are now managing their fisheries in accordance with the FMPs, including monitoring and reporting
                            compliance with rules and regulations. (ICR para. 47).

                            Outcomes:

                            The Project achieved its objective of improving river basin and aquatic resources management in selected
                            river basins in the Lao PDR. The adopted PDO indicator targets were achieved or exceeded in regard to:
                            (i) increasing the areas provided with improved irrigation and drainage services, and flood protection, in part
                            due to the improved working of the WUAs; (ii) strengthening fisheries and aquatic resources management
                            with the preparation of Fisheries Management Plans (FMPs) and the creation of FMCs that are carrying out
                            FMPs in line with rules and regulations; (iii) provision of livelihood support through provision of livestock and
                            materials to villages.



                            Rating
                            High


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            As discussed above, the efficacy of Objective 1 (to improve regional IWRM in the LMB) is rated Modest; the
                            efficacy of Objective 2 (to improve IWRM at the national and subnational levels in the Lao PDR) is rated
                            Substantial; and the efficacy of Objective 3 (to improve river basin and fisheries management in the Lao PDR)
                            is rated High. Based thereon, the overall efficacy of the Project is rated Substantial.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial




                                                                                                                                Page 15 of 23
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      4M Mekong Int. Water Resources MGMT (P104806)



 5. Efficiency
(Reference ICR paras. 50 to 53 and Annex 4).

Economic Efficiency

Appraisal Estimates: a cost-benefit analysis was carried out for two components: (i) irrigation and (ii)
floodgates. The economic efficiency indicators used were the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and the
Economic Net Present Value (ENPV). For the irrigation component, the estimates were ERR 37% and ENPV
US$3.4 million. At the Additional Financing, the estimates for the increased components were: ERR 29% and
ENPV US$3.79 million. For the floodgates component, the appraisal estimates were ERR 35% and ENPV
US$1.35 million and the Additional Financing estimates ERR 32% and ENPV US$1.31 million. For the two
components together, the combined ERR was 33% and the ENPV US$9.89 million. (ICR Annex 4).

Post-Completion Estimates: The ICR reports (para. 50) that the post-completion estimation was carried out in
line with the key assumptions and methodology used at appraisal. For the irrigation component, the ERR was
33% and for the floodgates component 34% with a combined ERR of 33%.

Rating: Based on the above, the Project's economic efficiency is rated Substantial.

Implementation Efficiency

Project Cost: At appraisal, the project cost was estimated at US$26.59 million. Under the Additional Financing
in 2017, the project cost was increased to US$50 million to cover cost overruns for some components and due
to the expanded scope of some activities. At project completion, the actual cost (as reported in the ICR Annex 3)
was US$48.51 million. However, there are some discrepancies in the ICR in this regard (the Data Sheet
indicates a total cost of US$50.13 million).

Project Duration: The implementation period estimated at appraisal was 70 months (5.9 years). With two
extensions of the closing date, the actual implementation period was 117 months (9.8 years). The first extension
of the closing date was to allow for completion of the activities added under the Additional Financing in 2017.
The second extension was to allow for the implementation delays caused by the COVID pandemic.

Rating: Based on the foregoing, the Project's implementation efficiency is rated Substantial.




Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)            *Coverage/Scope (%)



                                                                                                   Page 16 of 23
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      4M Mekong Int. Water Resources MGMT (P104806)



                                                                                        0
Appraisal                                                    33.00
                                                                                         Not Applicable
                                                                                        0
ICR Estimate                                                 33.00
                                                                                         Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The Project's outcome is rated on the basis of (i) Relevance of Objectives, (ii) Efficacy, and (iii) Efficiency.

As discussed in Section 3, the Relevance of Objectives is rated Substantial.

As discussed in Section 4, the Project's Efficacy is rated Substantial.

As discussed in Section 5, the Project's Efficiency is rated Substantial.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Technical risks: These are rated Moderate. While the hydromet stations in the Lao PDR have been
provided upgraded systems for timely and reliable weather forecasting, efficient maintenance and operations
of these systems will require timely and adequate funding to be provided to the agencies operating these
systems. The funding for these activities is provided through the government's budgetary resources. While
the funding has been adequate during project implementation, there is a risk that a shortage of budgetary
funds in future could lead to shortfalls in the required financing which could adversely affect the technical
efficiency of operations.

Financial Risks: These are rated Moderate. For sustaining the gains made under the Project, the institutions
and agencies (MRC, MONRE, WUAs, FMCs) responsible for implementing essential policies and facilities
will need adequate resources, financial and technical support, to carry out their functions effectively. For the
government agencies (MRC, MONRE), there is a risk that the degree of required support could be influenced
by changing political and fiscal circumstances. For the beneficiaries' agencies (WUAs, FMCs), there is a risk
that the degree of members' commitment and support could diminish unless positive results and benefits can
be maintained over time.

Institutional Risks: These are rated Moderate. Continued commitment from the key institutions and
agencies will be required for sustaining the capacity and will to carry out their functions effectively. There is a
risk that their ability to do so may be constrained by uncertainty and delays in obtaining the required financial
and technical resources.




                                                                                                        Page 17 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     4M Mekong Int. Water Resources MGMT (P104806)



Implementation Risks: These are rated Moderate. Successful implementation of the Joint Action Plans will
require continued inter-country commitment and cooperation. As reported in the ICR (para. 36), a lack of the
required funding has affected implementation of the Plans. This remains a risk in future.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  Quality-at-Entry

  (Reference ICR paras. 90 and 91).

  The strategic relevance was well-aligned, and continued to be well-aligned, with the priorities in the jointly
  agreed regional Mekong Program, the national programs of the Lao PDR, and WBG's Country
  Assistance Frameworks (CPFs) for Laos PDR. The project design was built on an adequate theory of
  change, but there were some shortcomings. The PDO was not adequately outcome-oriented, referring to
  examples of IWRM practices rather than measurable outcomes in regard to improvement of IWRM. The
  PDO Indicator regarding Joint Action Plans (JAPs) referred to preparation and implementation of the
  JAPs whereas implementation involved more than one country and was out of the purview of the Lao
  PDR alone. Some of the other PDO indicators and Intermediate Results (IRIs) lacked clarity and needed
  to be revised under the project restructurings. Implementation arrangements were adequately addressed.
  Safeguards aspects (environmental and social) ad fiduciary aspects (procurement and financial
  management) aspects were well covered. The risk assessments and mitigation measures were generally
  adequate.




  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Quality of Supervision

 (Reference ICR para. 92 and 93).

 The Bank supervision team was focused on development and was generally pro-active in identifying
 emerging or anticipated issues and seeking solutions with counterparts. However, weaknesses in the
 original PDO and associated Results Framework were not addressed until the second restructuring in 2017

                                                                                                     Page 18 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     4M Mekong Int. Water Resources MGMT (P104806)



 (five years into project implementation). The revisions and modifications carried out at the 2017
 restructuring contributed to maintaining the ambition of the Project. The team provided capacity-building
 technical assistance, through staff and consultants, to the implementing agencies including MRC and
 MONRE.

 During the implementation period of nearly 10 years, the Bank supervision team carried out a total of
 21 missions. The missions were adequately supported by specialists as required, including safeguards and
 fiduciary specialists. Implementation progress, issues, guidance, and action plans agreed with the
 counterparts were recorded in Aide Memoires and Implementation Status Reports (ISRs) which were
 regularly filed. The Back-to-Office reporting was generally candid and highlighted issues for the attention of
 the management.

 Overall, the Bank's supervision performance contributed to the Project's implementation efficiency which is
 rated Substantial (in Section 5 above).



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 (Reference ICR paras. 82 to 85).

 As designed, the Project's M&E system had some significant shortcomings which had to be addressed
 during project implementation. In The Results Framework, the formulation of the PDO was not adequately
 outcome-oriented, referring to examples of IWRM practice rather than to measurable improvements in
 IWRM. The associated PDO indicator regarding Joint Action Plans (JAPs) referred to preparation and
 implementation of the JAPs where implementation of the JAPs was beyond the purview of the Lao PDR
 alone. Some other PDO indicators and IR indicators lacked clarity and needed to be revised under the
 project restructurings.



b. M&E Implementation
  During implementation, the weaknesses in the Results Framework were addressed during the 2017
  restructuring. As discussed in Section 2 under Restructurings, some PDO indicators and IR indicators
  were revised, targets were increased, and additional indicators added to enable better assessment of
  results. The overall ambition of the Project was maintained or increased.




                                                                                                    Page 19 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     4M Mekong Int. Water Resources MGMT (P104806)




c. M&E Utilization
  The M&E system was used for monitoring implementation progress, including procurement activities.
  The information was used to flag or anticipate implementation issues that needed to be addressed in
  joint discussions between the implementing agencies and the Bank supervision team.

  Rating: M&E quality is rated Substantial with some shortcomings.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   (Reference ICR paras. 86 to 87).

   Environmental and Social Safeguards

   At appraisal, the Project was classified as Category -B, Partial Assessment. The policies triggered were
   Environmental Assessment (EA) - OP 4.01; Natural Habitats (NH) - OP 4.04; Pest Management (PM) - OP
   4.09; Indigenous Peoples - (IP) - OP 4.10; Involuntary Resettlement (IR) - OP 4.12; and Projects on
   International Waterways (PIW) - OP 7.50).

   Environmental: The Project was implemented in compliance with the World Bank's and the Lao PDR's
   policies and procedures regarding environmental, occupational health, and safety. Environmental and
   Social Management Framework (ESMF), Ethnic Group Development Framework (EGDF), and
   Compensation and Resettlement Policy Framework (CRPF) documents were prepared, disclosed, and
   publicly discussed. The ICR reports (para. 86) that there were no exceptions to the World Bank's safeguard
   policies. (ICR para. 86).

   Social: In regard to Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12), a CRPF was prepared for the Lao PDR to mitigate
   possible impacts due to small scale land acquisition, land donations, and/or resource use restrictions. The
   CRPF was successfully implemented throughout the life of the Project (ICR para. 87). Implementation of
   construction activities was carried out in compliance with the social and environmental safeguard
   guidelines. There were no outstanding grievance cases at project closing. (ICR para. 87).




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   (Reference ICR paras. 88 and 89).



                                                                                                  Page 20 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     4M Mekong Int. Water Resources MGMT (P104806)



   Financial Management: After some initial delays, financial management performance was satisfactory.
   The quarterly financial reports were submitted on time and were of satisfactory quality. Audit reports were
   issued timely, and the auditors provided clean opinions. (ICR para. 88).

   Procurement: The procurement was carried out in accordance with the Bank's guidelines and the
   provisions of the Loan Agreement. (ICR para. 89). The ICR does not report any non-compliance or mis-
   procurement issues.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   There were no significant impacts.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                   IEG
                                                                                Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Satisfactory         Satisfactory
                                                                                IEG rates Quality-at-Entry as
                                                                                Moderately Satisfactory, leading
Bank Performance                Satisfactory         Moderately Satisfactory    to the overall rating of
                                                                                Moderately Satisfactory for Bank
                                                                                performance.
Quality of M&E                  Substantial          Substantial

Quality of ICR                  ---                  Substantial


12. Lessons

(Reference ICR paras. 96 to 99).

The ICR (paras. 96 to 99) lists a number of lessons and recommendations derived from the Project's
experience. From these, IEG derives the following lessons relevant for similar projects carried out in
comparable environments.

Coordination of transboundary agendas is critical for the sustainable development of a
region. The regional agenda is critical for the Lao PDR as it sits almost entirely in the LMB and
contributes the largest flow to the lower stages of the Mekong River. Through the Mekong Program
and activities within each member country, the combination of basin-related dialogue processes,



                                                                                                  Page 21 of 23
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       4M Mekong Int. Water Resources MGMT (P104806)



underpinned by analytical work, enabled the member countries to engage in a collaborative manner,
leading to the preparation of joint action plans.

Regional outcomes in IWRM, along with a robust outcomes-based Results Framework, are
challenging to develop. The Project faced the challenge of setting outcome-based indicators with
results that would be directly attributable to project activities. Also, the achievement of some
outcomes takes time to complete after project completion, such as the ongoing implementation of
Fisheries Management Plans and River Basin Management Plans in the Lao PDR. Adequate
attention should be given in future projects to designing methodologies to address these issues.




13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is generally well-written, candid, and follows the OPCS guidelines (except with regard to length - 40
pages compared to the recommended 15 pages). The ICR provides an adequate theory of change in regard to
the causal links and the results chain. The reporting is generally outcome-focused but constrained in some
cases by weaknesses in the M&E system. The ICR provides a number of lessons that are drawn from the
Project's experience and are relevant for similar projects carried out in comparable environments. The ICR
does have some shortcomings. There are inconsistencies in the reporting of project costs and financing
between the ICR's Data Sheet and Annex 3.

Rating: Substantial with minor shortcomings.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                Page 22 of 23
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
4M Mekong Int. Water Resources MGMT (P104806)




                                                                             Page 23 of 23
