     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Gansu Rural-Urban Integration (P132775)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0023268

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                    Project Name
 P132775                                       Gansu Rural-Urban Integration

 Country                                       Practice Area(Lead)
 China                                         Transport


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)                 Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-84800                                30-Jun-2021                                          150,000,000.00

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 31-Mar-2015                               31-Dec-2021

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                       Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                             150,000,000.00                                             0.00

 Revised Commitment                              150,000,000.00                                             0.00

 Actual                                          150,000,000.00                                             0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                    ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Ranga Rajan                J. W. van Holst                Kavita Mathur                  IEGSD (Unit 4)
 Krishnamani                Pellekaan




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) as stated in the Loan Agreement (Schedule 1, page 5) and in the
   Project Appraisal Document (PAD, page 3) is:

   " To provide residents in Wuwei Municipality and Linxia Prefecture with improved connectivity
   between rural and urban areas."



                                                                                                   Page 1 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Gansu Rural-Urban Integration (P132775)




b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   There were three components (PAD, page 4).

   1. Wuwei Road Network Improvement. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$138.56 million. The
   actual cost was US$106.85 million. This component planned to rehabilitate roads in Gulang County and
   Lianngzhou District of Wuwei Municipality (including associated bridges and culverts, level-crossings,
   lighting, landscaping, road safety and drainage features). The selected roads connected to the Wuwei
   Golden Avenue (the main industrial development artery through the rural-urban integration core area).

   2. Linxia Road Network Improvement. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$73.30 million. The actual
   cost was 63.29 million. This component planned to rehabilitate roads in Linxia County of Linxia
   Prefecture (including associated bridges and culverts, level-crossings. lighting, landscaping, road safety and
   drainage features). The selected roads connected the rural villages that lacked paved road access to the
   urban spine of Linxia and two development zones.

   3. Technical Assistance (TA) and Project Management. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$4.07
   million. The actual cost was US$2.64 million. Activities in this component: (i) TA support, training and
   financing project related studies in road safety, maintenance and rural beneficiaries' support; and (ii)
   implementation support and support for monitoring and evaluation and capacity building.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project cost. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$227.48 million. The actual cost was USS183.00
   million. Over US$10.00 million of investments were dropped during implementation. The difference between
   the appraisal estimate and actual cost was due to the savings realized from competitive bidding.

   Financing. The project was financed by an IBRD loan of US$150.00 million. The loan was fully disbursed.

   Borrower contribution. The Borrower contribution of US$77.48 million was planned at appraisal. The
   actual contribution was less than planned at US$33.00 million.

   Dates. The project was approved on March 31, 2015, became effective on August 14, 2015, and scheduled
   to close on June 30, 2021. The project closed six months behind schedule on December 31, 2021.

   Other changes. There were two Level 2 restructurings.

   The main changes made through the first restructuring on October 12, 2018 are as follows:

         Project activities were modified. The original design envisioned rehabilitating nine road sections in
          Wuwevi. Part of the planned Wuwevi's A 7 section road overlapped with a parallel road development

                                                                                                    Page 2 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Gansu Rural-Urban Integration (P132775)



          project for the Gansu International Inland Port Zone. Hence this activity was dropped. The Gansu
          Province constructed the A 9 section road outside the project and hence this activity was dropped.
          Dropping these sections resulted in a loan saving of US$4.4 million.
         The design for Linxia Prefecture envisioned rehabilitating five road sections. Part of Linxia's B 5 road
          overlapped with the newly proposed Yongda Highway Project. This activity was dropped, and
          removal of this activity resulted in a loan saving of US$6.4 million.
         The road sections that were dropped in Wuwei municipality and Linxia prefecture were replaced with
          three other road sections with Bank approval.
         The results framework was modified in accordance with the changes listed above.

   The main changes made through the second restructuring on June 17, 2021:

         The activity of rehabilitating the road section from Golden Avenue to Huangyang Town Road (A 5)
          was dropped due to the high cost of resettlement for the wider right of way called for in the updated
          Wuwei Master Plan and replaced with three other roads in Wuwei.
         A new PDO indicator, " the number of jobs that the project roads connected to urban and rural
          residents in Wuwei and Linxia " was added to measure the scope of the project's impact to
          improving access to employment opportunities.

   The closing date was extended by six months from June 30, 2021 to December 31, 2021 for completing the
   ongoing activities that were delayed due to factors such as land acquisition and resettlement delays and
   restrictions imposed in the wake of the COVID - 19 pandemic.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country context. Decades of rapid albeit uneven economic growth led to large economic disparities in
China. The gains of economic development accrued mainly to coastal and urban areas, while the rural and
inland areas in the western region lagged behind. Reducing economic disparities and integrating rural
population into more economic productive urban clusters through connecting rural and urban areas was an
important part of the national development strategy. The project areas were in the Wuwei Municipality and
Linxia Prefecture in Gansu province in western China. Gansu province was the second poorest of China's
31 provinces in 2014. Its development was hampered due to the lack of all-weather roads connecting the
provinces' disparate towns and villages. Wuwei Municipality and Linxia Prefecture in the Gansu province
were areas with high incidence of poverty, large minority populations and greater potential for rural-urban
migration. Both areas lacked funding for road development and had gaps in institutional capacities for
managing road safety and road maintenance.

Government strategy. The National 12th Five Year Plan (FYP) of Transport Development for 2011 - 2016
emphasized development of China's western region. This plan and the Gansu province's 12th FYP
highlighted the need rehabilitating rural road 'support infrastructure' (such as bridges, drainage and road
facilities that mitigated climate and safety risks) and rehabilitating roads for promoting rural-urban migration.
Specifically, the plans underscored the need for improving: (i) road maintenance; (ii) road safety; and (iii)


                                                                                                       Page 3 of 14
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Gansu Rural-Urban Integration (P132775)



               sustainable transportation. Promoting rural-urban integration through project interventions remains relevant
               to China's 14th FYP for 2021 - 2026.

               The Wuwei Municipality's Urban - Rural Integration and Development of Core Area Master Plan aimed to
               develop core areas along the Wuwei Golden Avenue through (i) balancing urban and rural development
               through improving linkages between rural and urban areas; and (ii) improving livelihood opportunities to the
               rural population. The Linxia County's 12th Five Year Plan emphasized the need for rural-urban integration
               through developing all season roads and "last mile" connections from isolated villages to the two urban
               centers of Linxia's urban core and agro-processing districts.

               Bank strategy. The PDO was well-aligned with the Bank assistance strategy in China. At appraisal, the
               Strategic theme two of the Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for 2013 - 2016 articulated the need for
               "promoting more inclusive development " including through increasing rural residents' access to
               employment, social services and markets. The Bank's current Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for
               2020 - 2025 shifted priorities in Bank's engagement with China. China had achieved two of the three IBRD
               graduation criteria in 2016: (i) it reached the Graduation Discussion Income (GDI) threshold; and (ii) it had
               reasonable access to external capital markets. The current CPF focused on addressing " the remaining
               gaps in demonstration of best practices' pertaining to policies for sustainability, green development and low-
               carbon transport and cities. Also, when this project was implemented, due to the success of the previous
               two five-year rural road construction campaigns, almost all rural households in China living near urban
               areas had access to all-season paved roads.

               Previous Bank experience. The Bank assisted in the financing of several road projects in China including
               through the Guiyang Transport Project (GTP) which closed in December 2013. As in the previous project,
               the design included road rehabilitation and institutional strengthening activities. Although the poverty-
               alleviation needs of the key stakeholders (Gansu Province and local governments) was less relevant to the
               Bank's current CPF, the PDO was relevant to the CPF's focus on policies for sustainable
               development. Therefore, this review rates the relevance of the PDO as Substantial.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To provide residents in Wuwei Municipality and Linxia Prefecture with improved connectivity between rural
                             and urban areas

                             Rationale
                             Theory of change. Rehabilitating roads connecting rural and urban areas with climate resilient designs,
                             support facilities and road safety features in Wuwei and Linxia were likely to aid in improving connectivity. The

                                                                                                                                Page 4 of 14
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Gansu Rural-Urban Integration (P132775)



outcome was likely to be reinforced by the institutional strengthening activities (preparing road maintenance
plans and training respective agencies on road safety). The combination of these activities was likely to
contribute to the long-term development outcomes of: (i) helping rural residents access to employment in
urban areas; (ii) enable farmers to move products to emerging agricultural processing centers and final
markets; and (iii) encourage development of new processing and manufacturing clusters. The causal links
between activities, outputs and outcomes were logical and the outcomes were monitorable. The theory of
change assumes the following: (i) availability of counterpart funding; (ii) adequate capacities of the public
entities; and (iii) the public entities are committed to adopting road safety practices.

Outputs (ICR, pages 14 and 17).

      78.2 kilometers (km) of roads were rehabilitated in Wuwei, exceeding the original and achieving the
         revised targets of 63.4 km and 78.2 km respectively. The roads linked rural areas to Golden Avenue
         and other arterials identified in the Wuwei Rural-Urban Integration Master Plan. A 120 - meter bridge
         was constructed for connecting the County seat and one of the three major arterial roads in the
         country. 26.9 km of rural roads were constructed. There were no targets for this indicator.
        47.8 km of roads were rehabilitated in Linxia, nearly achieving the target of 47.9 km. These roads
         connected the rural agricultural areas to the two urban core areas of Linxia and two agro - processing
         districts.
        The long-term road maintenance strategies were prepared as targeted in Wuwei and
         Linxia. Liangzhou piloted the recommended rural road maintenance technology on its roads.
        370 solar greenhouses were constructed along the rural roads. There were no targets for this
         indicator.
        A total of 585 people from the transport bureaus and PIUs were trained under the project in the areas
         of project management, sustainable road maintenance, road safety, and support for rural
         beneficiaries. This exceeded the target of 535. In Linxia county around 255 local individuals were
         involved in road construction (including 69 women).
        126 China Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) assessments were completed with road safety
         recommendations as targeted. Post-construction recommendations were implemented by Wuwei and
         Linxia governments using their own resources.
        The transport bureau staff in both places were trained on road safety inspections. There were no
         targets for this indicator.
        Transport bureaus in both places implemented additional road safety activities such as rumple strips
         for speed reduction, improved road signage and traffic signals to improve the road condition for users,
         and road safety enforcement.
        According to the data provided by the implementing agencies, rural incomes grew by at least 75% in
         Gulang and Linxia counties during years of implementation. The ICR notes that though rural incomes
         grew more slowly than urban incomes in the three years before project implementation (2013 - 2015),
         they grew faster than urban incomes from 2015 - 2020. While the growth in rural income cannot be
         fully attributed to the project activities, because of the pervasive nature of road infrastructure
         investments, it is reasonable to conclude that project activities contributed to increasing rural incomes
         in the project areas.
        The final works for Gulang road A 12 were delayed pending transfer of title to a narrow strip of open
         land at the edge of the planned right of way. The ICR (paragraph 63) notes that the land transfer is
         expected to be completed before June 2023.



                                                                                                    Page 5 of 14
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Gansu Rural-Urban Integration (P132775)



                            Outcomes (ICR, page 17).

                            The outputs described above were expected to result in the following outcomes: (i) increase the share of
                            population with access to an all-season road; (ii) increase travel time savings on the selected key project
                            roads; and (iii) increase the number of jobs available to urban and rural residents in Wuwei and Linxia.

                                  84% of the rural population had access to an all-season road in Wuwei and Linxia when the project
                                     closed in 2021, as compared to 65% at the baseline in 2014. This exceeded both the original and
                                     revised targets of 78% and 83% respectively.
                                    1,580,557 rural people, according to the ICR, had gained access to an all-season climate-resilient
                                     roads in Wuwei and Linxia when the project closed, exceeding the original and revised targets of
                                     1,166,069 and 1,510,000 respectively. This included 47,500 rural residents in Linxia who had access
                                     to an all-season road for the first time. 84% of rural women had access to an all-season road when the
                                     project closed, exceeding the original and revised targets of 78% and 83% respectively.
                                    According to the ICR, 264,057 residents of rural villages or townships directly benefitted from project
                                     roads as per the revised target and exceeding the original target of 167,956.
                                    Average travel time in the project-intervened areas decreased by 47%, exceeding the original and
                                     revised targets of 39% and 38% respectively.
                                    The project-intervened roads were recorded as responsible for 8,403 jobs exceeding the target of
                                     8,000. According to the clarifications provided by the Bank project team, the methodology followed for
                                     monitoring this indicator was as follows: both the Wuwei and Linxia Project Management Offices
                                     (PMOs) made a list of all businesses, factories and enterprises that the completed project roads
                                     directly connected to and requested the businesses to report the number of active jobs (positions)
                                     they were providing before and after the road improvements. This indicator was then calculated by
                                     summing up the number of additional jobs provided by all the businesses on the list.

                            The efficacy with which the project's objective was achieved is rated by this review as substantial, given that
                            most of the expected outcomes were realized or exceeded. However, while the indicators measured the
                            extent to which the project aided in enabling people reach employment centers, there were no indicators
                            intended to measure the extent to which the project aided in helping the farmers to move products to
                            emerging processing centers and final markets. On the other hand, this area of support to farmers was not
                            part of the project's stated objective.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Overall, the efficacy with which the project's objective was achieved is rated substantial because of the
                            evidence that all the intended project outcomes were achieved.



                                                                                                                               Page 6 of 14
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Gansu Rural-Urban Integration (P132775)




  Overall Efficacy Rating
  Substantial



 5. Efficiency
Economic analysis. Ex-ante and ex-post cost-benefit analyses were conducted for road improvements in
Wuwei and Linxia. Road improvement activities activities accounted for 98% of the actual total cost. The
benefits were assumed to come from reduction in vehicle operating costs, travel time savings, reduction in
accidents and fatalities, expanded market access for rural producers and reduced transportation costs for
agricultural goods. The ex-post Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR) was 13.9%. The ex-post EIRR,
although higher than the opportunity cost of capital at 12%, was slightly lower than the ex-ante EIRR of 16%,
partly due to the lower than expected traffic volumes in the wake of the restrictions imposed due to the COVID-
19 pandemic.

Savings. Savings of US$28.00 million were realized during implementation due to competitive bidding. The
average award price for civil works was 13% lower than the appraisal estimate. This aided in completing the
project activities with the Bank loan and therefore counterpart funding was lower than planned at appraisal.

Administrative and operational issues. There were some delays during the initial years such as, delays in
counterpart funding, land acquisition and resettlement. These were resolved and all the planned activities were
completed, despite the delays due to the restrictions in the wake of the COVID - 19 pandemic, with a six-month
extension of the project closing date.

In sum, the efficiency with which the project was implemented is rated as substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                    98.00
 Appraisal                                                 16.00
                                                                                     Not Applicable
                                                                                    98.00
 ICR Estimate                                              13.90
                                                                                     Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome


                                                                                                   Page 7 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Gansu Rural-Urban Integration (P132775)




Relevance of the PDO to the Government strategy and the current Bank strategy is rated as substantial. Both
efficacy and efficiency are also rated substantial. This review concluded that there were only minor
shortcomings in the project's achievement of its objectives. The project's overall outcome is therefore rated
satisfactory


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Government commitment. There is a modest risk to the sustainability of the development outcomes as they
could be undermined due to inadequate road maintenance and axle load enforcement. The ICR (paragraph
86) notes that both Wuvei and Linxia have adopted rural maintenance plans developed under the project and
that their transport bureaus have adequate resources for financing road maintenance activities. However,
axle load protocols are yet to be resolved.

Economic risk. There is modest risk that the development outcome could be undermined due to the slower
than expected job growth in industrial parks and other employment centers in the project intervened areas




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The appraisal document prepared by the Bank for this project was based on the experiences from the
  previous Bank-financed Guiyang Transport Project. Lessons incorporated at design included: (i) placing
  the responsibility for contract management in the hands of a Project Management Office (PMO) as
  opposed to hiring an external agency; (ii) conducting a fiscal sustainability analysis at appraisal to confirm
  availability of counterpart funding; (iii) activities associated with developing low cost transit services (such
  as through bus stops and stations) were excluded, as the experience from the previous Bank-financed
  project showed that these services were not well-utilized in the short term; and (iv) financing a study on
  community-based maintenance schemes (PAD, paragraphs 27 - 29). The selection of roads to be
  rehabilitated in the two project areas were based on the priority roads identified in their respective plans.

  The implementation arrangements were simple and appropriate. They included: (i) the Gansu Provincial
  Project Coordination Office (PCO) established under the Provincial Foreign Loan Office of the Gansu
  Provincial Finance Department was responsible for overall project coordination; and (ii) the Wuwei
  Municipality and Linxia County were separately responsible for implementing their project components
  (PAD, paragraphs 32 and 33).

  The preparation team had identified risks at appraisal including risks due to weak implementation
  capacity, counterpart funding delays, and design risk. Mitigation measures included, training staff,
  reducing the project size from the original proposal to reduce counterpart funding and Bank review of the

                                                                                                        Page 8 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Gansu Rural-Urban Integration (P132775)



  engineering designs of roads and bridges prior to bidding. Even with mitigation measures the
  implementation risk was rated as substantial (PAD, paragraph 37). Appropriate arrangements were
  made at appraisal for the application safeguards and fiduciary compliance (discussed in sections 9 and
  10).

  There were shortcomings in Quality-at-Entry. The project preparation team underestimated the
  challenges associated with counterpart funding and counterpart funding was less than planned. There
  were also significant shortcomings in M&E design (to be discussed in section 9).

  Overall, this review concluded that there were moderate shortcomings in Quality-at-Entry and therefore
  rated it as moderately satisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Thirteen Implementation Status Results (ISR) Reports were filed over the project lifetime of seven years.
 implying on average twice a year supervision mission. Proactive support provided by the team facilitated
 project implementation and due diligence by the task team ensured selection of high-impact roads that
 were added during implementation. The Bank project team proposed an appropriate PDO indicator to
 measure accessibility to jobs on the project roads. The support provided by the supervision team aided in
 safeguards and fiduciary compliance (discussed in section 10). According to the clarification provided to
 IEG by the Bank team, the continuity of leadership was maintained, with two Task Team Leaders (TTLs)
 during the project lifetime.

 As discussed above, during supervision the government with support from the Bank designed a new
 indicator to measure efficacy which confirmed the project's success in creating additional employment.

 The quality of supervision was satisfactory.

 In sum, overall Bank Performance is rated as moderately satisfactory, due to the shortcomings in
 Quality-at-Entry.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization



                                                                                                  Page 9 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Gansu Rural-Urban Integration (P132775)



a. M&E Design
 The results framework was logical and the key outcome indicators measured the following: one, the
 number of people who benefitted from improved connectivity between urban and rural areas to reach
 employment centers, and two, the extent to which the beneficiaries benefitted from improved connectivity
 due to the average reduction in travel time between urban and rural areas in the project-intervened areas.

 There were however M&E design shortcomings. Some indicators were difficult to measure. For travel time
 savings, the M&E design in the PAD aimed to use the Rural Accessibility Index (RAI) (defined as road
 access within two km distance to an all-season road). However, according to the clarifications provided by
 the team, RAI is a standard indicator that is best suited to uniform rural areas with minimum transport
 infrastructure where a project aims to provide the most basic level of road access and hence reduced travel
 time for the transport of agricultural products to markets. This indicator was less relevant for this project, as
 the project was intended to focus on helping residents living in rural villages to both facilitate the marketing
 of agricultural products and to access jobs in urban areas. The Bank project team also clarified that
 because access to urban employment was time sensitive, the project aimed for a higher level of road
 access than the RAI. The Bank hence proposed an improved indicator for this project (the number of jobs
 directly created on project roads for both urban and rural residents). On the other hand, there were no
 indicators for measuring the access by rural people to product and labor markets, although access to these
 markets were not explicitly part pf the project's stated PDO.

 The Project Management Units (PMOs) at the Wuwei Municipality and Linxia Prefecture were responsible
 for collecting data for monitoring project performance with their respective transport bureau staff. The data
 collected were however related to employment generated and not ease of access for the rural population to
 the agricultural product or labor market. Given that project activities included road safety features, there
 was no indicator aimed to measure road safety features (such as the through measuring the trends in
 accidents and fatalities on the project-intervened areas during implementation).



b. M&E Implementation
  The RAI methodology used during preparation of the PAD was too complex for the implementing
  agencies in Gansu province, as they did not have Geographic Information System (GIS) processing
  capabilities normally used to calculate the RAI (ICR para 68). The RAI methodology was modified
  through the 2018 project restructuring. The revision entailed tabulation of RAI at the village (rather than
  the household level). The ICR notes that while this approach was adequate because the village clusters
  were generally compact, the new approach was implemented poorly. As a result, RAI outcomes could not
  be verified for Wuwei Municipality. It is also not clear why the supervision did not develop some
  quantitative data on the bus services (discussed in section 10).

  The M&E was able to estimate the impact of the project on employment, but it was not able to estimate
  the impact of the project on access by rural people to product and labor markets through the improved
  roads.



c. M&E Utilization



                                                                                                      Page 10 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Gansu Rural-Urban Integration (P132775)



  The ICR (paragraph 69) noted that there was little utilization of M&E data due to the limited capabilities
  of the transport bureaus for spatial analyses in Wuvei and Linxia. The project could have benefitted
  through simpler analysis, given the limited technical capacities of the implementing agencies.

  In sum, overall M&E is rated modest, in view of the shortcomings in M&E design, implementation and
  utilization.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as a Category A (Full Assessment) project under the World Bank safeguard
   policies. Five safeguard policies were triggered at appraisal; Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01);
   Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04); Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11); Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP
   4.10); and Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12). (PAD Data Sheet).

   Environmental Assessment, Natural Habitats and Physical Cultural Resources. Most
   adverse environmental impacts were related to road and bridge construction activities (such as dust,
   erosion, occupational health and safety and traffic) and operation phase concerns (such as vehicle noise
   and emission and potential chemical leakage). These impacts were assessed to be limited, temporary and
   site-specific. The safeguards on Physical Cultural Resources was triggered as ten mosques and a Taoist
   temple were identified in the vicinity of four of the project's rural roads in Linxia. The safeguards on Natural
   Habitats was triggered as a precaution as soil erosion caused by construction could affect the Daxia River
   in Linxia. The Wuwei Municipality and the Linxia Prefecture prepared and publicly disclosed Environmental
   and Social Management Plans (ESMPs) at appraisal to address these safeguards. There was compliance
   with these safeguards and hence there were no outstanding issues with environmental safeguards or
   issues with Physical Cultural Resources and natural habitats at project closure (ICR, paragraph 76).

   Indigenous Peoples and Involuntary Resettlement. An Ethnic Minority Development Plan (EMDP) was
   prepared and publicly disclosed at appraisal to ensure that the project activities benefit the ethnic minorities.
   The project involved land acquisition and resettlement. The Wuwei Municipality and Linxia Prefecture
   publicly-disclosed their respective resettlement action plans at appraisal. All resettlement issues were
   resolved, and the Project-Affected Persons (PAPs) were compensated by project closure (ICR, paragraphs
   72 and 73). Resettlement impacts declined significantly due to the reduction in new urban road construction.
   Land acquisition declined by 35% (from 157 to 102 hectares), the number of affected rural families
   decreased by 32% (from 2,662 to 1,806). 48 rural families (210 persons) were relocated. Both Wuwei and
   Linxia maintained grievance redress mechanisms during implementation. There was full compliance and
   hence no issues with the safeguards on indigenous peoples when the project closed.




b. Fiduciary Compliance

                                                                                                     Page 11 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Gansu Rural-Urban Integration (P132775)



   Financial Management. The PMO in Linxia and the PIU in Wuwei, were responsible for financial
   management. The Bank conducted an assessment of their financial management arrangements at
   appraisal. The assessment identified their lack of experience in managing Bank projects. The mitigation
   measures incorporated at design included, developing financial management manuals by Wuwei and
   Linxia and training staff. The ICR (paragraph 79) notes that financial management was adequate during
   implementation. There were no significant issues, and the financial audits were unqualified.

   Procurement. The Bank conducted a procurement assessment at appraisal. Neither the Linxia county
   PMO nor the Wuwei municipality PIU had ever executed Bank projects. The mitigation measures at design
   included, recruiting a qualified procurement agent with experience in Bank projects, developing a
   procurement manual and training staff (PAD, paragraph 52). The ICR (paragraph 77) notes that
   procurement management was satisfactory.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   One unintended impact following the execution of road works was the expansion of public transit bus
   services in rural areas (ICR, paragraph 47). The ICR notes that at appraisal public transit facilities was not
   included in the project financing due to uncertainty about whether transit services would emerge.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Satisfactory           Satisfactory
                                                                                  There were shortcomings in the
Bank Performance                Satisfactory           Moderately Satisfactory
                                                                                  Quality-at-Entry.
Quality of M&E                  Modest                 Modest

Quality of ICR                  ---                    Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR draws the following lessons from the experience of implementing this project, with some
adaptation of language.

1. A simple and flexible project design that reflects a country's priorities helps in addressing
challenges during implementation. The roads selected in this project were based on the priorities
identified in the Wuwei and Linxia plans. Having the selection criteria established in the PAD as



                                                                                                    Page 12 of 14
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Gansu Rural-Urban Integration (P132775)



opposed to fixed selection of roads provided the governments with flexibility to select interventions
during implementation while adjusting to changing circumstances.

2. A careful consideration of environmental and social risks is particularly needed in road
projects. In this project, the implementing agencies took steps to reduce resettlement impacts and
consulted with the Project Affected Persons to refine road alignments to reduce overall project risks.
These risks were lowered further by prioritizing roads with lower environmental and social impacts.

3. The project underscored the importance of capacity building activities. The experience of
this project demonstrated that even in countries with very well-developed institutional capabilities
such as China, technical and management capacity can vary across levels of government, agencies
and jurisdictions. For example, technical capacity of the local transport bureaus was limited at the
county-level in Gansu and the project responded to addressing the institutional capacity gaps in a
targeted manner.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is well-written and clear for the most part. The theory of change articulated in the text shows clear
causal links between project activities, outputs and outcomes and clearly states the assumptions behind the
theory of change. The ICR provides ample adequate analytical evidence to assess the project outcomes, is
results oriented and consistent. The ICR's lessons are clear, useful, and based on evidence outlined in the
ICR. The photographs provided in pages 15 - 16 and pages 50 - 51 help the reader to visualize the changes
made through the project's activities. The ICR for the most part adheres to the recommended length. However,
there were some shortcomings in the completeness of information on Monitoring and Evaluation.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                   Page 13 of 14
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
Gansu Rural-Urban Integration (P132775)




                                                                       Page 14 of 14
