     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BIH Employment Support Program (P152347)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0023269

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P152347                                    BIH Employment Support Program

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Bosnia and Herzegovina                     Social Protection & Jobs


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-86870                                 01-Oct-2021                                          55,699,539.61

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 05-Jan-2017                                01-Apr-2022

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            55,800,000.00                                                0.00

 Revised Commitment                             55,800,000.00                                                0.00

 Actual                                         55,699,539.61                                                0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Judyth L. Twigg             Eduardo Fernandez            Eduardo Fernandez               IEGHC (Unit 2)
                             Maldonado                    Maldonado




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The project's objective, as stated in the Loan Agreement (p. 6), was "to increase formal private sector
   employment among targeted groups of registered job seekers."

   Although one outcome target (job placements for job seekers from disadvantaged groups) was revised
   downward at a September 2020 restructuring, a new comparably-sized group of beneficiaries was added (job



                                                                                                    Page 1 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BIH Employment Support Program (P152347)



   seekers who became economically vulnerable due to the COVID-19 pandemic), such that the scope of the
   project was not changed. A split rating methodology is therefore not warranted.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  21-Sep-2020

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project consisted of two components:

   1. Support for Employment Promotion (International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, IBRD at
   appraisal: EUR 46.4 million; actual: EUR 48.12 million) was to help the government scale up and increase
   the effectiveness and efficiency of its active labor market programs (ALMPs) and job intermediation to help
   improve labor market outcomes. Funds allocated under this component were to be disbursed upon
   achievement of agreed results to be measured by disbursement-linked indicators (DLIs). It contained two
   subcomponents:

         Employment Promotion through Improved ALMPs was to finance a package of financial incentives
          directed at job seekers and employers, accompanied by contractual obligations and co-
          responsibilities to ensure financing of medium-term productive jobs in the formal private sector.
          These measures were to include targeted wage subsidies, on-the-job training, and self-employment
          programs. The programs to be funded each year were to change based on learning and results from
          previous years. Target groups were to include youth, long-term unemployed, those with low skills,
          individuals above 40 years of age, and members of disadvantaged groups. All ALMPs were to be
          co-financed 50/50 from general entity government revenues.
         Employment Promotion through Improved Job Intermediation was to finance improved employment
          services for job seekers and employers. Services for job seekers were to include improved
          methodologies for the intake/registration of newly unemployed persons, categorization of job
          seekers by risk of falling into long-term unemployment, and tailored counseling to clearly identify and
          focus resources on the job seekers most in need of support. Services for employers were to
          consist of development of new employer outreach methodologies, local skills needs
          surveys/interviews with employers, promotion of online services to increase the number of registered
          vacancies with the employment services, and facilitation of vacancy opening and filling by providing
          tailored human resource services to employers. These activities were to be financed through a
          combination of government funds and a small portion of the loan (specified in the Project Appraisal
          Document, PAD, Table 3).



                                                                                                    Page 2 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BIH Employment Support Program (P152347)



   2. Support for Management Systems, Monitoring, and Communications (IBRD at appraisal: EUR 1.8
   million; actual: EUR 0.51 million) was to support effective monitoring of the project, providing financing for
   strengthening management systems to monitor ALMPs and employment services as well as development
   and implementation of an effective communications strategy targeting job seekers, employers, policy
   makers, and the overall population. Through traditional investment lending mechanisms, it was to finance
   enhancements of information technology systems to allow data exchange and monitoring among relevant
   institutions; creation and implementation of a communications and outreach strategy; and process and
   impact evaluations of selected programs. As with the first component, these activities were to be financed
   through a combination of government funds and the loan.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   The project was approved on January 5, 2017, became effective on January 26, 2018, underwent a mid-
   term review in December 2019, and closed on April 1, 2022, six months later than its original closing date of
   October 1, 2021.

   The total planned project cost was EUR 87.3 million (US$97.2 million). It was to be financed by an IBRD
   loan of EUR 50 million (US$55.8 million), of which EUR 21 million was allocated to the Republika Srpska
   (RS) and EUR 29 million to the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina (FBH). EUR 1.8 million of the Bank
   loan was initially unallocated, to be used for any unforeseen expenditures. EUR 1.33 million was
   undisbursed at project closure because of failure to achieve one DLI target in the RS. Actual Bank financing
   was US$55.7 million. Government funding, planned at EUR 37.3 million (EUR 16 million from RS, and EUR
   21.3 million from FBH), was fully provided.

   The project was restructured twice. On September 21, 2020, the outcome/DLI target for increased job
   placement through ALMPs in RS was revised downward. Funds were allocated from the unallocated
   amount and across components to support benefits for 6,500 registered job seekers who became
   unemployed during the COVID-19 pandemic lockdown period (March-September 2020), and a new DLI was
   added to reflect support for those beneficiaries. On June 30, 2021, the closing date was extended to allow
   time for completion of activities following pandemic-related delays.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) is a small, upper middle-income country with a complex governance
structure comprising two autonomous and diverse entities: the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina
(FBH) and the Republika Srpska (RS). High unemployment and inactivity rates challenged both entity
governments' ability to reduce poverty. In 2015, 27.7 percent of the adult population (ages 15 and older)
was unemployed, one of the highest unemployment rates in the region. An even larger share of the adult
population -- 56.3 percent -- was inactive, neither working nor looking for work. Almost 44 percent of the
unemployed had not been able to find a job for more than five years. Only 31.9 percent of the
adult population was employed. According to the PAD (p. 1), only 12 percent of the employed were poor,
compared to 22 percent of the unemployed. Moreover, a higher share of the bottom 40 percent income
group who were employed had temporary jobs or no contracts, and they were much more likely to be in

                                                                                                      Page 3 of 14
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      BIH Employment Support Program (P152347)



               occupations and sectors of activity that rely on unskilled labor. Overall, the poor had difficulty getting and
               keeping formal jobs.

               In 2015, the BiH Council of Ministers and the governments of the RS and FBH officially adopted a reform
               agenda that recognized the importance of addressing high unemployment. It set out a wide range of policy
               reforms related to employment issues: improving the enabling environment for existing and new
               businesses; delinking health benefits from unemployment registration to reduce the incentives for informal
               work; making secondary, tertiary, and adult education curricula more responsive to the needs of the private
               sector; restructuring or selling state-owned enterprises (SOEs) to increase productivity and private sector
               job creation in those sectors; and reforming social assistance programs to encourage work. As a key
               element of social assistance program reform, it was recognized that the institutional capacity of public
               employment services (PES) needed to be strengthened so that they could effectively intermediate labor
               demand and labor supply. Having strong PES and active labor market programs (ALMPs) was seen as
               critical for supporting the overall reform agenda, especially as they would serve as tools to mitigate potential
               adverse effects on employment of other pending reforms.

               Prior to the project, qualified employment counselors and administrative staff were stretched thin, and
               services were almost exclusively offered in person with little use of electronic platforms or automation.
               Twice as many people were registered as unemployed than the actual number of unemployed -- with many
               people registering primarily to obtain free benefits -- creating a significant administrative burden on the PES
               that hindered their focus on real job seekers. A 2014 analysis of the functionality of the PES in the FBH
               showed that staff of those agencies spent about 70 percent of their time on administrative tasks rather than
               on direct employment support. There was wide divergence in the capacity of local offices. Coverage and
               targeting of ALMPs was low and ineffective, and monitoring and evaluation (M&E) was almost nonexistent.
               The project responded to this country context and government policy by seeking to improve employment
               outcomes through increasing the effectiveness and scale of ALMPs and upgrading the job intermediation
               services provided by the PES.

               The project's objectives were also highly aligned with the Bank's Country Partnership Framework at
               appraisal (CPF, FY2016-FY2020), which contained focus areas on creating conditions for accelerated
               private sector growth and increasing public sector efficiency and effectiveness. Specifically, the project
               supported CPF Objective 1c, Improve Public Service Delivery, by supporting enhanced PES capacity to
               respond in a timely and adequate manner to redundancies resulting from SOE reform, and Objective 2b,
               Improve Labor Market Flexibility and Social Protection, by making the country's labor market more agile in
               hiring and supporting people who were hard to employ. The project remains relevant to the current
               CPF (FY2023-2027), particularly its second objective on increased inclusive market-relevant employability,
               under its first higher-level outcome, increased inclusive private sector employment.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                                                                                                                      Page 4 of 14
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BIH Employment Support Program (P152347)




OBJECTIVE 1
Objective
Increase formal private sector employment among targeted groups of registered job seekers

Rationale
The theory of change for this objective held that the project's interventions would reduce labor market frictions
stemming from high search costs, supporting job seekers to transition into formal employment more quickly
and firms to find hires more quickly. For ALMPs, expanded coverage, better targeting of vulnerable groups,
and development of an online job portal would plausibly lead to better and faster matches between job
seekers and employers, ultimately increasing the number of registered job seekers placed in jobs. Production
of an annual report on monitoring of ALMPs, which would provide recommendations on how to improve
program design, would lead to redesigned programs based on those recommendations, improving the quality
of ALMPs and their capacity for job placement. For intermediation, developing of a profiling methodology and
employer outreach methodology, training of counselors, conducting of client satisfaction surveys, and
expanded vacancy canvassing would plausibly lead to increases in the number and quality of employer
contracts, the number of collected vacancies, the number of job seekers in need of PES support with a risk
profile, and the number of collected vacancies filled with registered job seekers, ultimately increasing the
number of registered job seekers de-registering because they found a formal job. The results chains for both
ALMPs and PES assumed that adequate and effective investments would be made in technical assistance
and information technology.

Achievement of the project's objectives was measured by three outcome indicators and five DLIs linked to the
two results areas of increased formal private sector job placements through improved ALMPs and increased
formal private sector job placements through improved intermediation.



Outputs

The Federation Employment Institute in the FBH issued 42 public calls, and the Employment Bureau of the
RS issued four public calls, enabling participation of 12,971 firms in the real sector.

A new rulebook of cantonal employment services was adopted in the FBH, along with a new rulebook for
employment service staff in the RS, meeting the target (DLI 3.1). 30,635 job seekers in need of support in the
FBH, and 27,000 in the RS, were profiled and had an individual action plan (IAP) reflected in the PES
database, exceeding the respective targets of 30,000 and 20,000 job seekers (DLI 3.3). A job seeker self-
assessment was introduced, meeting the target. The number of vacancies collected increased by 10.63
percent in the FBH and by 10 percent in the RS, meeting or exceeding the target of 10 percent (DLI 3.3).
Successful matches increased by 21 percent from 2017 to project closure in the FBH, and by 15 percent in
the RS, meeting or exceeding the target of 15 percent (DLI 3.5). IAPs were a key instrument in employment
intermediation; at least twice annually, an evaluation of completed IAPs was conducted to facilitate
understanding of job seeker needs and optimal means of support.

A total of four annual reports were completed to monitor programs according to various subgroups (age,
gender, long-term unemployed, branch office), providing recommendations for improving program design and
targeting (DLI 4). Four programs were redesigned on the basis of these recommendations, meeting the target
(DLI 2). The PES adopted new methodologies to analyze labor market data to better understand employer

                                                                                                   Page 5 of 14
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BIH Employment Support Program (P152347)



needs and labor market demand, and then made corresponding changes to the ALMP menu in order to
increase job placements. Entrepreneurship training was introduced, clearer criteria for target groups were
defined to reduce overlaps, and experience sharing was facilitated between ALMP designers and job
counselors. Wage subsidy amounts were increased for women, long-term unemployed, and low-skilled
persons to additionally support employment of targeted beneficiary groups. Information technology systems
were developed and enhanced for job counseling, profiling, on-line matching, and communication processes.

PES and ALMP information management and job portal systems were upgraded, reducing administrative
burdens, making data more available and consistent, and disaggregating beneficiary data by gender,
educational background, residency, and other characteristics. PES systems are now connected with the Tax
Administration system, enabling employment institutions to check employers' suitability for participation in
public calls and apply any needed corrective measures.

The satisfaction level of job seekers accessing PES support reached 90 percent in 2020, exceeding the target
of 81 percent. No baseline was provided.



Intermediate outcomes

The cost per job created by the program 12 months after completion for youth and disadvantaged people
decreased from EUR 3,000 to EUR 2,016.35, achieving the target of any decrease.

Unemployment benefit payments were made during the COVID-19 emergency to 3,600 recently unemployed
persons in the FBH and 2,900 recently unemployed persons in the RS, meeting the targets (DLI 5).



Outcomes

The number of registered job seekers in need of PES support de-registering from the unemployment registry
because they found a formal job increased from 102,000 in 2016 to 552,387 in 2022, far exceeding the target
of 110,543. These totals reflect an increase from 76,000 to 414,572 in the FBH, exceeding the target of
81,844, and an increase from 26,000 to 137,815 in the RS, exceeding the target of 28,699.

The number of registered job seekers placed in private sector jobs through wage subsidy ALMPs increased
from 5,000 in 2016 to 44,854 in 2022, exceeding the original target of 41,500 and the revised target of
37,575. These totals reflect achievement of 32,261 placements in the FBH (DLI 1, exceeding the target of
23,500) and 12,593 in the RS (DLI 1, not achieving the target of 14,075). Within these totals, sub-targets were
met and exceeded in the FBH for placements of youth and members of disadvantaged groups, and sub-
targets for these groups were nearly met in the RS. The ICR (p. 20) explained that 8,469 additional job
seekers were placed in the RS in agricultural and public sector jobs and were not counted against the
project's achieved result.

60 percent of ALMP beneficiaries remained employed as a result of participation in ALMPs 12 months after
completion of the program, exceeding the target of 50 percent. An impact evaluation conducted in the RS
found that there was an average 70 percent difference in employment probability in favor of the treatment
group compared to the control group at the end of the program, and that the effect remained positive three to

                                                                                                 Page 6 of 14
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               BIH Employment Support Program (P152347)



                            twelve months later; an analogous impact evaluation in the FBH found 51 percent higher employment
                            compared to the control group six months following program completion, and 52 percent higher employment
                            at twelve months.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The project's interventions supporting ALMPs and intermediation services of the employment service
                            agencies attracted more firms to participate in ALMPs, streamlined participation for disadvantaged job
                            seekers who rely on PES to find a job, facilitated more efficient and effective matching, and ultimately
                            achieved the objective of increasing formal private sector employment among targeted groups of registered
                            job seekers. The only shortcoming in achieving targeted change was a minor shortfall in the number of job
                            placements in the private sector in the RS.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   The PAD's cost-benefit analysis (Annex 5), focusing on the ALMP component of the project, found a net return
   for each dollar spent of 40 percent to 103 percent, depending on the program, and taking into account potential
   leakages to new hires who would have found a job without financial incentive. The analysis considered cost and
   benefit streams over a time span of 20 years for young beneficiaries, and 15 years for beneficiaries older than
   45 years. Programs varied in impact on labor outcomes and cost-effectiveness, which in turn depended on the
   target population, the parameters of the program, and program implementation mechanisms. These estimates
   were conservative, using only the ALMPs' direct costs (money transfers to employers and job seekers) and
   benefits measured as the present value of future income revenues over the working life of newly placed job
   seekers, or the increase in the present value of future income revenues due to wage increases resulting from
   higher productivity jobs (resulting from improved job matching).

   The ICR's ex post analysis (Annex 4) was based on a similar valid methodology and assumptions as those used
   at appraisal, updated to reflect actual results at the time of the project's impact evaluation (conducted prior to the
   COVID-19 emergency). It found an internal rate of return of 61 percent, within the range of appraisal estimates.

   Implementation efficiency benefited from project design that acknowledged the learning curve that would be
   associated with the first-time implementation of a hybrid investment lending project with a large results-based
   component. The DLI matrix deliberately set realistic targets in line with capacity constraints and the control span

                                                                                                                           Page 7 of 14
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      BIH Employment Support Program (P152347)



of implementing institutions, and it distributed risk between DLIs that were more difficult to achieve and those
that were achievable more quickly and with minimal time, effort, and financing. The mix of indicators/results,
targets, and attached disbursements was meant to provide the two entity governments with steady cash flow, in
particular for the financing of ALMPs. Moderate shortcomings included slow start-up and eventual inability to
agree on an Additional Financing that was proposed in response to the COVID-19 pandemic due to "lengthy and
difficult" decision processes arising from the unique, complex governance structure of the country (ICR, p. 28).



Based on strong economic efficiency and efficient implementation, with some moderate shortcomings that did
not meaningfully affect achievement of outcomes, efficiency is rated Substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?            Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                    94.80
 Appraisal                                                40.00
                                                                                     Not Applicable
                                                                                    94.80
 ICR Estimate                                             61.00
                                                                                     Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The objectives were highly relevant to country context, government strategy, and Bank strategy. The project
substantially achieved its objective of increasing formal private sector employment among targeted groups of
registered job seekers. Both economic and implementation efficiency were substantial, with moderate
shortcomings. These ratings indicate that there were only minor shortcomings in the project's preparation,
implementation, and achievement, leading to an Outcome rating of Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The ICR (p. 25) observed that the results-based design of the project helped build a likely sustainable focus
on outcomes rather than processes in the sector. Although the adverse impact of the pandemic and other

                                                                                                    Page 8 of 14
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      BIH Employment Support Program (P152347)



global crises might cause structural and short-term vulnerabilities for the country's macroeconomy,
undermining labor market demand and supply, government policies set out for the 2023-2027 period
continue to support increased inclusive private sector employment and provision of financial incentives to
firms, mitigating the risk. The ICR also noted that the project's requirement to report indicators to the Bank in
order to guarantee disbursement of the loan forced closer interactions between the Ministry of Finance,
MoLSP, Federation Employment Institute, and the cantons in the FBH, "possibly laying the ground for future
collaboration." In the RS, "it was evident that following the indicators became common practice from the
central level to the employment agencies," facilitated by the comprehensive and user-friendly information
systems developed under the project. The ICR (p. 26) also noted that sustainable capacity was built among
PES staff through the process of using impact evaluation findings to improve ALMPs. The government has
requested a follow-on project, approved by the Board on July 19, 2022.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  As this was the first investment project financing with DLIs in the BiH social sector, the project received
  extensive technical support from the Bank task team at the design stage through a technical assistance
  (TA) project (Strengthening Employment Outcomes in Bosnia and Herzegovina ASA, P162489). This TA
  contributed to robust technical design of the project and high responsiveness to the government's reform
  strategy, which in turn built government ownership of the operation. Project design drew from key lessons
  learned from prior experience implementing similar programs in other countries (detailed in the PAD,
  Annex 6). It was recognized that wage subsidies, while a useful instrument to help employers and
  employees weather times of crisis, were also a means to build skills among specific groups of workers,
  especially youth and low-skilled and older de-skilled workers. Lessons from impact evaluations in
  developed countries showed that wage subsidies were worthwhile only when they provide job
  opportunities to workers who would otherwise remain unemployed or take jobs that do not maximize their
  potential productivity. In addition, international evidence showed that employment programs have higher
  impact when combined with effective intermediation services. Lessons were also taken from the prior
  Bank-financed project in the sector, the Social Safety Nets and Employment Support Project (P116774,
  US$15 million, 2010-2015), including the need to focus on four key program features -- delivery modality,
  level of financial compensation granted to participants, method and extent of targeting, and duration and
  sustainability of programs -- and the possibility of achieving results without overly generous financial
  incentives. Finally, the prior project illustrated that strong administrative systems to support
  implementation of multiple ALMPs, case management, and employer outreach are critical.

  Risk assessment was multidimensional. Political and governance risks were related to the possibility of
  weak commitment from the FBH and RS governments, as well as the ten cantonal governments within
  the FBH, to be mitigated through strong communications with the general public, private sector, civil
  society, and relevant international organizations (including European Union [EU]representatives) to
  maintain a broad-based platform of support for the reforms. Macroeconomic risks stemmed from the
  possibility of weak economic growth in the EU, with adverse effects on BiH's economic outlook through
  decreased exports, remittances, and capital flows. The Bank mitigated these risks through continued
  dialogue with entity governments and the International Monetary Fund. There were also risks related to
  the complexity of the project's implementation arrangements, especially in the FBH, where the PES is


                                                                                                       Page 9 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BIH Employment Support Program (P152347)



  highly decentralized. The entity governments were reluctant to borrow large sums for TA, creating risk
  that TA resources would be inadequate to support implementation capacity. This risk was mitigated
  through setting aside a small portion of the loan as unallocated, so that TA needs that arose during
  implementation could be covered, and through the specification of a detailed Implementation Support
  Plan (PAD, Annex 4).

  Overall, the ICR (p. 32) attributes the project's success to the Bank team's "enormous efforts" in leading
  policy dialogue with the government and coordinating project preparation among the two entity
  governments and other stakeholders.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Highly Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The Bank team provided intensive and proactive implementation support. Three supervision missions were
 conducted during each year of implementation to review progress, identify problems that were causing
 delays, provide technical advice, and offer solutions contributing to timely resolution of issues. The task
 team leader was located in Washington, DC, but a locally recruited consultant was based in the World
 Bank office in Sarajevo to ensure daily just-in-time technical and communication support. During the
 COVID-19 pandemic, the team switched to virtual missions and conducted regular on-line meetings with
 the project management unit (PMU) to ensure uninterrupted communication. The ICR credits the Bank
 team's efforts for the client's request for a follow-on project.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Highly Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Highly Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The project's objective and theory of change were straightforward and focused. Outcome indicators and
 DLIs were set out clearly in the PAD (Annex 1), with appropriate baselines, targets, data collection
 instruments, frequency of collection, responsibility for collection, and verification protocols for DLIs
 well specified. Indicators were drawn from government administrative data, monitoring data collected by the
 implementing units, and data from impact evaluations of selected ALMPs conducted annually. There were
 20 intermediate results indicators for the FBH and 16 for the RS, a long list that could have been
 streamlined, given the complexity of working with two different government entities.



                                                                                                   Page 10 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BIH Employment Support Program (P152347)



 In FBH, the Ministry of Labor and Social Policy (MoLP) was in charge of project monitoring, verifying
 achievement of DLIs, and reporting to the Bank. A Steering Commitee, to include representatives from
 relevant ministries and the Prime Minister's office, was to receive biannual reports from the MoLP on
 progress toward achievement of DLIs and project indicators.

 In RS, the PES was responsible for implementation of ALMPs being financed by the project. The Ministry of
 Labor and Veterans Affairs (MoLVA) was to verify achievement of DLIs as reported by the PES, monitor
 the project, and report to the Bank. A Steering Committee, to include representatives from representative
 ministries and the Office of the President of the Government, was to receive quarterly or biannual progress
 reports from the MoLVA on progress toward achievement of DLIs and project indicators.



b. M&E Implementation
  Both the MoLP (FBH) and MoLVA (RS) had a dedicated M&E specialist to oversee project monitoring.
  M&E data were collected as planned. ALMP implementation data were sent from the entity-level PES to
  the M&E specialists for analysis and production of annual and biannual reports to the Bank and the
  Steering Committees, as envisioned. In the RS, a special online platform was developed for employment
  services, with statistical data and reports filtered by criteria including gender, region, workplace, and
  occupation. The ICR (p. 29) noted that "the ministries' M&E capacity was significantly strengthened under
  this project."



c. M&E Utilization
  The impact evaluations were effective monitoring and feedback tools, described by the ICR (pp. 29-30)
  as "an innovative way of using impact evaluations in a lending operation." Information systems
  developed under the project were critical in supporting the M&E function, enabling data to be used to
  inform meaningful course corrections. The performance monitoring reporting format developed during
  project implementation was incorporated into PES annual reporting and continues to be used. However,
  the ICR also noted that implementing agency capacity in verifying DLI achievement remained
  limited and requires further strengthening.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was rated Environmental Assessment category C. None of the Bank's safeguard policies were
   triggered. All selected ALMPs were implemented within the confines of national guidelines on environmental
   safety and health standards, and necessary checks were part of the selection process of ALMP beneficiary
   firms (ICR, p. 30).




                                                                                                 Page 11 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BIH Employment Support Program (P152347)




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Overall fiduciary responsibility lay with the FBH MoLSP and RS MoLVA. Both ministries were to be
   reinforced by PMUs that had experience with Bank financial management and procurement processes
   through prior projects. Financial management performance was rated satisfactory overall, with adequate
   systems for accounting, budgeting, organization and staffing, internal controls, counterpart funding, and
   audit and financial reporting. Project financial statement audit reports, prepared for each entity annually,
   were received by the Bank on time and contained unqualified opinions. However, the RS PMU did not
   submit interim financial reports on time, and there was an undisbursed amount of EUR 1.33 million on the
   RS side at the time of the disbursement deadline (August 1, 2022). Procurement was also overall
   satisfactory, carried out in compliance with the Bank's procurement guidelines. However, the ICR (p. 31)
   noted that the RS PMU faced challenges in the use of Bank procurement systems, including filing of proper
   documentation, due to technical difficulties and weak capacity. The follow-on project contains activities to
   build capacity of the procurement specialist.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None reported.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                               Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                    IEG
                                                                               Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                        Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Bank Performance               Highly Satisfactory   Highly Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                 Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                 ---                   High


12. Lessons

The ICR (pp. 33-35) offers a series of insightful lessons stemming from project experience, including
the following:

A comprehensive approach to labor market policies, addressing both supply- and demand-
side factors, can allow for flexibility in times of crisis. One of the project's approaches to
increasing formal private sector employment among targeted groups of registered job seekers was
through wage subsidies, an intervention that is by nature flexible and responsive to labor market

                                                                                                  Page 12 of 14
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       BIH Employment Support Program (P152347)



needs and to employers' constraints (high labor costs). This proved to be particularly valuable during
the COVID-19 emergency, when other types of interventions (such as training) might have increased
labor supply productivity but not addressed labor market needs.

Targeting specifically vulnerable populations and redesigning policies to meet their needs is
important for achieving higher-level policy objectives. In this case, defining eligibility for specific
vulnerable groups rather than allowing universal eligibility guaranteed access for populations who
were less likely to have obtained employment on their own. Project impact evaluations also showed
that these groups remained employed longer, and that satisfaction was increased among both job
seekers and employers.

Cultivating a culture of continuous monitoring and impact evaluation can encourage effective
feedback loops, improving the design of interventions and achievement of outcomes. For
example, in the RS, an annual impact evaluation showed that the employment program was most
effective for job seekers between the ages of 25 and 30, people with lower qualifications, and the
long-term unemployed, prompting the program to focus on and increase targets for those groups in
2021.




13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR clear, concise, and well written. It conformed with ICR guidelines. It was consistently results focused,
and its analysis was of high quality and based on a range of available evidence. Its explanations of
implementation challenges in a complex governance environment were candid and thorough. Its lessons were
insightful and should prove highly useful for design and implementation of future projects in the country and the
sector. The ICR could have gone into more detail on the extent to which the project's interventions increased
beneficiary populations' resilience to reform of state-owned enterprises and other elements of the government's
2015 reform agenda, but that is a minor shortcoming. Overall, this was a high-quality, best-practice document.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       High




                                                                                                    Page 13 of 14
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
BIH Employment Support Program (P152347)




                                                                        Page 14 of 14
