     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ET - Health SDG Program for Results (P123531)



                                                                                Report Number : ICRR0023354

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Program Name
 P123531                                   ET - Health SDG Program for Results

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Ethiopia                                  Health, Nutrition & Population


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)             Total Program Cost (USD)
 IDA-52090,IDA-60900,TF-14107,TF-          30-Jun-2018                                        349,451,099.76
 A4689,TF-A4705

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 28-Feb-2013                               30-Jun-2022

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                          100,000,000.00                                 100,000,000.00

 Revised Commitment                           350,000,000.00                                 100,000,000.00

 Actual                                       349,483,302.54                                   99,259,658.85




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Salim J. Habayeb           Eduardo Fernandez            Eduardo Fernandez              IEGHC (Unit 2)
                            Maldonado                    Maldonado




2. Program Context and Development Objectives

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The objective of the program was to improve the delivery and use of a comprehensive package of maternal
   and child health services (Financing Agreement, March 29, 2013, p. 6).

   During the implementation period, some associated outcome targets were revised upward.



                                                                                                 Page 1 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ET - Health SDG Program for Results (P123531)




b. Were the program objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during
   implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  20-Apr-2017

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Program scope and boundaries. The Financing Agreement clarified that the program targeted certain
   MDG-relevant results and comprised of high priority activities that constituted a sub-set of the country’s
   Fourth Health Sector Development Program (HSDP IV). The program was planned to support activities
   related to the Millennium Development Goal Performance Fund (MDGPF) under HSDP IV with the
   exception of high-value procurement. Costs are discussed in section 2e, below. The PforR was harmonized
   with MDGPF: both had a common scope, one core plan and one program using country systems, common
   reporting, and a common mechanism for handling corruption (PAD, p. 16). The ICR stated that program
   boundaries remained the same during the implementation period, but the Task Team clarified that Civil
   Registration and Vital Statistics activities that were introduced by the 2017 additional financing extended
   beyond the initial boundaries of MDGPF (Task Team clarifications, March 21, 2023).

   Program content and results areas. At entry, program activities aimed at advancing results in the
   following three priority areas (PAD, p. 15):

        1. Accelerating progress toward maternal health: supplying equipment and commodities for
           providing emergency obstetric care; supplying contraceptives; providing ambulances to all woredas;
           in-service training of midwives; training of Health Officers in Emergency Surgical and Obstetric
           Skills; and capacity building of health extension workers in clean and safe delivery.
        2. Sustaining gains made in child health: strengthening of cold chain systems; supplying vaccines;
           holding immunization campaigns; and supplying bed nets.
        3. Strengthening health systems: constructing health centers; supplying essential medical products
           and equipment; validating the Health Management Information System (HMIS) data semi-annually;
           and undertaking surveys and studies.

   An additional financing in 2017 expanded the scope and scale of the operation and introduced an
   Investment Project Financing (IPF) Component (US$21 million) to address two critical areas of need: (a)
   strengthening the Civil Registration and Vital Statistics System (CRVS) which is essential to providing key
   maternal and child health information; monitoring underage marriages; and developing a modern system of
   identification; and (b) provision of complementary capacity building and technical assistance to further
   strengthen program implementation. The IPF component had three sub-components (ICR, p. 12):




                                                                                                 Page 2 of 20
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    ET - Health SDG Program for Results (P123531)



        Sub-Component 1: Civil registration at the Federal Vital Events Registration Agency to build the
         CRVS system through technical assistance and procurement of equipment;
        Sub-Component 2: Technical Assistance and Capacity Building of the National Nutrition
         Program II in various areas, including multisectoral coordination, evaluation and identifying lessons
         learned; and
        Sub-Component 3: to support fiduciary management at Pharmaceuticals Fund and Supply Agency
         (PFSA) and MOH; implementation of the national Health Care Financing Strategy; and data and
         management information systems and surveys.



e. Comments on Program Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  The overall HSDP IV financing envelope was estimated at US$4,610 million for the period 2013-2018.
  Within HSDP IV, the PforR operation was planned to support activities under MDGPF (explained above in
  2d), also known as MDG Fund, estimated at about US$676 million during the same period. The MDG Fund
  was subsequently renamed as Sustainable Development Goals Performance Fund (SDGPF).

  The original World Bank contribution to the MDG Fund was estimated at US$100 million as an IDA Credit
  complemented by a grant of US$20 million from the Health Results Innovation Trust Fund (HRITF). The
  majority of expenditures under MDGPF would be made at the federal level, with goods and services
  transferred in-kind to subnational levels according to criteria related to the disease burden and assessed
  needs. Government wage costs were not included in the MDGPF. Other development partners contributing
  to MDGPF included DFID, PEPFAR, Netherlands, Australian AID, Spanish Development Cooperation, Irish
  Aid, Italian Cooperation, and several UN agencies such as UNICEF, UNFPA, and WHO.

  On April 20, 2017, an additional financing of US$230 million was provided to scale up activities and
  technical assistance. It consisted of an IDA Credit of US$150 million, a grant of US$60 million from the
  Global Financing Facility, and another grant of US$20 million from the Power of Nutrition Trust Fund. The
  additional financing included an IPF component and an extension of closing date to June 30, 2021.

  Program restructuring dates were as follows:

        April 20, 2017: Additional financing and extension of the closing date as noted above.
        April 21, 2020: Change in implementation arrangements.
        April 15, 2021: Change in data sources for verification to DHS in view of COVID-19 pandemic
         disruptions, and change in closing date to December 31, 2021.
        October 18, 2021: Changes in data sources for verification.
        December 13, 2021: Extension of the closing date to March 30, 2022.
        March 28, 2022: Extension of the closing date to June 30, 2022.

   All credit and grant proceeds were disbursed and the actual program cost was US$349.5 million.




                                                                                                 Page 3 of 20
                              Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                              ET - Health SDG Program for Results (P123531)



3. Relevance                          TBL




a. Relevance of Objectives                            New




                       Rationale
                       Responsiveness to the country context. During the years prior to appraisal, Ethiopia experienced strong
                       economic growth and progress in human development. The country’s Health Sector Development Program
                       (HSDP) started in 1996 and provided the overarching strategic framework for the sector to make health
                       gains. The World Bank was closely engaged with HSDP from its inception. Specifically, the World Bank
                       supported HSDP through the Protection of Basic Services Program (PBS) that was also supported by
                       development partners through a programmatic approach that covered several sectors supporting human
                       development, namely education, health, water and agriculture. At appraisal, Ethiopia was implementing its
                       fourth round of HSDP (HSDP IV) covering the period 2011-2015. Despite progress made, significant
                       challenges remained. The maternal mortality ratio persisted at 676 per 100,000 live births, and under-5
                       mortality was at 88 per 1,000 live births.

                       Country capacity and adequacy of the PforR instrument. Overall, the PforR instrument was a good fit for
                       supporting the Government’s well-defined HSDP framework. The health sector was recognized as one of the
                       better performing sectors in the country and the Government decided to use it to test the PforR instrument,
                       as there was a growing need to enhance accountability and to generate more attention to results (PAD, pp.
                       11-12). At the same time, there were some limitations to the use of the instrument for tackling some specific
                       technical areas that were addressed by the addition of an IPF component in 2017 (see section 2d).

                       Alignment with Bank strategy. Program objectives remained fully relevant to the Country Partnership
                       Framework (CPF FY18-22) at program closing. There was also alignment between the CPF and key country
                       strategies, namely the Government’s Growth and Transformation Plan (GTP II) and the Second Health
                       Sector Transformation Plan (HSTP II). Program objectives were aligned with CPF Focus Area 2 on Building
                       Resilience and Inclusiveness, specifically with CPF Objective 2.2 on improved equity and utilization of quality
                       health services. The CPF highlighted in its intervention logic that World Bank Group operations were to
                       address critical constraints (related to CPF Objective 2.2) by improving equity, utilization and quality of health
                       services, particularly maternal and child health care, in support of HSTP. There were similarities in indicators
                       used by CPF Objective 2.2 and those of the PforR Program: improved geographic equity in health service
                       delivery outcomes, based on Pentavalent 3 Vaccine for the bottom 20% of the lowest-performing woredas;
                       proportion of women in rural areas using a modern method of contraception; and deliveries attended by
                       skilled birth providers as a Supplementary Progress Indicator.


       Rating Relevance TBL




                       Rating
                       High


b. Relevance of DLIs                           New




DLI RELEVANCE TBL




                DLI 1
                                                                                                                           Page 4 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      ET - Health SDG Program for Results (P123531)




DLI
Deliveries attended by skilled birth provider (%)

Rationale
This DLI/Indicator would incentivize and measure the health system's ability to provide sufficient care during
birth. It is used as a proxy for access to health services and maternal care, i.e., for health service coverage.
Having a skilled health care provider at the time of childbirth can be a lifesaving intervention for both women
and newborns. Not having such access could contribute to the death of women and/or newborns or to long
lasting morbidity. On its own, this indicator does not capture the quality of care received, but it remains a
much better option than the alternative. The DLI was well aligned with the PDO.



Rating
High

DLI 2
DLI
Children 12-23 months immunized with Pentavalent vaccine (%)


Rationale
The DLI/Indicator consisted of the percentage of children under 2 who received three doses of the
pentavalent vaccine that combined the main childhood vaccines. It adequately reflected service coverage.
Monitoring and incentivizing national and subnational coverage levels are critical to help countries in tailoring
vaccination strategies and operational plans to address immunization gaps.



Rating
High

DLI 3
DLI
Pregnant women receiving at least one antenatal care vist (%)


Rationale
This DLI/Indicator reflected access and use of health care during pregnancy. The antenatal period presents
opportunities for reaching pregnant women with interventions that may be vital to their health and wellbeing
and that of their infants. It is one of the tracer indicators of health services for the universal health coverage.

However, one visit is not sufficient to ensure effectiveness. The usual norm consists of at least four visits.



Rating

                                                                                                       Page 5 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      ET - Health SDG Program for Results (P123531)



Modest

DLI 3 REVISION 1
Revised DLI
Pregnant women receiving at least four antenatal care visits (%)


Revised Rationale


The revised DLI was in line with globally recommended practices. Under normal circumstances, a pregnant
woman should have at least four antenatal visits. In addition to screening and identification of risk factors,
women learn about healthy behaviors and warning signs during pregnancy, and they receive social,
emotional and psychological support. Through antenatal care, pregnant women can access micronutrient
supplementation, treatment for hypertension to prevent eclampsia, as well as immunization against tetanus.
Antenatal care can also provide HIV testing and medications to prevent mother-to-child transmission of HIV.
In areas where malaria is endemic, health personnel can provide pregnant women with medications and
insecticide-treated mosquito nets to help in preventing the disease.




Revised Rating
High

DLI 4
DLI
Contraceptive prevalence rate (%)

Rationale
The percentage of women aged 15-49 years, married or in-union, who are currently using, or whose sexual
partner is using, at least one method of contraception. It is an indicator of health, population, development
and women's empowerment. It serves as a proxy measure of access to reproductive health services.



Rating
High

DLI 4 REVISION 1
Revised DLI
Contraceptive prevalence rate in rural areas (%)


Revised Rationale


                                                                                                   Page 6 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      ET - Health SDG Program for Results (P123531)




The revised DLI aimed at providing an added focus to improving delivery and use of contraceptives in
underserved rural areas.



Revised Rating
High

DLI 5
DLI
Health centers reporting HMIS data on time (%)

Rationale


The DLI/Indicator would contribute to timely reporting within the larger context of health system strengthening



Rating
Substantial

DLI 6
DLI
Develop and implement of a balanced score card approach


Rationale
This DLI/Indicator would contribute to health system strengthening, as it reflected coverage and utilization
aspects, including availability of key inputs such as commodities, staff, regularity of supervision, and
compliance with standard protocols. Institutions receiving performance incentives would have autonomy to
decide how to use the incentives received. According to the PAD (p. 21), testing this approach was to be
carried out in three representative regions (agrarian, pastoral and urban) over a period of two years, followed
by an evaluation before taking a decision on further scale-up. However, since Federal Ministry of Health
(FMOH) was keen to implement the score card in view of its likely benefits, this tool was rolled out nationwide,
and the DLI was dropped.



Rating
High

DLI 7
DLI
Develop and implement Annual Rapid Facility Assessment

                                                                                                   Page 7 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      ET - Health SDG Program for Results (P123531)




Rationale
The DLI/Indicator would contribute to health system strengthening.



Rating
Substantial

DLI 8
DLI
Transparency of Pharmaceutical Fund and Supply Agency procurement process



Rationale
The DLI/Indicator pertained to health system strengthening, Related information was to be disclosed online.




Rating
Substantial

DLI 9
DLI
DLI 9(1): Introduction of Procurement Key Performance Indicators developed by Federal Procurement Agency
at PFSA
DLI 9(2): Automate the PFSA core business fiduciary system using Selected Software in PFSA HQ and Addis
Ababa City
DLI 9(3): PFSA submission of backlog audit reports and timely quality audit reports thereafter


Rationale
To track and improve performance in procurement processes in the context of health system strengthening.



Rating
Substantial

DLI 10
DLI
DLI 10a: Children 6-59 months receiving vitamin A supplements; and
DLI 10b: Woredas in non-emerging regions delivering Vitamin A supplements to children

                                                                                                   Page 8 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      ET - Health SDG Program for Results (P123531)




Rationale
The two related DLIs were added in 2017 to focus greater attention on child health and nutrition. The DLI for
children receiving vitamin A supplements reflected the proportion of children aged 6–59 months who
received two age-appropriate doses of vitamin A supplements in the last 12 months. It measured the
coverage achieved through national vitamin A supplementation efforts in a specified period. Vitamin A
deficiency is a major public health problem in developing countries, and the lack of vitamin A causes visual
impairment, blindness, and significantly increases the risk of severe illness and death from common
childhood infections such as diarrheal disease and measles. Supplementation as a control strategy for
Vitamin A deficiency is the most immediate and direct approach to improving vitamin A status and the one
most widely implemented globally. Programs to control vitamin A deficiency enhance children’s chances of
survival, reduce the severity of childhood illnesses, ease the strain on health systems and hospitals
and contribute to the well-being of children, their families and communities.



Rating
High

DLI 11
DLI
Pregnant women taking iron and folic acid tablets


Rationale
The DLI was added in 2017 to focus greater attention on maternal health and nutrition. The
DLI/Indicator usually reflects women’s access to these core supplements and also reflects qualitative aspects
of ante natal care. Iron deficiency is a common nutrient deficiency and the resulting iron deficiency anemia is
a major contributor to the global burden of disease. Iron supplementation is universally recommended during
the second and third trimesters of pregnancy



Rating
High

DLI 12
DLI
DLI 12a: Children 0-23 months participating in Growth Monitoring and Promotion
DLI 12b: Percent of woredas in emerging regions transitioning from Enhanced Outreach Services to Community
Health Days
DLI 12.1: Conduct catch up campaigns to increase the uptake of essential health and nutrition services,
including Vitamin A, deworming, and nutrition screening, in security-constrained contexts




                                                                                                  Page 9 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      ET - Health SDG Program for Results (P123531)




Rationale
To focus greater attention on child health and nutrition. DLI 12.1 was added to mitigate the impact of the
COVID-19 pandemic and the deteriorating security situation.




Rating
High

DLI 13
DLI
DLI 13 (1): PHC facilities having all drugs from MOH list of essential drugs available
DLI 13(2): Develop and implement postnatal care services directive to improve the quality of postnatal services
DLI 13 (3): Improve the quality of adolescent health services


Rationale
DLI 13(1) was intended to monitor and track drug availability that was critical for both maternal and child
health services.

DLI 13(2) was intended to improve the management of maternal health services.

DLI 13 (3) was added with the focus on the ‘A’ as part of the Reproductive, Maternal, Newborn, Child, and
Adolescent Health (RMNCAH) agenda.



Rating
Substantial

DLI 14
DLI
DLI 14(1): Woredas with functional Community-Based Health Insurance schemes
DLI 14(2): Undertake Community-based Health Insurance scheme reviews every two years


Rationale
DLI 14(1) was to focus attention on lowering out of pocket spending.

DLI 14(2) was to track and monitor progress in expanding financial protection.




                                                                                                   Page 10 of 20
                                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                  ET - Health SDG Program for Results (P123531)




                  Rating
                  Substantial

                  DLI 15
                  DLI
                  Devise and implement a mechanism for documenting consultations when communal/private land is used for
                  construction of health facilities

                  Rationale
                  DLI 15 was added to establish a process to facilitate community involvement and consultations.



                  Rating
                  Substantial


      OVERALL RELEVANCE DLI TBL




                  OVERALL RELEVANCE RATING
                  Rationale
                  Relevance of objectives was rated high, as program objectives were fully relevant to the country context,
                  government plans, and the Country Partnership Framework at program closing.

                  Relevance of DLIs was rated substantial, as DLIs constituted the right triggers and incentives for promoting
                  the use of maternal and child health services, but with some shortcomings in the quality elements of DLIs and
                  extent of alignment with the PDO. Also, as the stated PDO was to improve the use of a comprehensive
                  package of maternal and child health services, this ICR Review expected that DLIs that would advance
                  nutrition results would have been included at the outset since improving the nutritional status of women and
                  children is an integral part of such a comprehensive package. Nutrition DLIs were added only in 2017 in
                  conjunction with the additional financing. The Task Team stated on March 21, 2023 that the thinking during
                  preparation was that nutrition did not need to stand as a separate outcome since access to nutrition services
                  was integrated in ante-natal care services.

                  The aggregation of both dimensions is consistent with a substantial rating for overall relevance.




                  Rating
                  Substantial



   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
EFFICACY_TBL




                                                                                                                      Page 11 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   ET - Health SDG Program for Results (P123531)




OBJECTIVE 1
Objective
Improve the delivery and use of a comprehensive package of maternal and child health services


Rationale
The theory of change held that:

      Activities that accelerate progress in maternal health MDGs, mainly the supply of equipment and
       commodities for provision of emergency obstetric care; supply of contraceptives; provision of
       ambulances to all woredas; in-service training of midwives and Health Officers in Emergency Surgical
       and Obstetric skills; and capacity building of health extension workers in clean and safe delivery would
       result in the following outputs and intermediate results: Health centers offering basic emergency
       obstetric care; woredas have functional ambulance services; midwives with in-service training; and
       health officers trained in emergency surgical and obstetric care.

      Activities that sustain gains made in child health, including strengthening cold chain system; supply of
       vaccines; immunization campaigns; and supply of bed-nets would result in the following outputs and
       intermediate results: Health centers have functional cold chain equipment; outreach campaigns
       undertaken; long lasting insecticidal nets distributed; Growth Monitoring and Promotion activities
       undertaken; woredas having Community Health Days; immunization campaigns and catch-up
       campaigns.

      Activities that strengthen health systems, including building health centers, supplying essential
       medical products and equipment, validating HMIS semi-annually; improving transparency in
       procurement processes, implementation of a Balanced Score Card to assess performance and related
       institutional-incentives, and undertaking surveys and studies;

-- and that, collectively, the above outputs and intermediate results would plausibly lead to improved delivery
and use of a package of maternal and child health services.

Outputs and Intermediate results

The number of service encounters for people who received essential health, nutrition, and population services
was 103.6 million in 2023 in 2022, exceeding the target of 88.9 million services. Among the beneficiaries,
there were 61.3 million service encounters for females, exceeding the target of 45.1 million.

The number of children immunized was 3.2 million children in 2022, exceeding the target of 2.2 million
children for that year.

The number of deliveries attended by skilled health personnel was 2.2 million deliveries in 2022, exceeding
the target of 1.2 million deliveries for that year.

The percentage of PHC facilities having all drugs from MOH list of drugs available increased from a baseline
of 42 percent in 2016 to 48 percent in 2022, exceeding the target of 47 percent.



                                                                                                 Page 12 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   ET - Health SDG Program for Results (P123531)



Health Centers reporting HMIS data on time increased from a baseline of 50 percent in 2012 to 96 percent in
2022, exceeding the target of 86 percent.

The proportion of woredas that had a nutrition coordination platform and reporting multisectoral nutrition
information to the national level was 42 percent in 2022, short of the target of 60 percent.

The percentage of kebeles storing and transferring registration forms safely attained 68 percent, short of the
target of 80 percent.

The percentage of births occurring in a given year that were registered attained 20.9 percent in 2022, short of
the target of 40 percent registration. The ICR reported that the COVID-19 pandemic and conflict in the
country disrupted the registration process.

Outcomes

Data showed a considerable level of improvement in the delivery and use of maternal and child health
services. While it was difficult to establish an airtight counterfactual as the basis for attributing outcomes to
the PforR that supported large-scale and multi-faceted interventions, the likelihood of incremental contribution
made by the program to observed outcomes was bolstered by the strength of the logical results chain and by
the absence of major factors outside the PforR program that might raise doubt about its contributory role.

Deliveries attended by skilled birth providers increased from a baseline of 10 percent in 2012 to 50 percent in
2022, exceeding the original target of 18 percent and the revised target of 40 percent. In a larger context, the
results remained below the regional average of 61 percent. Deliveries attended by skilled birth providers for
the bottom three performing regions of Afar, Oromia and Somali increased from a baseline of 19 percent in
2016 to 33.4 percent in 2022, surpassing the end target of 28 percent.

Progress in the delivery and use of antenatal care was also strong in terms of the percentage of pregnant
women receiving at least four antenatal care visits, as the rate increased from a baseline of 32 percent in
2016 to 43 percent in 2022, exceeding the end target of 38 percent.

The contraceptive prevalence rate increased from a baseline of 27.3 percent in 2012 to 35.9 percent in 2022,
exceeding the program target of 35 percent. The contraceptive prevalence rate in rural areas increased from
32 percent in 2016 to 37.5 percent in 2019, essentially meeting the target of 38 percent.

The percentage of pregnant women taking iron and folic acid supplements increased from a baseline of 42.1
percent in 2016 to 60 percent in 2022, exceeding the target of 50 percent.

The percentage of children 12-23 months who were immunized with Pentavalent 3 vaccine increased from a
baseline of 65.7 in 2012 to 81.3 percent in 2022, exceeding the target of 75.7 percent.

The percentage of woredas in emerging regions (i.e., Somali, Afar, Benishangul-Gumuz, and Gambela),
which are characterized by predominantly pastoralist populations living in extreme poverty and having limited
access to health services, transitioning from Enhanced Outreach Services (conducted twice yearly) to
Community Health Days (conducted quarterly), rose from zero in 2016 to 89 percent in 2022, surpassing the
end of program target of 50 percent. These campaign-style events, designed to increase coverage of vitamin




                                                                                                  Page 13 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      ET - Health SDG Program for Results (P123531)



  A supplementation and other child health services, were effective in delivering services to dispersed
  and predominantly rural populations.

  The percentage of woredas in non-emerging regions (i.e., Amhara, Oromia, Harari, Southern Nations
  Nationalities and People’s Region, Tigray) delivering vitamin A supplements to children increased from 48
  percent in 2016 to 100 percent in 2020, surpassing the target of 80 percent.

  The percentage of children 0-23 months participating in Growth Monitoring and Promotion improved
  significantly from a baseline of 38 percent in 2016 to 54 percent in 2019.




  Rating
  High




 OVERALL EFFICACY
 Rationale
 The program achieved its objective to improve the delivery and use of a comprehensive package of maternal
 and child health services, and exceeded its targets.



 Rating
 High


5. Outcome

Relevance is rated substantial, encompassing high relevance of program objectives and substantial relevance
of DLIs. Efficacy is rated high, as the operation fully achieved its objectives and exceeded its intended
outcomes. These findings are consistent with a satisfactory outcome rating.


    Outcome Rating
    Satisfactory


6. Risk to Development Outcome

The risk that development outcome may not be maintained is largely related to exogenous factors arising
from a continued insecurity situation. The ICR (p. 30) reported that the conflict in Tigray, Amhara, and Afar
regions is of particular concern as it has resulted in millions of internally displaced persons and significant

                                                                                                      Page 14 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ET - Health SDG Program for Results (P123531)



disruptions in essential health services. Also, capacity constraints persist in a large and complex devolved
health system. An unfinished maternal and child health agenda remains despite the remarkable progress
made. It requires sustained efforts, including for addressing disparities in access to quality health services
across regions and in financial protection. To this end, a follow-on operation has been approved to support
the government in maintaining gains, accelerating further progress, and providing targeted support for
vulnerable groups and internally displaced persons in conflict-affected regions. The ICR (p. 22) reported that
this follow-on operation titled “Ethiopia Health PforR (Hybrid) Strengthening Primary Health Care Services
(P175167” was approved by the Board on December 13, 2022. The ICR also stated (p. 31) that the operation
included an investment project financing component that would be key for providing targeted support for
vulnerable groups and internally displaced persons.




7. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The overall approach of the operation was sound and built on HSPD IV that provided the strategic
  framework for health interventions. HSPD IV also benefited from harmonized support among Ethiopia's
  development partners in the health sector (PAD, p. 12). Program implementation arrangements were
  based on existing institutional and implementation mechanisms of HSDP IV that were in line with
  Ethiopia's decentralized federal structure with shared responsibility between the Federal Ministry of
  Health (FMOH), Regional Health Bureaus, and Woreda Health Offices (PAD, p. 20).

  FMOH was responsible for overall planning and budgeting, supported by its Directorates. The
  Pharmaceutical Fund and Supply Agency (PFSA) under FMOH was responsible for procurement of
  health sector goods while the Policy Planning and Finance General Directorate, the Human Resources
  Development Directorate and the Health Infrastructure Directorate were responsible for procuring
  services, consultancies and works. There was a dedicated project management unit (PMU) under the
  Health Infrastructure Directorate that supported facility expansion from the federal level, including for the
  provision of technical assistance for civil works in the regions. Nine Regional Health Bureaus and two city
  administrations were responsible for planning and programming in their respective areas. The Woreda
  Health Offices would manage primary health care delivery within their jurisdictions. Regional Health
  Bureaus would provide technical support to the woredas.

  A Joint Consultative Forum chaired by the Minister of Health and co-chaired by one of the partners in the
  sector was the highest body for dialogue on sector policy and reform issues between the Government of
  Ethiopia, its partners and stakeholders. A Joint Core Coordinating Committee chaired by the Director
  General was the technical arm of the Joint Consultative Forum, and would provide operational oversight
  for the implementation of all pooled funds provided by partners to the health sector.

  M&E arrangements for reporting on DLIs would use the HSDP IV systems complemented by household
  and health facility surveys (PAD, p. 21). The PforR would also support the strengthening of the Health
  Management Information System.

  The program preparation teams selected two groups of DLIs: maternal and child services DLIs at the
  outcome level; and health system DLIs that were process-oriented, i.e., intermediate results level. DLIs
  were chosen using the following criteria: (a) evidence of their contribution to MDGs; (b) under the span of

                                                                                                    Page 15 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ET - Health SDG Program for Results (P123531)



  control of government; (c) achievable in the time-frame being considered; and (d) objectively measurable
  and verifiable. DLI targets were established based on global experience (PAD, p. 18).

  The World Bank Task Team worked collaboratively with government counterparts to guide program
  design and coordination. The Bank Team benefitted from broad-based support from within the World
  Bank, including advice from OPCS. A Quality Enhancement Review was conducted in July 2012 and its
  recommendations were addressed in the design. The Quality Enhancement Review reportedly
  commended the relevance and clarity of DLIs (ICR, p. 29).

  The PforR assessments were strong, including technical, macroeconomic, fiduciary, environmental and
  social assessments. Risks were adequately identified with appropriate mitigation measures. Preparation
  required considerable dialogue with other development partners who were providing larger amounts of
  grant funding. The operation was in an advanced state of implementation readiness. As a minor
  shortcoming, the ICR reported that, while there was adequate focus on supply-side impediments,
  additional attention could have been provided to demand-side barriers. Health extension workers were
  already providing extensive support in this area, and there was an assumption that all service providers
  would be incentivized to fully address demand-side aspects.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The Bank Task Team conducted, jointly with government counterparts, regular supervision and
 implementation support missions, and produced high quality, comprehensive, and timely Aide Memoires
 and Implementation Status Reports (ICR, p. 30). The program was supervised by three different task
 teams for nearly a decade, and transitions were reportedly seamless. The Task Team provided timely
 advice and support, and was proactive in assisting the Borrower to keep the program on track. It was
 responsive to introducing program amendments and extending the closing date when required. The
 additional financing was prepared in a timely manner (ICR, p. 30). The quality of Bank supervision and
 implementation support was acknowledged by the main stakeholders. The Team further enhanced its
 technical and implementation support during the last two years of implementation when challenges were
 faced due to the COVID-19 pandemic and the security situation. During the ICR mission in August 2022,
 both Government counterparts and development partners expressed satisfaction with the support provided
 by the World Bank.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory




                                                                                                 Page 16 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ET - Health SDG Program for Results (P123531)



8. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The objective of the program was clearly stated and reflected by the selected indicators. M&E
 arrangements were well embedded institutionally and would use HSDP IV information system
 complemented by household and health facility surveys (p. 21). For population-based surveys, the program
 would utilize the reliable data of the Demographic and Health Survey whose implementation is
 coordinated by the Central Statistical Agency, an entity independent of FMOH. The provision of data would
 be coordinated by FMOH and the Ethiopian Health and Nutrition Research Institute, assisted by the Gates
 Foundation, UNICEF and WHO. The PforR was planned to support ongoing government efforts to further
 strengthen HMIS.



b. M&E Implementation
  M&E Implementation was adequate overall, but with challenges encountered during the latter years of
  implementation in view of the COVID-19 pandemic combined with security concerns that made
  population-based surveys more challenging. The balanced score card was dropped because the scheme
  was replicated nationwide at an early stage (ICR, p. 27). Regular reporting facilitated verification
  processes and disbursements.

  There were other surveys and studies conducted during the life of the program and they provided
  policymakers with valuable information for decision making, such as the nutrition reports with a wide
  range of data and recommendations for improving interventions supported by the program, e.g., Iron
  Folic Acid utilization, Vitamin A supplementation, and Growth Monitoring and Promotion.



c. M&E Utilization
  M&E findings were used for program monitoring, including to: (i) take stock of progress on DLIs and
  identify remedial actions if needed; (ii) identify areas requiring technical assistance; (iii) hold
  consultations between national and state authorities to identify strategic priorities and targets; and (iv)
  re-orient health sector strategies toward addressing key gaps (i.e., quality, equity, financial protection
  and disruptions in service delivery). Evidence-based Joint Reviews were organized to assist partners to
  leverage the comparative advantage of each agency in mobilizing support. National authorities worked
  with regional and local stakeholders on an annual basis to address emerging issues and bottlenecks.
  Nevertheless, the ICR (p. 27) reported that more could have been done to systematically share M&E
  findings with authorities at decentralized levels.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

9. Other Issues



                                                                                                    Page 17 of 20
        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
        ET - Health SDG Program for Results (P123531)



a. Safeguards
   During preparation, the Team conducted an Environment and Social Systems Assessment (ESSA) to
   assess, against the requirements of OP/BP 9.00, the degree to which the program systems would manage
   and mitigate the environmental and social impacts of the overall program. The ESSA rated overall risks as
   moderate, with a potential adverse effect related to the generation of medical waste and improper disposal.
   An action plan was designed to address related weaknesses, and included measures to enhance capacity,
   establish infection prevention, set up patient safety committees, improve public and worker safety, and
   document outreach and actions focused on providing services to vulnerable persons. The ICR (p. 28) stated
   that related performance was generally strong (ICR, p. 28), including for establishing and operating infection
   prevention and patient services committees in health facilities and availing appropriate storage for the
   collection of hazardous waste pending disposal, but the ICR also stated that further improvements were
   needed. The 2017 additional financing brought additional attention to social development issues, including
   for the preparation of a strategy to tackle Gender-Based Violence (GBV).

   Note: While the PAD and ICR explained the above route for addressing environmental and social aspects
   under a PforR lending instrument, the ICR categorized the operation under Environmental Assessment
   Category B, applicable to investment projects. The Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (ISDS) of January 30,
   2017 for this Hybrid PforR with Technical Assistance IPF Component noted that no Safeguard Policies were
   triggered and that the Environmental Category was a C Category. No explanation was offered to clarify the
   discrepancies.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Overall fiduciary compliance was assessed as moderately satisfactory (ICR, p. 28). The ICR reported that
   funds were used for intended purposes and that the government adhered to fiduciary requirements. The
   program used qualified fiduciary personnel, submitted regular quarterly financial reports, produced internal
   audit reports and procurement audits; and submitted semiannual fraud and corruption reports. Audit
   opinions were unqualified, but two audits of the Pharmaceuticals Fund and Supply Agency raised
   qualification points that necessitated a detailed action plan for resolution. Also, there were delays in
   implementing a new financial management module.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None reported.



d. Other
   --



10. Ratings

                                                                                                   Page 18 of 20
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       ET - Health SDG Program for Results (P123531)



                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                   IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                          Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Bank Performance                 Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                   Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                   ---                   Substantial


11. Lessons

The ICR (pp. 31-33) offered several lessons and recommendations, including the following lessons
re-stated by IEG Review:

The challenging context in countries with large disparities in access and persistent gaps
underscores the importance of sustained, long-term engagement in human development.
While Ethiopia made steady and impressive progress in health advancements, much more remains
to be done to have a major and sustained impact on maternal and child health. A follow-on operation
is ongoing. Designing interventions that are appropriate for different regions (agrarian, nomadic,
urban) will take time, including for a thorough understanding of what works and how different regions
can be incentivized to revamp their health services. The large number of internally displaced people
and the complexity of conflict after-effects require specialized and well-tailored support to restore
and further advance maternal and child health services.

A Program for Results can be complemented by Investment Project Financing components
to provide specific technical support, capacity building, and targeted strengthening. To
bolster capacity, the World Bank and development partners provided hands-on-support on a wide
range of issues, such as for civil registration, vital statistics, fiduciary capacity of the SDG
Performance Fund, National Nutrition Program, health financing and fiduciary systems in the health
sector.

The consistent availability of reliable information facilitates tracking of program progress,
performance assessment, identification of challenges, and sustenance of donor
harmonization. Harmonized donor support facilitated the production of regular Demographic and
Health Surveys; annual facility readiness surveys; assessment of Community-Based Health
Insurance; and nutrition surveys. The timely availability of data enabled the verification of DLIs.
Donor support also contributed to an enhanced Health Management Information System.



12. Assessment Recommended?

  No

13. Comments on Quality of ICR

                                                                                                   Page 19 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ET - Health SDG Program for Results (P123531)




The ICR provided a thorough and candid review of the program experience. The narrative was results-oriented
and supported the ratings and available evidence. The ICR was aligned to program development objectives.
The evidence was robust and included demographic and health surveys supported by international technical
assistance. The discussion of efficacy was intertwined with the theory of change and its results chain. The
review was reasonably concise, internally consistent, and followed guidelines. The assessment of relevance of
DLIs would have benefited from added accuracy and analytical rigor if the ICR had opted to discuss each of
the main DLIs separately. Lessons tended to be framed as findings, and there were occasional lapses in clarity.




  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                 Page 20 of 20
