      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Mozambique Covid19 Response DPO (P174152)



                                                                                   Report Number: ICRR0023042

1. Operation Information



 Operation ID                                Operation Name
 P174152                                     Mozambique Covid19 Response DPO

 Country                                     Practice Area (Lead)
 Mozambique                                  Macroeconomics, Trade and Investment



  Non-Programmatic DPF

  L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)                    Total Financing (USD)
  IDA-D7330                                 30-Jun-2021                                          101,539,035.00

  Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
  22-Oct-2020                               30-Jun-2021

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                Co-financing (USD)

  Original Commitment                             100,000,000.00                                             0.00

  Revised Commitment                              100,000,000.00                                             0.00

  Actual                                          101,539,035.00                                             0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Mees Daniel van der         Jennifer L. Keller            Jennifer L. Keller              IEGEC
 Werf



2. Program Objectives and Pillars/Policy Areas
DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives

The objectives of the proposed operation were to (i) mitigate the impact on lives and livelihoods by supporting
the immediate Covid-19 response, and (ii) support reforms that will aid the recovery and enhance fiscal
sustainability.



                                                                                                    Page 1 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Mozambique Covid19 Response DPO (P174152)



The above is the PDO as it appears in the operation’s Financing Agreement. This PDO can be unpacked into
three underlying objectives: namely:

     i. Mitigate the impact on lives and livelihoods by supporting the immediate Covid-19 response.
    ii. Support reforms that will aid the recovery.
   iii. Enhance fiscal sustainability.


b. Pillars/Policy Areas
The project supported:

Pillar 1: Mitigating the impact on lives and livelihoods by supporting the immediate COVID-19 response.

Pillar 2: Supporting reforms that will aid the recovery from the crisis and enhance fiscal sustainability.


c. Comments on Program Cost, Financing and Dates

The project was approved on October 22nd, 2020, for a US$ 100 million IDA grant. It became effective on
December 14th, 2020 and was closed on the original closing date of June 30th, 2020. At that time US$
101,539,035 had been disbursed. The discrepancy between the amount approved and the amount disbursed is
due to changes in the exchange rate between the approval and disbursement dates


3. Relevance of Design

a. Relevance of Objectives

 Relevance to country context

 The objective of the first pillar was directly related to the COVID-19 pandemic response. During the
 project design phase, daily reported case numbers in Mozambique were still relatively low with the seven-day
 average having not yet significantly surpassed the 200 mark. However, the potential impact of COVID had
 already become apparent in other countries and a significant reduction in economic activity was anticipated as
 social distancing and travel restrictions (domestically and globally) would affect demand for goods and
 services. Growth was expected to decline to 1.3 percent in 2020, down from a pre-COVID forecast of 4.3
 percent, with significant risks for a further slowdown. This was expected to cause a sizeable number of
 Mozambicans to fall back into poverty. The impact of social distancing measures and business closures was
 expected to be felt most strongly in urban and peri-urban areas, where it would impact sources of income from
 informal work and self-employment. Mozambique’s urban poverty rate was estimated to increase from 29 to at
 least 31 percent in 2020, pushing an additional 250,000-300,000 urban people into poverty on account of
 employment and income losses, price increases, and a deterioration of public services.

 The objective of the second pillar was related to Mozambique’s economic and fiscal outlook for which
 the pandemic was not the only challenge. The COVID-19 outbreak reached Mozambique as the country
 attempted to recover from two major shocks: the hidden debt crisis and the devastating effects of cyclones Idai
 and Kenneth in 2019. In 2016, Mozambique’s track record for high growth was disrupted when large,

                                                                                                       Page 2 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Mozambique Covid19 Response DPO (P174152)



previously unreported, external borrowing came to light. The revelation of US$1.3 billion in undisclosed debt
reduced confidence in the country, precipitated a temporary cessation of budget support from several major
donors, increased debt levels, and more than halved the average rate of growth. In 2019 Mozambique had
made notable progress in remedying the effects of these shocks, but past gains were threatened by the
potential impact of the pandemic. The DPL supported the objectives of improving economic management,
increasing accountability and transparency of government institutions, and strengthening the business
environment for job creation which broadly aligned with issues identified in the Mozambique SCD.

Relevance to CPF and country development strategy

Pillar 1 focused on practical steps needed to mitigate the health and financial impacts of the pandemic. It
aligned with the CPF objectives of improving health service delivery and extending coverage of social
protection and labor programs.

Pillar II aligned with the CPF goal of improving economic management, increasing accountability and
transparency of government institutions, and strengthening the business environment.


b. Relevance of Prior Actions

Rationale

 Prior Actions
 PDO1: Mitigate the impact on lives and livelihoods by supporting the immediate Covid-19 response.
 PA 1: To strengthen the health sector response to COVID-19, the GoM has
 (i) approved the COVID-19 Operational Preparedness and Response Plan; and
 (ii) approved fast-track clearance procedures for COVID-19 related medical imports.
 PA 2: To support the water sector response to COVID-19, the GoM has issued instructions to water utilities and
 service providers to
 (i) ensure all users remain connected despite payment status;
 (ii) to delay water bill payments for all consumers under the social tariff; and
 (iii) to exempt from water payment all users of public and private standpipes.
 PA 3: To widen access to social protection during the COVID-19 pandemic,
 (i) the GoM has approved an increase in the number of social transfer beneficiaries from 700,000 to 1,690,000
 households
 (ii) the Central Bank has authorized the opening of digital accounts using identification from the social security
 institute for social transfer beneficiaries; and
 (iii) the GoM has established a fuel price stabilization fund, which will widen fiscal space for the COVID-19 social
 response.
 PA 4: To provide liquidity support to banks and firms,
 (i) the Central Bank has provided a US$500 million credit line facility to commercial banks; and
 (ii) the GoM has deferred income and corporate tax payments of small firms to 2021.
 PDO 2: Support reforms that will aid the recovery
 PA 7: To increase financial inclusion, the Central Bank has submitted to the Council of Ministers the simplified
 bank account law (“Lei que aprova o regime juridico das contas bancarias”) for opening bank accounts.



                                                                                                     Page 3 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Mozambique Covid19 Response DPO (P174152)



PA 8: To improve access to finance for small and medium enterprises (SME), the Council of Ministers has
approved regulations for the use of moveable collateral guarantees and the creation of a centralized moveable
collateral registry
PDO3: Support reforms that enhance fiscal sustainability
PA 5: The GoM has improved debt transparency and fiscal risk management through mandatory annual
publication of
(i) annual debt reports with coverage of state-owned enterprises (SOE) and LNG debt published; and
(ii) the financial statements of the national hydrocarbons company (ENH); and
(iii) the publication of a credit risk assessment framework for SOEs from 2019 onwards.
PA 6: To enhance debt sustainability, the Council of Ministers has approved decree that establishes a regulatory
framework for public investment management, which requires planned projects
(i) to be pre-appraised for social and economic impact before financing and
(ii) requires consideration of disaster resilience for infrastructure projects.

PDO1: Mitigate the impact on lives and livelihoods by supporting the immediate Covid-19 response.

Prior Action 1: PA 1 was the only PA that directly supported the medical response to the pandemic.
Mozambique’s health sector needed to rapidly develop key response measures, mobilize external resources,
and map them to key activities in a coordinated manner. To this end, the Ministry of Health (MISAU) had to
develop a costed operational plan for both national and provincial levels. Mozambique’s emergency response to
COVID-19 also required the importation of medical products from an increasingly competitive market. The
Health Response plan of MISAU estimated that US$153 million in medicines and medical supplies needed to
be procured in the following six months. Tariffs and red tape were making the response costly and slowing
down access to critical inputs. The simplified importation process was expected to cut the time to import by an
average of 41 hours per shipment at borders and 18 hours per shipment at ports. This would help to make the
overall Covid response quicker and more efficient. Albeit not grounded in country-specific analytical work, there
was a clear and convincing results chain linking PA 1 to the achievement of PDO I. The PA is therefore rated
Satisfactory.

Prior Action 2: PA 2 was designed to prevent households unable to pay their bills from losing water access
which was important to hygiene during a pandemic. That said, in 2020, only 44 percent of the urban population
in the bottom two income quintiles had access to a piped water connection or public standpipes leaving more
than half of the poorest to not benefit. Finally, the moratorium on disconnections only lasted for the five months
of the state of emergency while the pandemic and its disruptions continued for another two years.
Disconnections resumed soon after the DPF was approved, and by early 2021 they had returned to pre-COVID
levels. Overall, this PA’s results chain was credibly linked to alleviating the impact of the pandemic. Moderately
satisfactory.

Prior Action 3: By providing cash transfers targeted at the most vulnerable people and areas, PA 3 aimed to
provide a buffer against extreme poverty. As many Mozambicans lack the identification required for opening
mobile money or basic bank accounts, the central bank issued comfort letters to mobile money operators that
enabled undocumented Mozambicans to open accounts. The fuel price stabilization fund collected resources
from a fuel tax to support the government’s commitment to smooth the passthrough of fuel price spikes of more
than 20 percent of the previous month’s price. This was designed to protect the budget from fiscal risks due to
price spikes (thus contributing to PDO III.) The GoM committed to allocating inflows to this fund for social
protection transfers in 2020. This PA helped finance the COVID-19 social response, therefore, contributing to
PDO I, but the temporary reallocation of the stabilization fund undermined its intended fiscal objective in the
short term. Overall, there is an explicit and convincing results chain linking, especially the first part of, the PA to

                                                                                                        Page 4 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Mozambique Covid19 Response DPO (P174152)



the achievement of the PDO to which the PA is likely to make a major contribution, it is therefore rated
Satisfactory.

Prior Action 4: By the end of April 2020, 1,175 firms had suspended their activities and over 12,000 workers
had been laid off. PA 4 aimed to mitigate the pandemic’s impact by ensuring that financial institutions were able
to provide access to credit and working capital for businesses in a sustainable way (PA 4 i) and by supporting
the survival of viable small firms (PA 4 ii). The first measure of the PA, the provision of a US$500 million credit
line by the Central Bank (BdM) to commercial banks was intended to supplement liquidity in the financial
system and in an effort to sustain the availability and reduce the cost of financing to firms. The ICR and
Program Document provide no estimate of the possible impact of this measure on the economy, including
whether or not financial institutions would lend the additional liquidity or use it to support buffers, although staff
indicated analysis had been conducted by the Ministry of Finance. PA 4 ii’s tax deferrals were targeted at the
least resilient firms; very small firms with a turnover of less than US$36,000, which covered 75 percent of all
formal firms, many of which did not make significant profits, particularly during the pandemic. Informality
remained high in Mozambique: about 80% of the Mozambican labor force works in the informal sector, which is
estimated to account for 31% of GDP and was outside the scope of these measures. The Program Document
estimated that at least 5,000 firms would benefit from the income tax relief measure. With an average firm size
of 4 workers per firm, this measure was expected to benefit at most 20,000 workers out of a labor force of more
than 14 million. The Bank provided technical assistance through the Financial Stability and Inclusion Project
(P166107). Overall, given the unclear results chain for measure (i) and the likely minor contribution of measure
(ii) to the achievement of the PDO this PA is rated moderately unsatisfactory.

PDO 2: Support reforms that will aid the recovery

Prior Action 7: Only 33 percent of Mozambican adults had a bank account in 2019, and of these only 19
percent were women. The introduction of simplified Bank account requirements for small customers was
intended to boost financial inclusion by 5 percent point. The prior action only required submission of the law to
the Council of Ministers, making the PA the first step towards greater financial inclusion. Project documentation
indicated an assumption that increased financial inclusion would boost the economic recovery. However, the
link between the COVID recovery and financial inclusion is weak and weakened further by the time it would take
for financial inclusion to rise because of this PA. Implementation of the bank account law was supported by the
Financial Inclusion and Stability Project (P166107). The PA is likely to make no discernible contribution to the
achievement of the PDO. Consequently, this PA is rated unsatisfactory.

Prior Action 8: According to the 2018 Enterprise Survey, close to 90 percent of loans in Mozambique require
collateral and loan applications of SMEs are disproportionately rejected for lack of collateral. This particularly
disadvantages women since they tend to own less real estate property than men. Developing a collateral
framework for movable assets was a step towards addressing a financing constraint and was intended to
support the private sector in the pandemic recovery phase. Support for the preparation of the legal framework,
regulations, and technical specifications for the collateral registry was provided under an IFC Advisory Services
project financed by the Swiss State Secretariat for Economic Affairs. Implementation of the registry was
financed under the Financial Inclusion and Stability Project (P166107) as part of its support for the use of
mobile payments to deliver social welfare payments. However, no evidence is presented to support the view
that the absence of a collateral registry was a major constraint to firm access to finance in
Mozambique. Without establishing this link, the PA is likely to have a negligible effect on the economic
recovery. The PA is rated unsatisfactory.




                                                                                                       Page 5 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Mozambique Covid19 Response DPO (P174152)



 PDO3: Support reforms that enhance fiscal sustainability

 Prior Action 5 and 6:

 Mozambique was already in debt distress before the beginning of the pandemic. The 2019 IMF Article IV
 Consultations recommended further improving debt transparency and SOE oversight, as did the 2021 SCD
 Update. Despite past government commitments, annual debt reports were not published regularly and were
 limited to central government direct and guaranteed debt. As SOEs were at the heart of the 2016 debt crisis, PA
 5 focused on SOE debt reporting and the financial position of the national LNG company. Improving public
 investment management, including better appraisal and selection and increased transparency, also advised by
 the 2016 SCD, would help ensure that debt-financed projects are profitable, generating the necessary returns to
 repay debt, thus enhancing fiscal sustainability. These PAs built on reforms already underway and supported by
 the Economic Management for Inclusive Growth technical assistance program (P168754). The World Bank is
 also providing appropriate follow-up through a new IPF; the Managing Public Resources for Service Delivery
 Project (P173178). The impact of two recent cyclones underlined the importance of building more resilient
 infrastructure. This in turn can reduce the resources required to repair or replace infrastructure, thereby
 reducing the contraction of new debt (PDO III). Both PAs were being supported by an ongoing technical
 assistance program of the World Bank, co-funded by the UK.

 The impact of the publication of a credit risk assessment framework for SOEs on the PDO is unclear. The
 program document states an expectation that “with increased access to information about SOE debts and the
 establishment of credit risk assessment framework, it is expected that the Ministry of Finance will have credit
 risk ratings for ten of the largest SOEs by the end of 2021.” However, given the fact that the publication of debt
 reports was discontinued by the GoM in 2017, this expected outcome seems far from guaranteed.

 Overall, while the results chain linking PA 5 to the achievement of the PDO is credible it is unlikely to make a
 significant contribution to its achievement and is therefore rated Moderately Unsatisfactory. Both components
 of PA 6 are relevant to supporting efficient and effective use of funds borrowed to finance public investment.
 There is an explicit and convincing results chain linking PA 6 to the achievement of the PDO, it is therefore
 rated Satisfactory.



Rating

Moderately Satisfactory


4. Relevance of Results Indicators

Rationale

Most indicators only partially measured progress to objectives because of the prior actions and in a
number of cases were no more than tangentially related to the achievements of the PDOs. The weak
relevance of several RIs resulted in a general downgrading of ratings for efficacy.

Results indicators by Objective and PAs; baseline and target values; status and achievement



                                                                                                     Page 6 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Mozambique Covid19 Response DPO (P174152)



                                                                                Actual vs.
Results         Associated RI                                                              RI achievement
                                          Baseline     Target      Actual       targeted
Indicators      PAs        relevance                                                       rating
                                                                                change
PDO 1: Mitigating the impact on lives and livelihoods by supporting the immediate COVID-19 response
RI 1: Number of
laboratories with                                      5           19
COVID-19
                  PA 1      S             0 (2020)                              380%       Substantial
testing                                                (December (December
capacities                                             2021)       2021)
established.
RI 2: Average                                          less than
                                                                   1,121
number of                                 12,059       1,000
household
                  PA 2      MU                                     (April-      98.9%      Substantial
disconnections                            (Jan.-March (April-
                                                                   September
from piped water                          2020)        September
                                                                   2020)
services.                                              2020)
RI 3a: Number of
social transfer                                        150,000
                                          1,000                    120,506
beneficiaries
                  PA 3      MU                                                  80.8%
reached through                                        (December
                                          (2019)                   (April 2022)
electronic                                             2021)
payment means.
RI 3b: New                                                                                 Modest
mobile
                                                       90,000
transaction                               0                        75,715
accounts opened PA 3        MS                                                  84.1%
                                                       (December
by women due to                           (2019)                   (April 2022)
                                                       2021)
social transfer
scale up
RI 4: Number of                                        5,000
                                          0                                                Negligible
firms benefiting
                  PA 4      S                                      1,300        26%
from tax relief                                        (December
                                          (2019)
measures.                                              2021)
PDO 2: supporting reforms that will aid the recovery
RI 7: Adults with
                                                       40%         31.1%
a deposit                                 35%
account in a      PA 7      U                                                   -78%       Negligible
                                                       (December (December
formal financial                          (2019)
                                                       2021)       2021)
institution (%).
RI 8: Number of
new registrations                                      200         5,034
                                          0
of security
                  PA 8      MU                                                  2500%      Substantial
interests in the                                       (December (December
                                          (2019)
collateral                                             2021)       2021)
registry.
PDO 3: support reforms that enhance fiscal sustainability


                                                                                               Page 7 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Mozambique Covid19 Response DPO (P174152)



                                                        10           12
RI 5: Number of                            0
SOEs with a        PA 5       S                                                   120%         Substantial
                                                        (December (December
credit risk rating                         (2019)
                                                        2021)     2021)
RI 6: Share of
new projects in
                                                        50%          100%
the budget                                 0                                                   High
selected from     PA 6        S                                                   200%
                                                        (December (2022
the pre-                                   (2019)
                                                        2021)     Budget)
appraised
project pipeline.



PDO1: Mitigating the impact on lives and livelihoods by supporting the immediate COVID-19 response

RI 1(The number of laboratories with Covid-19 testing capacities established): This results indicator
adequately measured the impact of the first reform under PA 1 with a clear and credible results chain. RI
1: Satisfactory

RI 2 (Average number of household disconnections from piped water services): This indicator failed to
capture the substantial number of disconnections following the five months grace period for nonpayment
of water fees. Limiting the measurement period to five months undermined the indicator’s ability to capture
the extent to which households were protected from disconnection. RI 2: Moderately Unsatisfactory

RI 3a (Number of social transfer beneficiaries reached through electronic payment means): This indicator
measured only a small subset of the beneficiaries of social transfers since most beneficiaries were outside
the digital payment net. Consequently, as acknowledged in the ICR, a better indicator could have been
the total number of beneficiaries receiving payment, regardless of method. RI 3a: Moderately
Unsatisfactory

RI 3b (New mobile transaction accounts opened by women due to social transfer scale up): While this
indicator measured the change in women’s access to finance, the lack of an indicator capturing new
accounts for men, leaves uncertainty about the total financial inclusion gains achieved. RI 3b: Moderately
Satisfactory

RI 4 (Number of firms benefiting from tax relief measures): RI 4 fully measured the impact of reform (ii),
the deferral of the small firms’ income and corporate tax payments. RI 4: Satisfactory



PDO 3: support reforms that enhance fiscal sustainability

RI 5 (Number of SOEs with a credit risk rating): RI 5 measured the outcome of (iii) the publication of a
credit risk assessment framework for SOEs. As acknowledged in the ICR, RI 5 could have been
strengthened by specifying the need to publish the ratings, which was expected but was not yet in place in
April 2022. RI 5: Satisfactory



                                                                                                      Page 8 of 18
                   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                   Mozambique Covid19 Response DPO (P174152)



               RI 6 (Share of new projects in the budget selected from the pre-appraised project pipeline): adequately
               measures the impact of PA 6 (i) toward the objective although a measurement capturing the financial size
               of the project would be more informative than a share of total projects. RI 6: Satisfactory



               PDO 2: supporting reforms that will aid the recovery

               RI 7 (Adults with a deposit account in a formal financial institution %): RI 7 involved a new law to allow
               simplified bank accounts. The indicator – the percentage of adults with a bank account – could be affected
               by many other factors, and so was not tightly linked to the prior action. As acknowledged in the ICR, an
               indicator on the number of accounts opened because of the new, simplified requirements, would have
               been more appropriate. RI 7: Unsatisfactory

               RI 8 (Number of new registrations of security interests in the collateral registry): While RI 8 measures the
               number of new registrations, it is uncertain how many of the new registrants were able to successfully
               access finance or how much finance was accessed using registered collateral. RI 8: Moderately
               unsatisfactory.



   Rating

   Moderately Satisfactory

   5. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
EFFICACY_TBL




                OBJECTIVE 1
                Objective
                Mitigating the impact on lives and livelihoods by supporting the immediate COVID-19 response
                [PAs 1-4, RIs 1-4]

                Rationale
                One of the five targets was fully achieved. The remaining targets were not achieved. Most targets were rated
                substantial, but one target was rated negligible therefore the efficacy of Objective 1 is rated moderately
                satisfactory.

                RI 1: The targeted number of laboratories with COVID-19 testing capacities established was exceeded by a
                large margin. However, other aspects of the immediate COVID-19 response, likely impacted by the
                Operational Preparedness and Response Plan or the targeted approved fast-track clearance procedures for
                COVID-19-related medical imports (e.g., reduced processing time for COVID-19-related medical imports)
                were not captured. The RI is rated substantial.

                RI 2: An average number of household disconnections from piped water services below 1000 was targeted.
                The target was almost met with an actual achievement of 1,121. Because of this measure the water regulator
                incurred losses for which compensation was late to arrive. This caused doubts about the government’s
                commitment to compensation which made the regulator reluctant to extend the relief measure. The regulator
                also lacked the monitoring platform necessary to ensure compliance. A participatory monitory platform to

                                                                                                                    Page 9 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Mozambique Covid19 Response DPO (P174152)



enable more direct communication between consumers and the regulator was planned but never developed.
The RI is therefore rated substantial.

RI 3a: with an actual achievement of 120,506 the targeted 150,000 social transfer beneficiaries reached
through electronic payment means were not met. The more-than-doubling in the number of beneficiaries was
very ambitious and exceeded the capacity of the responsible agency which was itself hindered by COVID. A
more robust indicator for the social transfer program would have been the total number of beneficiaries
actually receiving payment, instead of focusing only on those receiving digital payments. RI 3b: targeted the
opening of 90,000 new mobile transaction accounts by women due to the social transfer scale-up. With
75,715 new accounts opened the target was not met. The indicator was only indirectly related to social
transfers. The impact of the establishment of a fuel price stabilization fund by the GoM on financing the
COVID-19 social response was not captured. The RIs are therefore rated substantial.

RI 4: The targeted 5000 firms benefitting from tax relief was not met as only 1,300 firms benefitted. The
contribution towards the objective of the US$500 million credit line facility to commercial banks was not
reflected. Evidence elsewhere in the ICR indicates that the facility was not very effective as only US$3.5
million was disbursed by the time it was closed at the end of 2020 suggesting that foreign exchange liquidity
was not a major challenge. Therefore, this RI is rated negligible.



Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Support reforms that enhance fiscal sustainability
[PAs 5-6, RIs 5-6]

Rationale
As the achievement of all RI targets is rated substantial, the efficacy of Objective 2 is rated satisfactory.

RI 5: the targeted 10 SOEs with credit risk rating was exceeded by 2. However, RI 5 only measured the direct
output of PA 5 reform (iii) the publication of a credit risk assessment framework for SOEs. The impact of other
supported reforms related to SOE debt reporting and ENH financial statements towards fiscal sustainability
was not reflected. Therefore, RI 5 efficacy is rated substantial.

RI 6: aimed for 50% of new projects in the budget to be selected from the pre-appraised project pipeline, in
reality this was 100%. Consequently, RI 6 efficacy is rated high.



Rating

Satisfactory

OBJECTIVE 3

                                                                                                   Page 10 of 18
                         Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                         Mozambique Covid19 Response DPO (P174152)




                      Objective
                      Supporting reforms that will aid the recovery
                      [PAs 7-8, RIs 7-8]

                      Rationale
                      As the achievement of more than a third of RI targets is rated negligible, the overall efficacy of this objective is
                      rated moderately unsatisfactory.

                      RI 7: targeted a 5-percentage point rise in the share of adults with a deposit account in a formal financial
                      institution. In fact, a 3.9 percent point decrease took place. PA 7 required only the submission to the Council
                      of Ministers of simplified bank account law, rather than submission to the National Assembly. Consequently,
                      several steps remained, including Parliamentary approval, before its provisions could be implemented. Then
                      a response by private individuals was required to actually open accounts. Overall, this made the outcome
                      susceptible to delay. Therefore RI 7 is rated negligible.

                      RI 8: targeted 200 new registrations of security interests in the collateral registry. More than 5000 new
                      registrations were achieved. It should be noted that while RI 8 measures the number of new registrations, it is
                      uncertain how many of the new registrants were able to successfully access finance. RI 8 is rated
                      substantial.



                      Rating

                      Moderately Unsatisfactory


OVERALL EFF TBL OLD




Overall Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
Rationale

Objective I is rated moderately satisfactory, Objective II is rated satisfactory, and Objective III is rated moderately
unsatisfactory. Drawing on all three ratings the overall efficacy is rated as moderately satisfactory.



Overall Efficacy Rating
Moderately Satisfactory


      6. Outcome

      Rationale

      Given the urgent nature of the operation, it was generally well designed with a reasonable number of
      prior actions and a strong focus on the pandemic response. There was however a disconnect between the
      objective of Pillar II and its PAs. Pillar II’s strongest PAs, PA 5 and 6, focused on debt transparency and debt

                                                                                                                          Page 11 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Mozambique Covid19 Response DPO (P174152)



sustainability which, albeit of great importance, especially to Mozambique, is only one aspect of fiscal
sustainability. PA 7 and 8 could be argued to contribute to increasing state revenues but that effect would be
very indirect indeed. PA 5 to 8’s overall contribution to economic recovery in 2020 was likely modest.

Overall, the RIs were quantitative and measurable, and their achievement was substantial. While the RIs
were generally clearly defined, the associated data sources and how the RIs were calculated were not. As the
evidence behind the RIs is often not appropriately referenced, it is unclear which part of the GoM or other
institution supplied the data. This makes it challenging to assess the credibility of the sources. Furthermore, in
many cases where the PA consisted of multiple reforms, the connected indicator only partly measured what the
collective effort of the reforms was meant to amount to. The ICR further recognized the shortcomings of results
indicators 2, 3, 5, and 7.

With both the relevance of the prior actions and the achievement of the objective (efficacy) rated moderately
satisfactory, the overall outcome rating is moderately satisfactory.


a. Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

7. Risk to Development Outcome

While the sustainability of the achieved outcomes is supported by several operations, political risk
remain for the debt management reforms. Most of the measures under Pillar I (PAs 1, 2, and 4) were only
intended to be temporary. However, additional financing was approved for the COVID-19 Strategic
Preparedness and Response project (P178068) in December 2021. This financing enabled the import of
additional vaccines and other medical supplies and the continued implementation of the COVID-19
Preparedness and Response Plan. The policy measures supported by PAs 3, 5, 6, 7 and 8 are likely to be
sustained. A new Social Protection and Economic Resilience project (P173640) will support the maintenance
and further expansion of the social protection system (PA 3) and digital payment promotion (PA 7). The
outcomes of PA 5 and 6 are likely to be sustained due to the increasing GoM commitment to public financial
management reforms since 2019. Additionally, the Managing Public Resources for Service Delivery Project
(P173178) was approved in December 2021 and supports improved PFM, including better monitoring of
SOEs. A new DPF series, Institutions and Economic Transformation (P176762) will also support continued
reforms in the areas of SOE performance, financial inclusion, fiscal rules, climate-smart public investment,
and the water sector. Both this and the future DPF are also supported by a continuous trust-funded TA
program on transparency, fiscal risk management, and public investment management. The wider reform
agenda put in place in the wake of the hidden debt crisis is also supported by the IMF and other donors.
However, given the GoM’s past track record a risk of policy reversal, especially around debt management
persists. This will especially be the case when Mozambique starts to receive substantial LNG receipts as is
expected to be the case by the end of the decade. Finally, the collateral registry (PA 8) is proving very
popular. Financial inclusion should eventually increase, supported by the new simplified bank account law.


8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Bank Performance – Design

                                                                                                    Page 12 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Mozambique Covid19 Response DPO (P174152)




Rationale


When the operation was designed there was much uncertainty about what the full impact of COVID
would be. While disruptions were expected to last 2-3 months, government-imposed COVID restrictions
remained in place for a year and a half. The operation included a good balance between short-term
COVID-relief measures and structural reforms. However, the longer-than-anticipated COVID limitations
made achieving sufficient progress on the structural reforms more challenging than anticipated. More
modest ambitions and a focus on less complex implementation processes would have been justified within
the uncertain context of a pandemic. The operation did mostly benefit urban Mozambiquans and formal
sector workers. Half of the operations PAs aimed to mitigate the impact on lives and livelihoods. Several of
these measures were likely to only or mostly benefit urban populations (which were only 38% of the
population in 2021) and formal sector workers. The water measures were likely to benefit only urban and
peri-urban households while deferred tax payments would exclusively benefit the formal sector, which is in
majority urban.

The PAs were in most cases supported by sound and rigorous analyses and articulated a clear
results chain between PAs and PDOs, but there were significant exceptions. The design of the DPO
was informed by lessons from the programmatic DPO series terminated after the hidden debt scandal.
Pillar I and its PAs were informed by various World Bank studies in 2020. PA 1 was informed by findings
on the need for a national public health emergency preparedness and response plan and the criticality of
testing capacity from Coronavirus disease (COVID-19) technical guidance (WHO, 2020). PA 2 was
informed by Water Supply, Sanitation, and Hygiene (WASH) and COVID-19 and Critical WASH
Interventions for Effective COVID-19 Pandemic Response (World Bank, 2020). They identified investing to
strengthen core public health infrastructure, including water supply and sanitation systems as one of the
most cost-effective strategies for increasing pandemic preparedness. WASH services are also critical
during the recovery phase of a disease outbreak to mitigate secondary impacts on community livelihoods
and well-being. The lesson from Policy Actions to Mitigate the Poverty and Distributional Impacts of the
COVID-19 Pandemic (World Bank, 2020), that temporary moratoria of public utility bills successfully
dampen the negative short-term effects on household incomes due to loss of labor in the wake of COVID-
19 also informed PA 2. PA 3 was informed, among others, by the lesson that the use of existing structures
especially where there are social safety nets in place is the preferred social policy response from The
Economic Policy Response to the COVID-19 Crisis (World Bank, 2020). Pillar II and its PAs were
supported by country-specific analysis from the Debt Management Performance Assessment report
(2017), Mind the Rural Investment Gap: Disparities in Access to Basic Infrastructure and Directions for
Mozambique’s Public Investment Program (2019), the National Financial Inclusion Strategy (NFIS, 2016-
2022) Mid-Term Review, and the World Bank Enterprise Survey for Mozambique. Although based on the
same analysis the RIs in some cases (e.g., RI4, 5, and 6) only partially captured the underlying results
chain. For some PAs, the analytical underpinning was lacking. There was no analysis of the expected
impact of the credit line (PA 4i) while the deferred income and corporate tax were based on ad-hoc
analysis from the Ministry of Finance.

The Program Document successfully identified other risks and constraints to achieving the PDOs
and identified credible mitigation measures. The Program Document identified three main risks and
constraints to achieving the PDOs: 1) a further worsening macroeconomic situation due to a more
prolonged and wider spread of COVID-19, 2) fiduciary risks, and 3) low institutional capacity. The severity
of the impact of COVID on the Mozambican economy is largely outside the scope of influence of the WB.

                                                                                                   Page 13 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Mozambique Covid19 Response DPO (P174152)



The fiduciary risks were partly mitigated with continued donor assistance from the World Bank and other
partners to strengthen budget execution and controls and the authorities’ commitment to audit and report
on COVID-19 expenditures, including large contracts, which are monitored jointly with the IMF and other
budget support donors. Additionally, given its participation in the Debt Service Suspension Initiative (DSSI),
Mozambique has committed to monitor and report on the use of resources dedicated to the COVID-19
response, including those freed up by the initiative. The low institutional capacity risks were mitigated in
two ways. First, the Bank was providing technical assistance to strengthen institutional resources in all
areas supported by this operation. Second, the DPF was complementary to other projects and technical
assistance provided by IDA and development partners, which together constituted a “more holistic support
environment than one operation can offer.” For instance, PA 5 and 6 built on reforms already underway
and supported by the Economic Management for Inclusive Growth technical assistance program
(P168754). Yet, this technical assistance fell short of sufficiently raising the capacity of the social protection
agency as stated by the ICR. Consequently, the project was not able to fully meet its targets PDO I.
Finally, it should be noted that the most pressing constraint on achieving the PDOs was the relatively
modest ambition of the PAs in relation to the broadly defined high-level goals. This is especially the case
for PDO III “supporting reforms that will aid the recovery”, to which the PAs are unlikely to deliver a
substantial contribution.

The operation formed an integral part of development partners’ collective response to the crisis in
Mozambique which was coordinated by a high-level group of heads of missions that discussed strategic
COVID-19 response messages with the Prime Minister. Its preparation specifically benefitted from the
COVID-19 Health Coordination Group, which was created by health partners to support the Ministry of
Health (MISAU) in the formulation, operationalization, and implementation of its Response Plan. The
operation further benefitted from the Social Protection Working Group (composed of the United Nations
(ILO, WFP, UNICEF), the World Bank, the UK, and Sweden), which has been formed to support the
Government in its plan to increase payments to existing recipients of social safety net programs. The
partners support targeting through technical assistance, as well as distribution of cash, potentially through
UN organizations active in certain cities/areas. The operation has also been coordinated with budget
support programs being developed by other development partners in response to the COVID-19 crisis. It
has been coordinated with the IMF, which approved emergency support to Mozambique to help bolster
foreign exchange reserves and, together with the World Bank’s funds, close the fiscal financing gap.
Furthermore, the DPO reinforced the IMF’s agreement with the government on strict transparency and
accountability measures regarding expenditures related to the COVID-19 response. Finally, the operation
was also part of a broader effort by the Bank with significant complementarities. This included significant
support to the authorities in the prevention, detection, and response to COVID-19, including acquisition
and deployment of vaccines—through the Mozambique COVID-19 strategic preparedness and Response
Project (P175884).



Rating

Satisfactory

b. Bank Performance – Implementation

Rationale


                                                                                                        Page 14 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Mozambique Covid19 Response DPO (P174152)



The ICR offers limited insight into the team’s ability to identify new and emerging risks to the
achievement of the PDOs throughout the evaluation. Given the emergency nature of the operation, less
demanding PAs, with fewer actors, and simplified implementation procedures would have been appropriate.
More than doubling the number of cash transfer beneficiaries was overly ambitious and exceeded the capacity
of the implementing agency. Deferred tax payments for SMEs proved to have limited impact indicating that the
application process was too cumbersome. It is unclear when it became apparent that indicators 3a, 3b, and 4
were unlikely to be met. There is no indication that additional action was taken at that time to address these
shortcomings when they became clear. Especially the risks to the success of PA 2 were not mitigated in a
timely fashion. When FIPAG sought government commitment to compensation, compensatory financing was
arranged to offset the temporary losses. Unfortunately, uncertainty and delays undermined its effectiveness. It
should be acknowledged that the project’s ability to respond to emerging challenges might have been hindered
by the fact that COVID restrictions barred the implementing TTL from Mozambique. In addition, the project’s
short timeline and emergency nature are another extenuating factor in the project’s inability to sufficiently
address these constraints before project closure. However, as the ICR notes, given the emergency nature of
the operation, less demanding PAs, with fewer actors, and simplified implementation procedures would have
been appropriate.



Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

c. Overall Bank Performance

Rationale

Overall Bank Performance is rated moderately satisfactory. The PAs were in most cases supported by
sound and rigorous analyses and articulated a clear results chain between PAs and PDOs. The Program
Document successfully identified the main risks and constraints to achieving the PDOs and identified credible
mitigation measures. However, given the emergency nature of the operation, less demanding measures,
fewer actors, and simplified implementation procedures could have been justified, this applies especially to the
measures of PA3. The operation formed an integral part of the development partners’ collective response to
the crisis in Mozambique and was well-coordinated. Planned mitigation measures were implemented and
benefitted from continued stakeholder and donor coordination in a variety of general and sector-specific
platforms. The ICR offers limited insight into the team’s ability to identify new and emerging risks to the
achievement of the PDOs throughout the evaluation.


Overall Bank Performance Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

9. Other Impacts

a. Social and Poverty


                                                                                                   Page 15 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Mozambique Covid19 Response DPO (P174152)



While no concrete data are provided, the prior actions under Pillar I are likely to have had positive
poverty and social effects, especially in urban areas, which were most affected by COVID-19 social
distancing measures. The ICR argues that prior actions 1 and 2 probably saved lives by helping contain a
widespread contagion. Prior action 3 could have had a positive impact on poverty reduction by temporarily
increasing the income of almost 1 million households. While likely outcomes, the ICR does not offer any
evidence or data to support these statements. It further argues that “the deferral of corporate income tax
payments under the fourth measure is expected to have had a positive impact on jobs as it provided cash flow
relief to firms representing about 20 percent of formal sector employment.” The effect of this measure was likely
positive but small as only 1300 firms chose to make use of the deferral. The impact on poverty was even smaller
as most of the poor work in the informal sector as also stated in the Program Document. PA 8’s poverty-
reducing impact is likely to be small as the vast majority of the population works in the informal sector, but it is
expected to have positive indirect effects through SME growth linkages.



b. Environmental

Most of the reforms are not expected to have significant positive or negative effects on the environment,
forests, and other natural resources. The disposal of imported equipment and materials related to the pandemic
response will follow the World Health Organization’s (WHO) safe handling and disposal guidelines. The creation of
a fuel price stabilization fund increased the cost of petrol and diesel at the pump and therefore could lead to a
small reduction in demand for these products, thus lowering carbon emissions. The improved investment
management system includes a stronger environmental impact assessment of projects.



c. Gender

Several prior actions benefited women disproportionately. At project initiation, 70 percent of social transfer
beneficiaries were women. The program targeted vulnerable households, which are often woman-led, and it
prioritized payment directly to women in the household. Because payments are being made for the first time by
digital means, this should also help to close the financial inclusion gender gap by enrolling more women than men
in mobile money accounts. The moveable collateral registry reform is also expected to have positive gender
outcomes. The 2018 enterprise survey shows that women-owned firms are 10 percent more likely than men’s to be
asked to provide collateral when seeking credit while women are 10 percent less likely than men to own
immovable assets.



d. Other

No other impacts were presented in the ICR.




10. Quality of ICR


                                                                                                     Page 16 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Mozambique Covid19 Response DPO (P174152)



Rationale

The ICR presents sufficient evidence to support the reported achievements. However, the evidence
supporting results is not consistently referenced appropriately, leaving it unclear which part of the GoM or other
institution supplied the data, thus making it challenging to assess the credibility of the sources. The results
chains linking evidence to interventions and outcomes are clear and coherent. However, the uncertainty around
the baseline, target, and final achievement of PA 7 on the share of adults with a deposit account in a formal
financial institution could indicate that the evidence has not been sufficiently interrogated in a balanced manner.
At times the ICR makes statements without presenting convincing evidence. For example, the ICR postulates,
regarding the low take-up of the tax relief measures, that “it does appear that many eligible firms did not bother
to apply, probably because the temporary relief did not justify the extra paperwork involved.” Staff indicated that
this became apparent from surveys conducted by the Ministry of Finance, this should be clarified in the ICR.

The ICR has a strong outcome orientation and candidly identifies how better results could have been
achieved and what should be done differently in the future to improve impact. The ICR team also derived
valuable lessons from the projects which are well-supported by the evidence and findings of the ICR. However,
their operational relevance suffers from the fact that they are overgeneralized leading to axiomatic lessons.
Especially the first and fourth lessons could already be considered common knowledge. Lesson 3 is similarly
overgeneralized but is valuable when less extended beyond its evidence base.

The ICR is consistent with the ICR guidelines, yet more data could have been included, including by attaching
data sets or evidence in the annex of the supporting documents. The ICR is concise and not overly descriptive,
nor does it contain information unnecessary for self-evaluation.



a. Rating

Modest

11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                    IEG
                                                                                  Disagreement/Comments
                                 Moderately
Outcome                                                Moderately Satisfactory
                                 Satisfactory
                                                                                  While noting pandemic and time-
                                                                                  frame limitations, there was
                                                                                  insufficient evidence that
                                                                                  emerging coordination risks
Bank Performance                 Satisfactory          Moderately Satisfactory
                                                                                  (RI2) and implementation
                                                                                  challenges (RIs 3a, 3b, and 4)
                                                                                  had been identified and
                                                                                  addressed in a timely fashion.
Relevance of Results
                                 ---                   Moderately Satisfactory
Indicators
Quality of ICR                   ---                   Modest


                                                                                                     Page 17 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Mozambique Covid19 Response DPO (P174152)




12. Lessons

1. Better targeting is needed to ensure emergency relief measures benefit the most vulnerable. The PAs
of Pillar I were intended to mitigate the impact on lives and livelihoods of the pandemic from which the poor are
the ones most likely to suffer. While PA3 specifically targeted the poorest and most vulnerable Mozambicans,
PA4 did not. It targeted very small firms of on average 4 workers. Even if the target of supporting 5000 firms was
achieved that would have amounted to supporting only 20.000 livelihoods without reaching the 80% of
Mozambique’s labor force, and most of the poor, who work in the informal sector. Similarly, less than half of the
poorest Mozambicans benefitted from the pricing relief on piped water.

2. DPFs can be a valuable part of responding to an emergency, but follow-up and complementary
support is essential. Often, crisis response DPFs are standalone operations given the emergency nature of
the support. This means that significant reforms may not be supported over the longer term, and implementation
could falter. For example, the pre-appraisal of investment projects is only a first step in a long-term process of
improving public investment management. In this case, the World Bank is providing appropriate follow-up
through a new IPF as well as a next DPF.

3. It is critical to have available up to date core diagnostics to inform the design of operations put
together in the context of a crisis. When time is of the essence, it is often not possible to undertake the
necessary analysis to inform the design of prior actions. It is therefore critical to ensure that up to date core
diagnostics – e.g., on PFM, PIM, debt management – are available to inform priority setting and design.


13. Project Performance Assessment Report (PPAR) Recommended?

No




                                                                                                       Page 18 of 18
