     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Biomass District Heating (P146194)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0023279

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P146194                                   Biomass District Heating

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Belarus                                   Energy & Extractives


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-83510                                31-Dec-2019                                          87,766,402.02

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 31-Mar-2014                               30-Apr-2022

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           90,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                            90,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Actual                                        87,766,402.02                                               0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                 ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Nestor Ntungwanayo          Ihsan Kaler Hurcan          Ramachandra Jammi              IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   As per the Loan Agreement (LA) on page 5, the Project Development Objective (PDO) is “to scale up the
   efficient use of renewable biomass in heat and electricity generation in Selected Towns of the Borrower,"
   where “Borrower” is defined as the Republic of Belarus. The PDO statement in the Project Appraisal
   Document (PAD) on page 6 is same, except “in Belarus” was used instead of “of the Borrower” and was
   unchanged throughout project implementation.



                                                                                                  Page 1 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Biomass District Heating (P146194)



   To assess the project’s efficacy, the PDO was not unpacked, because there were no specific PDO indicators
   related to scaling up each category of heat and electricity generation. Moreover, this review will not use a split
   assessment, despite multiple results frameworks. Instead, the project efficacy will be assessed against the
   results framework established during the October 2019 restructuring, based on OPCS guidelines indicating
   that when the project scope is expanded and become more ambitious, the operation can be assessed based
   on the more ambitious revised outcomes and outcome targets. (OPCS Guidelines, December 2021,
   paragraph 60).



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  11-Oct-2019

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Component 1: District Heating Energy Efficiency (US$23.35 million at appraisal, actual of
   US$17.34 million): Main activities that were to be funded were as follows: (i) the modernization and/or
   construction of heat substations by installing individual building-level heat substations with temperature
   controls, and (ii) the reconstruction and/or construction of district heating networks and upgrading of peak-
   load gas boilers.

   Component 2: Biomass Heat Generation (US$ 64.98 million, at appraisal, actual of US$69.37 million).
   This component included investments in: (i) Biomass boilers and combined heat and power (CHP) plants,
   and (ii) Wood chipping equipment and biomass storage facilities.

   Component 3: Technical Assistance (US$1.45 million, at appraisal, actual of US$0.84 million). This
   component financed capacity building for the participating district heating (DH) utilities and implementation
   support to the Project Management Unit (PMU), including the following: (i) Improvement of existing social
   accountability mechanisms, (ii) Support for a shift to energy-content-based biomass pricing, and (iii) Other
   project implementation support.




e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project Cost: Actual project cost amounted to US$87.7 million, or 97.52 percent of approved amount.

   Project Financing: The project was financed by an IBRD loan in the amount of US$90.0 million.


                                                                                                      Page 2 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Biomass District Heating (P146194)



   Project Financing: The project was financed by an International Bank for Reconstruction and
   Development (IBRD) loan in the amount of US$90.0 million. At project’s closure, an undisbursed
   balance of US$2,233,597.98 was cancelled.

   Borrower Contribution: No borrower contribution was identified at appraisal, and none occurred during
   implementation.

   Dates: The project was approved on March 1, 2014, and became effective on July 31, 2014, and closed
   on April 30, 2022, 28 months after the original closing date of December 31, 2019.

   Restructurings: The project was restructured four times as follows, but the second one was cancelled
   upon the government’s request:

   (i) On February 14, 2018, to reallocate and utilize loan savings to finance additional sites and update a
   results indicator. The large savings arose from (a) good competition among local and international bidders
   for all contracts resulting in lower offers, (b) a downturn economic conjecture whereby local companies were
   eagerly competing for the few projects externally funded, and (c) an appreciation of the US$ against the
   Belarusian Ruble (BYR).

   (ii) On September 25, 2018, to add a new subcomponent under Part III to provide technical assistance for
   scaling up wood biomass-based heating and improving heating energy efficiency in selected towns.
   However, the restructuring was cancelled upon the request of the government in April 2019. The
   government decided to finance these activities with other sources of funds.

   (iii) On October 11, 2019, (a) to extend the loan closing date by 22 months to October 31, 2021 to allow
   time to complete the additional works and to compensate for the delays caused by irregularities in some
   procurement transactions investigated by Integrity Vice Presidency of the World Bank and the COVID
   pandemic; (b) to add two new sites (Stolin and Kamenets); and (c) to expand the scope of work by adding
   heat network and individual heat substations for two existing sites (Buda Koshelevo and Cherikov).

   (iv) On October 29, 2021, a level 2 restructuring was completed to extend the closing date by six months
   from October 31, 2021, to April 30, 2022. The Bank team agreed with the time extension of about five
   months to allow a contractor to catch up with delays and complete the works necessary for a biomass boiler
   plant to be operational and cover the heat demand of the district of Baranovichi city in a sustainable
   manner.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The Project was relevant to the Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for Fiscal Years18-22, with regard to
the focus area 3: “Improving contribution of infrastructure to climate change management, economic growth
and human development”. The Project directly contributed to CPF Objective 3A: “Enhanced climate change
management” thanks to energy savings and switching from fossil fuels to lower-carbon biomass fuel.
Through these activities the Project also remained relevant to Belarus’ efforts to comply with greenhouse
gas (GHG) emission reduction goals and to meet its Nationally Determined Contributions under the Paris

                                                                                                  Page 3 of 13
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Biomass District Heating (P146194)



               Agreement. The Project was also relevant to all the aspects of CPF Objective 3C: “Enhanced efficiency,
               security, and quality of energy utility provision”. The Project intended to enhance efficiency and quality of
               District Heating (DH) provision thanks to improved generation efficiency, reduced transmission and
               distribution losses and better regulation of heat supply at the building level. It was also expected to improve
               security of DH supply thanks to the reduced dependence on expensive imported fuels and enhanced
               reliability of the participating DH systems.

               However, the ICR did not indicate that the PDOs were in line with Borrower's priorities and short-term plans,
               nor did it indicate to which extent both the World Bank and the Borrower had done the groundwork for
               swift implementation of the project.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To scale up the efficient use of renewable biomass in heat and electricity generation in selected towns in
                             Belarus

                             Rationale
                             Theory of change: As the PAD did not develop a theory of change, the ICR recreated one which is detailed
                             hereafter. Key expected outcomes included the following: (i) an increase in the projected lifetime energy
                             savings, (ii) an increase in the heat and electricity generated from renewable biomass, (iii) a pick-up in the
                             average cost-recovery rate for residential district heating; (iv) an increase in the projected lifetime reduction in
                             CO2 emissions, and (v) an increase in the number of direct project beneficiaries. The key expected output
                             was the volume of generation capacity of renewable energy constructed using the project resources. Key
                             activities funded by the project consisted of funding (i) the modernization and/or construction of heat
                             substations and the reconstruction and/or construction of district heating networks and upgrading of peak-
                             load gas boilers, (ii) investments in biomass boilers and Combined Heat and Power (CHP) plants, and (iii)
                             wood chipping equipment and biomass storage facilities.

                             Overall, the theory of change was generally sound, as there was a logical link between the project’s activities,
                             outputs and outcomes.

                             Outputs:

                                        179.4 MW of biomass boilers capacity was installed, exceeding the target of 106 MW, and a baseline
                                         of zero.
                                        106 Individual Building-level Substations and Central Heating Substations (CHS) were constructed,
                                         with not target, and no baseline.

                                                                                                                                   Page 4 of 13
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Biomass District Heating (P146194)




                                  29 km of Heating Networks (two-pipe) were installed, with 8 km constructed, and 21 km replaced, with
                                   no target and no baseline.
                                  Biomass fuel storage facilities were constructed and wood chipping machines for biomass fuel supply
                                   were installed, with no target and no baseline.
                                  International procurement practices of bidding and contracting, as well as Financial Management (FM)
                                   and disbursement methods were strengthened.
                                  Improved social accountability mechanisms that provide key information on government programs
                                   communicate with end-users of DH services and collect customer feedback and grievance on all
                                   aspects of service delivery.

                            Outcomes:

                                  The target for the projected lifetime energy savings was exceeded by 10 percent, reaching 2,111,416
                                    megawatt hour (MWh) against a revised target of 1,916,500 MWh, and a baseline of zero.
                                  The target for the heat and electricity generated from renewable biomass was partially achieved (85
                                   percent), reaching 13,500,465 MWh against a revised target of 15,816,000 MWh, and a forecast
                                   of 14,832,644 in 2025 (94 percent of target), and a baseline of zero.
                                  The target for the projected lifetime reduction in CO2 emissions was partially achieved (85.4 percent),
                                   reaching 3,081,517 metric ton against a revised target of 3,607,600 metric ton, and a baseline of zero.
                                  The target for the average cost-recovery rate for residential district heating was partially achieved,
                                   reaching 25 percent, against a revised target of 35 percent, and a baseline of 15 percent, an original
                                   target of 80 percent. The difference between the costs and the tariffs is covered by subsidies, and
                                   heat supply represents only a part of the utilities’ business (they also deal with water supply, waste
                                   management and other utility services).
                                  The target for the direct project beneficiaries was exceeded by 45 percent, reaching
                                   170,220.00 against a revised target of 117,380.00, of which 50 percent were female, and a baseline of
                                   zero.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The project successfully installed heat and electricity generation facilities using biomass, which replaced old
                            systems using natural gas. The new systems and the use of biomass improved the efficiency of heat and
                            electricity generation as evidenced by the expected lifetime energy savings higher than the target. This
                            resulted in a substantial expected reduction in the GHG emissions, too, but lower than the target. As
                            counterfactual, if the combined heat and power plants were not constructed under the project, the old district
                            heating systems would continue to produce only heat without any power generation resulting in significant
                            energy inefficiencies. However, the production of heat and power generation were lower than expected as


                                                                                                                               Page 5 of 13
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Biomass District Heating (P146194)



  fewer new residential units were built in the project areas. Overall, the project’s efficacy in achieving the
  project objective is rated as substantial.



  Overall Efficacy Rating
  Substantial



 5. Efficiency
Using the appraisal methodology, the ICR updated the economic analysis of the project and found that the
Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR) and the Economic Net Present Value (ENPV) numbers were higher
than the estimates calculated at appraisal. The updated ENPV was estimated at US$293.9 million under
international gas price, in comparison to the ENPV at appraisal of US$42.4 million. The increase was mainly
from the fact the project financed more subprojects than those that were initially planned due to cost savings
during implementation (ICR, p.19). The updated analysis at the ICR stage found that the post-completion EIRR
was 31.0 percent based on the international gas prices in comparison to the weighted average EIRR estimated
at 18.3 percent at appraisal (with individual EIRRs for the subprojects ranging from 12.4 percent to 24.5 percent
at appraisal). However, based on the Belarus-Russia contractual natural gas price is, which is substantially
lower than the international natural gas prices, the post-completion EIRR drops to 17.4 percent and the ENPV to
US$98.9 million (The ICR does not report post-completion EIRRs for subprojects). This review takes the post-
completion EIRR as a range from 17.4 percent to 31.0 percent.

Implementation Efficiency

The majority of the initial thirteen activities were completed within or below the original cost estimate. Significant
cost savings arose from simple and straightforward design, good competition between local and international
bidders, and favorable exchange rate changes. Regarding project duration, eleven of the originally planned
thirteen subprojects were completed prior to the original scheduled closing date. The project was closed 28
months after the original term due to (i) the need to allow more time to complete the additional subprojects
added from cost savings realized under the original project, and (ii) irregularities in some procurement
transactions investigated by Integrity Vice Presidency of the World Bank, and (iii) the delays triggered by the
COVID pandemic. Moreover, there were delays resulting from shortcomings in some district utilities’ capacities,
and from missing environmental impact assessment that resulted in rebidding, and procurement, monitoring and
reporting issues as well (ICR, paragraph 71 on page 24). In conclusion, the Bank team handled well the
above challenges, including the consequences of fraud cases, the COVID 19, and the Russian invasion of
Ukraine which are discussed under the Bank supervision section.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:

                                                                                                        Page 6 of 13
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Biomass District Heating (P146194)




                               Rate Available?            Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                    0
Appraisal                                                 18.30
                                                                                     Not Applicable
                                                                                    0
ICR Estimate                                              17.40
                                                                                     Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Each of the relevance of PDOs, the efficacy and the efficiency of project implementation is rated Substantial,
resulting in an overall Satisfactory rating of the project outcome.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The ICR (para 98) has assessed the risk to development outcome to be low based on the following factors:
(i) the Government of Belarus has demonstrated its commitment towards increasing the efficient use of
sustainable biomass energy in district heating sector further; (ii) the capacity of the PMU has significantly
improved, and (iii) the commitment of local utilities to continue using renewable biomass in their DH system
remains strong. A follow-on project -The Sustainable Energy Scale Up Project (P165651) - is expected to
continue assisting Belarus towards meeting the development outcomes (before its suspension). The risk to
development outcome could increase should the Belarus counterparts reduce their level of commitment, as a
fall-out of the on-going war in Ukraine.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  T

  The project was strategically relevant and well prepared and underpinned by Bank analytical
  support. The PDOs were relevant to Belarus’ long-term goals, and the used approach in the
  selection of project activities matched the country priorities. The project aimed to address challenges
  of the Belarusian district heating sector, drawing from lessons learned from the Bank’s experience in
  implementing similar projects in Belarus and in other countries. The Government demonstrated
  its commitment to the project by adopting several national programs for energy efficiency and use of



                                                                                                    Page 7 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Biomass District Heating (P146194)



  local fuels ahead of project approval. Finally, the project design was informed by insights from the
  analytical work from the Bank’s Energy Sector Management Assistance Program (ESMAP).

  The project design was results driven. The selection of PDO level and intermediate level indicators
  was an integral part of the design process. Their selection aimed to facilitate the project’s
  achievement of its objectives and the adopted indicators had positive implications for supervision and
  performance assessment.

  Implementation arrangements were generally adequate, but there were also weaknesses. The
  project design benefitted from achievements in earlier projects in the area of fiduciary (finance,
  procurement), legal and safeguards matters. Moreover, the Project Management Unit (PMU) had
  about 15 years of experience in implementing World Bank projects, and was staffed with qualified
  professionals, who had strong operational capacity and were familiar with the Bank’s policies and
  procedures.




  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Aide-memoires and ISRs were candid and had good quality. Aide-memoires were prepared after each
 supervision mission and were well detailed and offered a candid assessment of issues and progress.
 Supervision missions covered also safeguards and fiduciary matters which were regularly monitored.

 Continuity in the project oversight facilitated the tracking of project progress. The continuity of the
 project leadership was observed with three TTLs over eight years of implementation, and transition was
 smooth as there was no transition delay between two TTLs under this project. Finally, the last TTL was
 based in the country office and had been with the project since appraisal, and this contributed to the
 adequate supervision and smooth implementation of the project.

 The Mid-Term Review (MTR) charted the course toward project completion. The 2017
 MTR mission confirmed that the PDO were still relevant, and that progress toward achieving the PDO was
 satisfactory. The MTR mission identified restructuring needs to utilize US$26.3 million of loan savings
 following a competitive bidding process and the significant devaluation of the national currency. The project
 was restructured in 2018 in order to expand the scope, and this helped to substantially maximize the
 development impact of the project. Also, the results framework was revised and monitored regularly by the
 Bank team.

 The Bank team successfully handled implementation challenges. The three incidents which affected
 the project implementation entailed (i) fraud cases, (ii) the COVID-19 pandemic, and (iii) the Russian
 invasion of Ukraine. While the fraud and corruption risk were estimated to be low, a case of contractors’
 misconduct was investigated by the Integrity Vice Presidency. A local company was awarded two
 contracts, and after the completion of an INT investigation, both contracts were terminated in May 2017,
 and direct contracts were signed with new service providers. Moreover, the Russian invasion of
 Ukraine resulted in sanctions against Russia and Belarus, but impact was limited as material delivery was

                                                                                                    Page 8 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Biomass District Heating (P146194)



 almost completed. Finally, supervision efforts became challenging in early 2020 given the safety guidelines
 and restrictions related to the global COVID-19 pandemic, which resulted in Bank supervision missions
 being carried out in a virtual setting. Despite all the above implementation challenges, the Bank team
 processed new biddings for the fraudulent operations, extended the project closing date, used virtual
 supervision and delivered key project activities.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 There was a congruence between the theory of change and the results framework. The recreated
 theory of change showed how the project activities contributed to outcomes and PDO, and PDO indicators
 aimed to capture and measure that contribution. Intermediate indicators were used to track continuous
 progress towards achieving the PDO. For instance, the number of contracts competitively awarded, and the
 construction progress were tracked on-site through regular site supervision conducted by the site owners
 and the PMU.

 PDO indicators were specific, measurable and achievable, but there were shortcomings in
 measuring the project outputs. The main three PDO indicators measuring energy savings, heat and
 electricity generated from biomass, and greenhouse gas (GHG) emission reduction were adequately
 identified to monitor progress toward the PDO. These indicators had baselines at project approval, as well
 as intermediate and final targets. However, the results framework did not include indicators to measure
 some of the project outputs because site-specific designs were not completed at the time of project
 appraisal, such as the number of individual-level substations and central heating substations, length of
 heating networks, and number of biomass fuel storage facilities and wood chipping machines.

 M&E arrangements were adequate. The PMU was responsible for data collection, analysis and reporting
 project progress to the Bank. The M&E instruments included the following elements: (a) biannual progress
 reports, (b) a midterm review of implementation and outcome progress (c) Bank team supervision visits to
 sites, and (d) annual financial audits.



b. M&E Implementation
  Implementation Status and Results Reports (ISRs) were the key instrument to report to
  stakeholders on progress toward the PDOs. The ISRs were concise documents
  which provided pertinent information needed to track the project progress. The Bank team conducted
  regular missions, updated the progress in achieving results and reported the progress in the biannual
  ISRs. Normal review procedures for procurement, FM reports, and independent audits also were carried

                                                                                                  Page 9 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Biomass District Heating (P146194)



  out. However, field supervision missions could not happen because of fraud and force majeure
  situations.

  The M&E quality relied on good collaboration between the Bank team and the PMU. Several
  discussions and technical support from the Bank team enabled the PMU and the site owners to analyze
  data in a methodological manner and provide reliable data on results indicators. The PMU carefully
  checked the data from the participating district heat utilities before consolidation and sharing with
  stakeholders.

  PDO indicators were adequately updated when the project scope expanded, but shortcomings in
  measuring some project outputs were not addressed. The project scope expanded after the addition
  of seven sites to utilize loan savings. Disaggregated data for these three indicators were collected for
  each of the boiler plants built under the expanded project scope. However, the shortcomings in the
  results framework in measuring some of the project outputs after the completion of site-specific designs
  were not addressed (see M&E Design above).



c. M&E Utilization
  The PMU, the participating utilities and the World Bank team used the indicators to monitor physical
  progress and make appropriate adjustments to the initial plans. For instance, M&E reports triggered
  restructurings as discussed in previous sections of this review. Finally, the results achieved helped
  nurture the dialogue between the Government of Belarus and the World Bank and created momentum
  for subsequent interventions in the field of energy efficiency for heating and power, such as the
  Sustainable Energy Scaling Up Project approved in 2019.

  Overall, while there were some moderate shortcomings in the M&E design and implementation, the M&E
  system was sufficient to assess the achievement of the project objectives and test the links in the results
  chain. The quality of M&E is rated Substantial.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as a Category B operation and two safeguard policies were triggered, namely
   Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 and Involuntary Settlement OP/BP 4.12. The PMU prepared
   Environmental and Social Management Framework and site-specific Environmental and Social
   Management Plans (ESMPs) during implementation, and the ESMPs have been publicly disclosed.

   The Project was implemented in compliance with the site specific ESMPs and had no outstanding
   environmental issues. Furthermore, during its implementation, no occupational health and safety incidents




                                                                                                   Page 10 of 13
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Biomass District Heating (P146194)



  and accidents were reported, and no complaints on adverse environmental impacts had been received from
  the local population or from the state inspection bodies.

  Both the PMU and district heating utilities demonstrated good knowledge of social impact and risk
  management tasks of the project. Social accountability mechanisms were well established and improved
  during project implementation to enable citizens to lodge grievances, receive redress, and oversee the
  provision of public services

  The Project maintained a Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) through the implementation period to deal
  with the complaints related to DH investment activities under the Project. However, the PMU did receive any
  grievances or complaints. Overall, the Project complied with the World Bank’ social safeguards
  requirements and produced positive social impacts by providing improved and reliable heating systems to
  customers. Also, during implementation of investment activities at sub-project sites, there was no land
  acquisition, physical displacement, or any issue with squatters.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Procurement

  While the ICR did not discuss procurement issues, the TTL provided the following summarized information
  upon request. The procurement capacity and qualifications of the PMU were consistently rated as
  adequate in ISRs, while the Project Procurement Risk was assessed as “Moderate”. The project
  experienced some delays at procurement and contracts implementation stages; however, these did not
  significantly affect achievement of PDO.

  Financial management

  Compliance with the Project FM covenants, and arrangements have always been assessed as
  Satisfactory, and FM risk remained either Moderate or Low throughout the period of project
  implementation. Interim Financial Reports were submitted in a timely manner and were confirmed to be of
  acceptable quality. All annual audits of project financial statements were carried out by private auditors and
  were acceptable to the World Bank. Two outstanding audit reports (one for calendar year 2021 and the
  other from January 2022 to the end of the Project) are still pending, mainly due the COVID-19, and the
  Russian invasion of Ukraine, which disturbed international travel to and from Belarus. Auditors have issued
  unqualified audit opinions and did not note any significant internal control issues.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  Due to fuel replacement from natural gas that produces minimal amounts of pollutants, such as carbon
  monoxide and nitrogen dioxide, and virtually no sulfur dioxide and particulate matter, the use of biomass
  fuel resulted in some increase in local pollutant emission. However, the total emissions of local pollutants
  do not exceed the national regulatory limits established for heat production.



                                                                                                   Page 11 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Biomass District Heating (P146194)




d. Other
   The Project contributed to improving security of energy supply because it replaced imported natural gas by
   local renewable biomass. This contributed to reducing import dependence and the risks of supply
   disruptions which can be caused by any external factors (ICR paragraph 11 on page 11 and paragraph 5 of
   Annex 6 on page 62).

   Through technical assistance, the Project enhanced policy dialogue on the transition to energy-content-
   based biomass pricing. A comprehensive analysis was conducted to assess the legislation and the
   practices of trading biomass fuel for heat and power generation plants in Belarus and in leading European
   countries. The assessment included recommendations to introduce a system of trade settlements based on
   biomass moisture and energy content (ICR, paragraphs 57-66).

   The project also provided technical assistance for the improvement of existing social accountability
   mechanisms. As a result, provision of key information on government programs, communication with end-
   users of DH services, collection of customer feedback and grievance on all aspects of service delivery, and
   inclusion of the public to the decision-making process has improved (ICR, paragraph 58).



11. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                   IEG
                                                                                Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Satisfactory         Satisfactory

Bank Performance                Satisfactory         Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                  Substantial          Substantial

Quality of ICR                  ---                  Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR identified several lessons and recommendations, but this review has retained two of them,
which are rephased below:

(i) Fuel switching from gas and oil to wood biomass is highly sustainable and economically
sound. This project was transformational as it financed primarily fuel switching from gas and oil to
sustainable wood biomass. Moreover, biomass-fired district heating not only creates markets for
wood resources, but also increases the market price of biomass due to growing demand. From the
country’s perspective, this is positive for local economic development, job creation and fiscal
revenues. TA to the government and the regulator to create an attractive legal, regulatory, and
institutional environment for biomass trading could significantly help the scale up of biomass-fired
heat and power generation.

(ii) Political economy factors can hinder improvement in financial viability and need to be
addressed during policy dialogue among key stakeholders. The project impact on the financial

                                                                                                  Page 12 of 13
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Biomass District Heating (P146194)



health of DH companies has been smaller than expected. The average cost recovery rate increased
from 15% to 25% instead of the target 80%. The Government willingness to move the heating sector
towards cost-recovery has been slow, and the heat tariffs were not raised as quickly as expected for
political reasons. The difference between the costs and the tariffs is covered by subsidies, and heat
supply represents only a part of the utilities’ business. Heat tariff reforms could have been more
successful if a broad communication campaign and dialogue at different policy-making levels were
organized, but this was not part of the project.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

Overall, the ICR is well-written, evidence-based and internally consistent. It provides a detailed narrative of the
country context, the project design and the recreated theory of change, as well as its implementation
and achieved results. More specifically, the tables page 46-49 provides key information of generated outputs,
and the Annex 1 on Results Framework and Key Outputs are testimony of the achieved results. The results
orientation and the quality of analysis were generally of good quality (ICR, page 14-17). There were
moderate shortcomings as follows: (i) the absence of an assessment of a key implementation function-
procurement, and (ii) there was room for concision in drafting the ICR, as the document is almost the double of
the recommended length. In all, the quality of the ICR is rated Substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                     Page 13 of 13
