     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Afghanistan Land Administration System (P164762)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0023323

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P164762                                    Afghanistan Land Administration System

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Afghanistan                                Urban, Resilience and Land


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-D4470,TF-A9598                        30-Sep-2024                                            6,189,444.29

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 25-Apr-2019                               30-Sep-2024

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                             35,000,000.00                                  10,000,000.00

 Revised Commitment                              19,703,824.65                                    1,841,495.06

 Actual                                           6,189,444.29                                    1,770,181.06




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                 ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Maria Shkaratan             Christopher David           Kavita Mathur                   IEGSD (Unit 4)
                             Nelson




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) is (a) to support the development of the Afghanistan land
   administration system; and (b) to provide the population in selected areas with improved land registration
   services, including issuance of Titles and Occupancy Certificates.

   The PDO was not revised.



                                                                                                   Page 1 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Afghanistan Land Administration System (P164762)



   For the purposes of this ICR review, the objective will be assessed as follows:

   PDO1: to support the development of the Afghanistan land administration system; and

   PDO2: to provide the population in selected areas with improved land registration services, including issuance
   of Titles and Occupancy Certificates.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  25-Jun-2020

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   1. Original components:

   Component 1 – Land Policy and Institutional Strengthening (cost at appraisal: US$ 5.3 million;
   actual cost: US$ 0.08 million). The component was to help close gaps and further develop the policy,
   legal and institutional framework for land administration while building technical, institutional and citizen
   engagement and communication capacities. Component 1 comprised the following subcomponents:

          1.1 Strengthening the Land Policy, Regulatory and Institutional Framework of the Ministry of Urban
           Development and Land (MUDL): support for policy, regulations, and human resources strategy.
          1.2 Institutional and Technical Capacity Building: geo-spatial and training equipment; training and
           knowledge exchange; development of professional requirements and certifications.
          1.3 Public Awareness Raising, Communication and Citizen Engagement: grievance redress
           mechanism (GRM), awareness raising, communication.

   Component 2 – Developing Technological Capacity, Information and Systems for Land
   Administration (cost at appraisal: US$26.3 million; actual cost: US$ 0.84 million). The component is to
   support creation of a modern land administration system in Afghanistan: to develop a cadastre-based
   system capable of issuing and certifying map-based titling, dispute resolution, and recording and
   maintaining changes, which will lead to a State-guaranteed land registration system. Component 2 included
   the following subcomponents:

          2.1 Developing Geo-Information Infrastructure: provision of technology and training.
          2.2 Establishing a Land Information System (LIS): delivery of information technology
           support and equipment.


                                                                                                       Page 2 of 16
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Afghanistan Land Administration System (P164762)



        2.3 Supporting Cadastral Surveying and Land Registration in Selected Areas: building information
         systems, institutional development, provision of equipment and training, construction of facilities.
        2.4 Supporting Issuance of Occupancy Certificates (OCs) in Selected Areas: institutional
         strengthening, creating information systems.

  Component 3 – Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation (cost at appraisal: US$ 3.4 million;
  actual cost: US$ 1.42 million). The objective of this component was to ensure adequate capacity for
  project implementation and oversight, monitoring and evaluation, compliance with fiduciary requirements
  and social and environmental safeguards, as well as adequate project risk monitoring and inter-institutional
  coordination.

  2. Changes in components during implementation:

  The components stayed the same during implementation.

  In September 2020, the Bank approved the government’s request to cancel and reallocate to COVID-19
  response a part of the project funds in the amount of US$10.0 million. The project's scope was reduced,
  and some activities were scaled down. The main impact was on land surveying and registration activities,
  which initially covered Kabul and Herat but now only covered Kabul, with a reduced scope. In addition, the
  scope of capacity building and knowledge exchange was reduced.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost: The actual project cost was US$2.34 million, compared to the appraisal estimate of US$35
  million.

  Project Financing: The project was financed by an International Development Association (IDA) credit
  (US$25.0 million at appraisal and US$1.67 million at closure) and an Afghanistan Reconstruction Trust
  Fund (ARTF) Grant (US$ 10 million at appraisal and US$0.67 million at closure).

  Borrower/Recipient contribution: There was no Borrower contribution.

  Changes in project financing due to restructuring:

        The project underwent one restructuring, in September 2020 when the amount of US$10 from the
         project funds was cancelled and reallocated for the COVID-19 response, at the government’s
         request. The amount disbursed at that time was US$2 million or six percent of the original project
         funds.
        Reallocation of financing across components: in September 2020, the World Bank canceled the
         amount of US$10.0 million from the project based on the government’s request to reallocate those
         funds for the COVID-19 response. According to the ARTF and IDA legal agreements, the project
         was financed on a pro-rata basis: 71.4 percent by IDA and 28.6 percent by ARTF. Therefore, the
         canceled amount was proportionally distributed as follows: US$ 7.14 million from the IDA Grant and
         US$ 2.86 million from the ARTF Grant. There was a slight change in component financing as a
         share of total financing: the share of Component 1 financing decreased from 15 percent of the total
         at appraisal to seven percent of the total after the cancellation; the share of Component 2 financing


                                                                                                    Page 3 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Afghanistan Land Administration System (P164762)



          increased from 75 percent of the total to 83 percent of the total; and the share of Component 3
          financing stayed at 10 percent of the total.

   Project Dates: The project was approved on April 25, 2019 and became effective on May 13, 2019. The
   September 2020 restructuring did not involve an extension of closing date. The mid-term review
   (MTR), planned for 2022, was not conducted because the project was suspended prior to that. The original
   closing date was September 30, 2024. Due to the collapse of the government in August 2021 and the
   following political turmoil, the WBG’s country portfolio, including the project, was suspended on February
   17, 2022 and then phased out.

   Split rating justification. Project's efficacy will be evaluated using split rating because the September 2020
   restructuring involved a partial cancellation of the project's funding, reducing the project's scope. Further, it
   was not clear if the reduction of the scope was commensurate with the lower commitment size. Also, the
   restructuring affected the outcome targets under Objective 2. Therefore, this review will separately assess
   efficacy for the Original and Revised projects under Objective 2, but not under Objective 1.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country context: At project approval, Afghanistan was experiencing economic stagnation and deterioration,
an increasing conflict, and deepening internal political fragmentation. Average annual GDP growth fell to
2.5 percent between 2015-2020, below the rate of population increase. The impact of COVID-19 was
significant and led to a two-percent economic contraction and a sharp increase in poverty. An estimated 60-
70 percent of the population lived in poverty at the end of 2020. The collapse of the government in August
2021 triggered further economic crisis and a withdrawal of most international aid.

Relevance to the national priorities at approval: The PDO was relevant to the country conditions and well-
aligned with national priorities. Weaknesses in Afghanistan’s land governance were a major source of
conflict and poverty due to inequitable land distribution, land related conflict, and recurrent land-grabbing.
Rapid urban growth was increasing land tenure insecurity in urban areas, where 61 percent of the housing
stock was informal. Stronger property rights, a better land administration system, and a modern
comprehensive land information system would have substantial social and economic impact. The project
was aligned with the government’s Institutional Development Program for Land Administration (IDPL),
which was to establish transparent land services through legal, policy and institutional strengthening.

Relevance to the WBG’s assistance Strategies at approval: The PDO was consistent with the FY2017-2020
Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for Afghanistan, which had three pillars: (i) building strong and
accountable institutions; (ii) supporting inclusive growth; and (iii) expanding and deepening social inclusion.
Pillars (i) and (ii) had an emphasis on improving land management. Transparent land administration would
benefit the population by promoting the development of land markets, thus contributing to the government
goals of state building and self-reliance.

The PDO remained relevant to the national priorities and the WBG’s Assistance strategies until the
takeover in August 2021. The IDPL’s medium- and long-term objectives stressed the strengthening of land
governance and the development of a land administration system in Afghanistan. The Performance and

                                                                                                        Page 4 of 16
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Afghanistan Land Administration System (P164762)



               Learning Review, which extended the FY2017-2020 CPF to FY22, emphasized the importance of land
               governance for economic growth.

               The PDO did not remain relevant at closing due to the government takeover in August 2021 and the
               following political turmoil and significant changes in the support provided to the country by the international
               community. On February 17, 2022, the WBG’s country portfolio was suspended and then phased out. Two
               weeks later, the World Bank’s Board endorsed the Afghanistan's Approach Paper 2.0, which prioritized
               protecting the vulnerable, preserving human capital and key institutions, reducing the need for future
               humanitarian assistance, and improving gender equality through Recipient Executed grants, decided by the
               ARTF, and made off-budget and outside of the involvement of the Interim Taliban Administration (ITA) with
               United Nations (UN) agencies and potentially international and national non-governmental organizations.

               The relevance of objectives is rated high due to its full alignment with the country strategy and government
               priorities at appraisal and up to the suspension of the WBG’s country program due to the August 2021
               government takeover.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To support the development of the Afghanistan land administration system.

                             Rationale
                             The theory of change (ToC), developed for the PAD, showed a direct, logical causal chain from inputs to
                             outputs. Key technical activities, updates and policy reforms were intended to result in greater awareness of
                             land administration and the associated policy changes that would ensure an operational land registry and the
                             issuance of legal title. The outputs were logically linked to the outcomes, and the ToC showed how the
                             combination of outputs creates an improved system of (i) land administration (through the creation of legal
                             framework, new standards, better government capacity, geoinformation assets, and land information system);
                             and (ii) land registry services, such as issuance of titles and Occupancy Certificates (OCs) (through the
                             creation of survey and registration processes, systematic land registration, and better tenure security of urban
                             population in the targeted informal areas). There is one small limitation: the missing interlinks from specific
                             outputs to outcomes. If the intermediate outcomes were presented in a separate column, it would be easier to
                             establish those links.

                             Note regarding the Original and Revised projects: The revisions of the outcome targets made at
                             restructuring affected only two outcome targets under Objective 2; they did not affect any of the outcome



                                                                                                                               Page 5 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Afghanistan Land Administration System (P164762)



targets under Objective 1. Therefore, this review will separately assess efficacy for the Original and Revised
projects under Objective 2, but not under Objective 1.

Outputs

By the time of actual project closure, none of the outputs under Objective 1 were achieved, but the progress
made was adequate considering expected project closure date. This relates to the following intermediate
results indicators (IRIs):

1. One key law for land administration was drafted and went through the consultation process (the target was
three);

2. Two curricula and training modules for land administration were designed (the target was four); and

3. Eighty-one percent of grievances related to the project were resolved within standards stipulated in GRM
procedures (against 90 percent targeted).

The other two IRIs under Objective 1 were not achieved yet: the Regulation for Land Dispute Resolution was
not approved (the target was to approve it by project closure) and Strategic HR Plan was not adopted (the
target was to adopt it by project closure).

Outcomes

1. The Land Information System (LIS) was expected to be fully developed and operational by project closure
and become available for usage both centrally and in project locations (PDO 1). This was not achieved by
actual project closure. By the end of 2021, it was expected that 10 percent of the target would be reached,
which did not happen at the time of project suspension in August 2021. However, the progress made by that
time shows that the project was on track to reaching this outcome by the planned closure: the LIS design was
finalized, 71 percent of the targeted parcels were completed, all land use maps were finalized, and a land
price market database was prepared for 200 districts.

2. Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) and uniform service standards for the Deputy Land Ministry/MUDL
were expected to be adopted and implemented through everyday operations (PDO2). This was not achieved
by actual project closure. There was no target for 2021, therefore it is not possible to assess if the progress
made by the time of the project suspension in August 2021 was adequate. However, the ICR reports that
“good progress was made on this indicator, with several procedures completed, including those for cadastral
surveying and geodetic services” (ICR, page 14).

Overall, under the original project, Objective 1, neither the expected outcomes, nor the expected outputs were
achieved by actual project closure. Post-closure, the expectation was that some of the progress made by the
project would be halted or lost (ICR, page 15).



Rating
Negligible




                                                                                                  Page 6 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Afghanistan Land Administration System (P164762)




OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
To support the development of the Afghanistan land administration system.

Revised Rationale
No changes were made to this objective.



Revised Rating
Negligible


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To provide the population in selected areas with improved land registration services, including issuance of
Titles and Occupancy Certificates.

Rationale
Please see the discussion of the ToC under objective 1.

Outputs

1. One zonal land registration office was established, compared to the target of six offices;

2. No parcels were covered by the cadastral survey, while the original target was 100,000 parcels; and

3. Training on women's land rights and the OC program was provided to 6,435 women (this was not a RF
indicator, and no target had been established for it).

Outcomes:

OCs were expected to be issued to households based on systematic land registration. The target was not
achieved: the number of benefiting households was 3,963 at actual project closure, compared to the original
target of 220,000 households by planned project closure and 75,000 households by the end of 2021. The
gender-based target was not achieved either: the number of women receiving the OCs (alone or jointly) by
actual project closure was 3,150, as compared to the original target of 105,000 by planned project closure
and of 52,500 by the end of 2021.

Overall, under the original project Objective 2, neither the expected outcomes, nor the expected outputs were
achieved by actual project closure. Post-closure, there was a risk that some of the benefits obtained due to
the project would be lost: and the OCs issued to women could become illegitimate.



Rating
Negligible


                                                                                                  Page 7 of 16
                                 Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                 Afghanistan Land Administration System (P164762)




                              OBJECTIVE 2 REVISION 1
                              Revised Objective
                              To provide the population in selected areas with improved land registration services, including issuance of
                              Titles and Occupancy Certificates.

                              Revised Rationale
                              At restructuring, the objective stayed the same, but two targets under Objective 2 were revised: a PDO target
                              and an IRI target.

                              The revised PDO target: the target for the number of OCs that were expected to be issued to households
                              based on systematic land registration was reduced from 220,000 to 185,000. This target was not reached: at
                              actual project closure, the number of the issued OCs was 3,963, significantly below the revised number.

                              The revised IRI: the target for the number of Parcels Covered by Cadastral Survey in Project’s Selected
                              Areas was reduced from 100,000 at appraisal to 50,000 at restructuring. This target was not reached: none of
                              the parcels was covered by the survey by actual project closure.

                              Overall, under the Revised project Objective 2, neither the expected outcomes, nor the expected outputs
                              were achieved by actual project closure.



                              Revised Rating
                              Negligible


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            For both objectives, the efficacy is Negligible: while an adequate progress was made toward outcome targets
                            that were expected to be reached by the originally planned project closure date, none of those targets was
                            achieved by the actual closure date.

                            The overall efficacy is negligible.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating                                   Primary Reason
                            Negligible                                                External shock
                  OBJR1_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale




                                                                                                                               Page 8 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Afghanistan Land Administration System (P164762)



  For both objectives, the efficacy is Negligible: while an adequate progress was made toward outcome targets
  that were expected to be reached by the originally planned project closure date, none of those targets was
  achieved by the actual closure date.

  The overall efficacy is negligible.



  Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating                        Primary Reason
  Negligible                                                External shock


 5. Efficiency
At appraisal, no economic analysis for the project was done. The project appraisal was based on the
government’s IDPL, which the project supported, and the financial benefits from the fees related to the OC
issuance. For IDPL, the Internal Rate of Return (IRR) was significant and amounted to 19.05 percent. Potential
financial benefits to the government from the fees charged for issuing OCs under the project would be between
US$5.0 million and US$7.0 million.

In preparation for the MTR in 2021, the economic benefits from the OC issuance were estimated using the
Hedonic Price Model (HPM). They amounted to US$13,500 - US$14,500 per OC. The ICR provides no details
about the methodology of the economic analysis or the project’s net benefits. At IEG's request, the team has
shared the economic analysis report prepared in June 2021. According to the report, the analysis used the
following methods: (i) hedonic regression analysis, which provided data on what determines housing prices in
Afghanistan; (ii) a phone survey of a sample of OC recipients, which collected such data as perceived value of
the house, the size of the house, and construction materials used. Using a GiS software, the survey data, and
the outcomes of the hedonic regression analysis, a change in property values due to the OC issuance and
potential fiscal revenues from the OC fees were forecast. While the report provides an estimate of the gross
benefits per issued OC (quoted above), it does not contain information about the project's net benefits.

At closure, no economic analysis was conducted. Considering that the project did not achieve any of its
expected outcomes by the actual closure, the expected benefits did not materialize. The ICR could have
included a simple calculation of the level of net benefits achieved by actual project closure, based on the actual
achievement of the OC target. However, the ICR contains no such calculations. IEG’s calculations, based on the
ICR’s data - the number of OCs issued (3,963) and the lower end of the estimated benefits per OC (US$13,500)
- show that the total project benefit from OCs at actual project closure was US$53,500,500, which is
significantly above the amount that was disbursed at that time (US$6,189,444). Therefore, the project’s net
benefits at actual closure were positive.

Overall, while the ICR did not include a simplified version of the economic analysis, which was prepared for the
MTR in 2021, or provide an estimate of the project’s net benefits, there was room for doing it. This would have
helped to better understand the value for money of the project.

Administrative efficiency. The project experienced initial delays related to the procurement of key project
elements such as the LIS design, the geodetic network, and the photogrammetry, as well as the contracting
of international consultants and the PIU staff. The delays and high costs of hiring the international experts



                                                                                                     Page 9 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Afghanistan Land Administration System (P164762)



resulted in significantly higher project management costs than originally expected, with 56 percent of those
spent by project actual closure.

While the expected economic benefits of the project did not materialize, net economic benefits at actual closure
were positive. Therefore, the project efficiency is rated Modest.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     0
 Appraisal                                                  0
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     0
 ICR Estimate                                               0
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The relevance of objectives is rated high due to its full alignment with the country strategy and government
priorities at appraisal and up to the suspension of the WBG’s country program due to the August 2021
government takeover. For both objectives, as well as for both the Original and the Revised projects under
Objective 2, the efficacy is Negligible: while an adequate progress was made toward outcome targets that were
expected to be reached by the originally planned project closure date, none of those targets was achieved by
the actual closure date. The overall efficacy is negligible for both original and the revised projects. While the
expected economic benefits of the project did not materialize, net economic benefits at actual closure were
positive. Therefore, the project efficiency is modest. The overall outcome rating is Unsatisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Unsatisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The ICR reports that the risk to development outcome is rated High due to factors outside the Bank’s control,
specifically, the shortened project implementation and the collapse of the government in August 2021. Under
the circumstances, most initial project results are not expected to be maintained, and some, such as the
modernization of the legal and policy framework, face a high risk of being undone. This applies particularly to


                                                                                                    Page 10 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Afghanistan Land Administration System (P164762)



the changes related to women’s land rights. The institutional capacity building results will be lost as many
trained staff have left the country or their workplace (ICR, page 25).




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project was prepared with full understanding of the specifics of project design when facing complex
  challenges, such as those related to land governance in Afghanistan. It involved such mitigation
  measures as prioritizing interventions and combining institutional capacity building and technological
  innovations with raising awareness, gaining support of the population, and developing activities targeted
  at women. However, the ICR notes that “project design had some shortcomings, including the lack of
  readiness for implementation stemming from issues related to the Project Preparation Grant (PPG)
  implementation” and that “the project design was too complex, and some of its features could have been
  managed more sequentially" (ICR, page 24).



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The project benefited significantly from having a stable task team, including the same task team leader
 (TTL) managing the project from appraisal to actual closure. The implementation was supported by
 technical specialists with specific knowledge of both the sector and the country, who worked diligently to
 find solutions, in coordination with the client. The team included a focal point in Kabul, who was
 providing advice to MUDL and the PIU and followed up on agreed actions and urgent matters. The team
 conducted four implementation missions and held weekly meetings with the PIU and field offices between
 missions. The missions were in-person prior to March 2020 and became virtual after that, due to the
 COVID-19 pandemic. The team reported on project's status and performance in aide memoires and
 implementation status reports (ISRs), highlighting the shortcomings, challenges, and actions required. The
 preparation of the MTR, which started shortly before the actual project closure, involved an in-depth
 analysis of the issues and potential adaptation measures (ICR, page 25).



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory




                                                                                                    Page 11 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Afghanistan Land Administration System (P164762)



9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The results framework (RF) was designed using the SMART methodology: it was specific (linked to
 results), measurable (measured the results), adequate (provided sufficient information to assess the
 results), realistic (had a reasonable cost and measurement frequency), and targeted (covered the targeted
 population and area). SMART helped to support the link between the M&E and the ToC during
 implementation. SMART was also used when preparing the M&E Manual and the M&E plan, according to
 which each indicator was measured through Indicator Measurement Fact Sheets (IMFS), which was very
 detailed and included: the indicator´s description, geographic scope, unit of measurement, formula,
 frequency, responsibility for data collection, source of information, means of verification, and data collection
 instruments (ICR, page 22). The RF was comprehensive and balanced across the PDO level indicators and
 IRIs. All indicators were quantitative, time-bound and had baselines and targets. The RF had a gender-
 disaggregated indicator.



b. M&E Implementation
  Throughout project implementation, the IMFSs were monitored and updated quarterly. The M&E team
  within the PIU was collecting, consolidating, and analyzing data on project performance, and tracking
  progress to project targets. M&E data was used to inform the interactions with the stakeholders and the
  public awareness activities. The M&E data reported by the PIU satisfied the World Bank standards and
  was submitted on time. The semi-annual progress reports were of adequate quality and submitted on
  time. The project’s M&E was rated Satisfactory until October 2020; then downgraded to Moderately
  Satisfactory due to the delays in recruiting two new M&E specialists; then, in April 2021, upgraded to
  Satisfactory, and stayed at this level for the rest of project implementation (ICR, page 22).



c. M&E Utilization
  The M&E data was used for project management (including regular reports and project restructuring),
  decision-making, and communication with the stakeholders. Progress toward the RF targets was verified
  quarterly and during the World Bank's supervision missions. Throughout project implementation, the
  M&E information enabled the team and the stakeholders to identify challenges to the achievement of
  project objectives and to evaluate the results achieved (ICR, page 22-23).



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Environmental Safeguards. The project was classified as Category B and triggered the Environmental
   Assessment Policy (OP/BP 4.01). An Environmental Management Framework (EMF), including an


                                                                                                     Page 12 of 16
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Afghanistan Land Administration System (P164762)



  environmental assessment and generic Environmental Management Plan (EMP), were prepared. The EMF
  included guidelines to prepare Environmental Management Plans (EMP) for impacts related to civil works
  (mainly construction and rehabilitation of small office buildings). The EMF was made public in the country
  and on the World Bank's external website on January 1, 2019. The Project complied with the World Bank
  Environmental Safeguards Policies and the Government's environmental regulations. Compliance with
  OP/BP 4.10 was rated as Satisfactory throughout project implementation (ICR, page 23).

  Social Safeguards. The Operational Policy on Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12) was triggered by the
  construction of six zonal offices, although no major resettlement was expected. The OC issuance program
  posed several potential social risks, and a Social Assessment (SA) was conducted. A Resettlement Policy
  Framework (RPF) and a Social Management Framework (SMF) were developed to comply with OP 4.12
  and the national law. In addition to the RPF, MUDL prepared procedures for the OC Regulations that
  helped to address the gaps to minimize the risks. The project complied with OP4.12, and the rating for
  compliance ranged from Satisfactory to Moderately Satisfactory throughout project implementation (ICR,
  page 23-24).




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management (FM). The FM had some shortcomings, which caused its downgrading from
  Satisfactory to Moderately Satisfactory in December 2019 and to Moderately Unsatisfactory on August 12,
  2021. This was due to the following: questionable expenditures identified during the reviews, low budget
  utilization, weaknesses in the record management, non-compliance with the legal covenants, and low
  progress in resolving external audit observations (ICR, page 24).

  Procurement. Procurement processes were implemented based on the Project Implementation Plan,
  Annual Operations Plans, and annual procurement plans. The procurement plan was updated frequently.
  Due to the delays in the approval of procurement packages by the MUDL, the procurement rating was
  downgraded from Satisfactory to Moderately Satisfactory in February 2020, then to Moderately
  Unsatisfactory in November 2020. On August 14, 2021, the procurement rating was upgraded to
  Moderately Satisfactory, and it stayed at this level until closing. The improvement was due to the speed-up
  of the procurement of key packages, the hiring of procurement and project management specialists, and
  the preparation of the procurement manual (ICR, page 24).




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  ---



d. Other
  ---




                                                                                                Page 13 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Afghanistan Land Administration System (P164762)



11. Ratings
                                                                                    Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                      IEG
                                                                                    Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                        Unsatisfactory           Unsatisfactory
                               Moderately
Bank Performance                                        Moderately Satisfactory
                               Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                 Substantial              Substantial

Quality of ICR                 ---                      Substantial


12. Lessons

The following lessons are based on the ICR, with minor adjustments.

      Complex projects implemented in countries where institutional development is a
       challenging task benefit from taking full advantage of the World Bank’s analytical and
       technical expertise and being based on the World Bank’s long-term engagement in the
       country. The project was developed following over a decade of World Bank involvement in
       the land sector in Afghanistan. The analytical basis for improving the legal and institutional
       framework for land administration and management was thus developed, institutional and
       legal weaknesses identified, and recommendations for priority reforms prepared. In addition,
       the World Bank’s prior development policy finance (DPF) projects had created incentives to
       promote key land governance reforms. While the project had to be discontinued due to the
       circumstances beyond the Bank’s control, the initial results were promising, and those could
       not have happened without the analytical basis and a long-term prior engagement.

      The experience in Afghanistan and other countries with challenges to institutional
       development shows that gaining a broad support of the beneficiaries is as important
       as providing adequate technology and institutional capacity building. The project
       involved participatory and consultation processes established to promote awareness and
       active participation of the beneficiaries responding to cultural and gender issues. The
       project’s technical and legal activities were embedded in traditional structures: council
       members and elders of the local community were consulted on planned activities prior to
       implementation to obtain their support and to request that they communicate project
       objectives to the community in the local language. It was planned to deploy a targeted
       communication campaign to inform women about their land property rights and develop
       gender-specific awareness-raising materials. While project implementation was cut short,
       project experience with beneficiary engagement proved to be positive.

      Complex and transformational projects benefit from a well-applied programmatic
       approach. The project was complex and overly ambitious considering the country’s
       institutional capacity, demand for expertise, and the ongoing conflict. The project’s design
       took the complexity of the objectives into account and applied a programmatic approach that
       included prioritizing and sequencing the tasks. However, such an approach could have been
       applied better, especially to transformational activities such as transitioning from deed

                                                                                                      Page 14 of 16
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Afghanistan Land Administration System (P164762)



         registration to parcel-based titling registration and transferring the responsibility for deed
         registration from the courts to MUDL. In particular, to better manage technical design and
         implementation capacity risks, a more incremental approach could have been considered.

        Early and focused attention on capacity building is critical in FCV contexts. Project
         design included an institutional capacity assessment and a capacity-building plan, and the
         need for that was underscored during project implementation. However, MUDL was
         unprepared for this because its organizational structure and internal workflows were in flux at
         the start of implementation. Engagement with MUDL during project preparation would be
         beneficial for the capacity building activities.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provides a detailed history of the project; a good justification of the PDO relevance; comprehensive
and robust evidence; a clear linking of evidence to findings; and sufficient information to understand how the
activities are linked to the expected outcomes and further to the intended impacts. The ICR has internal
consistency. The lessons learned are linked to the narrative and the ratings and are useful for future lending
operations. The sections on efficacy, risks to development outcome; M&E quality; environmental, social, and
fiduciary compliance; and Bank performance are informative and contain useful analysis. However, the ICR’s
information regarding project efficiency is inadequate: a description of the economic analysis at MTR, which
was a substitute for the missing economic analysis at appraisal, is almost absent (the methodology is not
described, and the net benefits’ calculations are not presented), and the calculation of the net benefits at
closure, which could be easily done based on the data present in the ICR, was skipped. There was certainly
room for including a simplified version of the economic analysis which would have help in better understanding
the value for money of the project. Despite this weakness, the overall quality of the ICR is Substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                      Page 15 of 16
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
Afghanistan Land Administration System (P164762)




                                                                                Page 16 of 16
