     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NE-Capacity for Service Delivery (P145261)



                                                                                   Report Number: ICRR0023157

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P145261                                     NE-Capacity for Service Delivery

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Niger                                       Governance


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-H9310                                   31-Dec-2018                                          36,214,747.20

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 31-Mar-2014                                 31-Dec-2021

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                       Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                              40,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                               40,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Actual                                           36,527,525.29                                              0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Antonio M. Ollero           Clay Wescott                  Jennifer L. Keller              IEGEC (Unit 1)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Financing Agreement (page 4, Schedule 1 - Project Description), the project development
   objective of the Niger Public Sector Capacity and Performance for Service Delivery Project was "to strengthen
   public investment management capacity and civil servant performance evaluation processes in targeted
   ministries to improve service delivery outcomes."

   The original objective was revised in the first restructuring. According to the Amended and Restated
   Financing Agreement (page 4, Schedule 1 - Project Description), the project development objective was "to

                                                                                                    Page 1 of 28
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NE-Capacity for Service Delivery (P145261)



   strengthen public finance and human resource management to improve service delivery capacity in selected
   sectors."

   This ICR Review will conduct a split evaluation of this project.

   Original Project Objective. This ICR Review parses the original objective as:

   1. To strengthen public investment management capacity in targeted ministries
   2. To strengthen civil servant performance evaluation processes in targeted ministries
   3. To improve service delivery outcomes in the agriculture, education, and health sectors

   The targeted ministries were: (a) the Ministry of Planning (Ministere du Plan, de l'Aminagement du Territoire
   et du Developpement Communautaire); (b) the Ministry of Finance (Ministere des Finances); (c) the Ministry
   of Civil Service (Ministere de la Fonction Publique et de la Reforme Administrative); (d) the Ministry of
   Agriculture (Ministere de l'Agriculture); (e) the Ministry of Primary Education (Ministere de l’Education); and (f)
   the Ministry of Health (Ministre de la Sante Publique).

   The reference to the "agriculture, education and health sectors" was added by this ICR Review for clarity, in
   lieu of the original unspecified "selected sectors" cited in the Program Document.

   Revised Project Objective. This ICR Review parses the amended objective as:

   1. To strengthen public finance management
   2. To strengthen human resource management in the civil service
   3. To improve public service delivery capacity in the education and health sectors

   The reference to the "education and health sectors" was added by this ICR Review for clarity, in lieu of the
   original unspecified "selected sectors" cited in the Restructuring Paper.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  24-Oct-2016

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   Structured as an investment project financing (IPF) with performance-based conditions (PBCs) – withdrawal
   of part of the funding would be dependent on the achievement of targets for disbursement-linked indicators



                                                                                                       Page 2 of 28
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  NE-Capacity for Service Delivery (P145261)



(DLIs) or disbursement linked results (DLRs), the project had two original components and three revised
components.

Original Project Components

Supporting Programs for Service Delivery Results (US$25 million estimated at appraisal) aimed to
improve capacity and systems in five sectors: (a) public investment management – the development and
coordination of public investment management systems, program and project formulation, monitoring and
evaluation systems, and budget management tools for the Ministry of Planning and the Ministry of Finance;
(b) human resource management – the development of a human resource performance evaluation system
for the Ministry of Civil Service and the Commission for State Modernization (Haut-Commissariat a la
Modernisation de l'Etat), within the Prime Minister’s Office (Primature); (c) agriculture – support to Ministry
of Agriculture and the Commission for Food Security (Haut-Commissariat a l’Initiative Les Nigiriens
Nourissent les Nigiriens), within the Prime Minister’s Office, to enhance agricultural productivity and revenue
generation in irrigated areas and to improve the productivity of rainfed agriculture; (d) public health –
support to the Ministry of Health to improve human resource deployment, provision of medicines, key
medical inputs, and governance and leadership; and (e) education – support to the Ministry of Education to
improve teacher deployment, management and information systems, and monitoring and evaluation. This
component involved 13 PBCs (see Section 4 for the particulars of the original PBCs and their distribution
among the three original project objectives).

Technical Assistance for Capacity Development (US$15 million estimated at appraisal) supported: (a)
the provision of information systems and equipment to upgrade planning, procurement, and monitoring and
evaluation systems in target ministries, inter-connect planning and financial management systems,
consolidate of information systems managed by the National Statistics Institute (Institut National des
Statistiques), develop information systems for the one-stop shop for customs transactions and the anti-
money laundering and financing of terrorism (AML/CFT) initiative, support service delivery indicator surveys
for health and education; (b) the application of change management tools; (c) training to enhance the
capacities of civil servants in target ministries and to strengthen the national training institutions; (d)
technical assistance to strengthen the coordination function of the Ministry of Planning, improve investment
planning and programming), and enhance the monitoring and evaluation of programs and projects; and (e)
project implementation. This component did not involve any PBC.

Revised Project Components

Strengthening Public Financial Management (US$13 million estimated at restructuring, US$8.55 million
disbursed by closing) aimed to improve public financial management in six areas: (a) budget planning and
management – reforms to strengthen tax and custom administration including value-added tax (VAT)
reforms, development of a strategy to implement the organic budget law and other directives on public
financial management, update of budget forecasting and planning tools, and integration of public
financial management information technology (IT) systems; (b) public investment monitoring and evaluation
– creation of a comprehensive database of public investment programs, development of assessment tools,
including preliminary studies, feasibility studies, and impact studies, evaluation of public investment
programs covering 2014-2019; (c) procurement – evaluation of the public procurement system, assessment
of options to update procurement legislation and regulation, installation of a procurement management
information system, and disclosure of procurement information, statistics, and audits; (d) tax administration
– disclosure of results of user surveys of tax administration performance, support to user centers to improve
tax administration performance, and development of a VAT reimbursement system; (e) tax and customs


                                                                                                 Page 3 of 28
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    NE-Capacity for Service Delivery (P145261)



  administration – preparation and implementation of a comprehensive action plan for tax and customs
  administration reform, studies to update relevant legislation, regulation, procedures, and manuals,
  deployment of IT tools, and development of performance contracts for tax and customs administration; and
  (f) cash management, treasury payment systems, accounting, control and oversight – conduct of surveys of
  relevant legislation, installation and maintenance of IT tools, conduct of institutional, performance,
  management, and financial audits, building capacity on internal and external controls in selected ministries,
  establishment of the Treasury Single Account, and operationalization of electronic funds transfer and
  payment systems. This component involved 4 PBCs (the 13 original PBCs would be amended into four
  revised PBCs at restructuring), all about the first of the three revised project objectives (see Section 4 for
  the particulars of the revised PBCs and their distribution among the three revised project objectives).

  Improving Human Resources Management (US$15 million estimated at restructuring, US$17.45 million
  disbursed by closing) would: (a) develop and implement a national human resource management strategy;
  (b) roll out an integrated human resource information system at selected ministries; (c) implement biometric
  identification for all government employees; (d) establish a pilot incentive system to improve staff
  deployment in the education sector; (e) prepare and implement a strategy to improve teacher pooling in
  higher education; (f) conduct assessment studies to update human resource management legislation, and
  regulation; (g) promote transparency and accountability in human resource management; (h) provide
  training on human resource management to employees at selected ministries; and (i) conduct and publish
  the results of a service delivery indicator survey for the education and health sectors. This component did
  not involve any PBC.

  Change Management (US$12 million estimated at restructuring, US$10.34 million disbursed by closing)
  would: (a) upgrade network operations centers for public financial management and human resources
  management; (b) operationalize monitoring and evaluation systems; (c) provide training and coaching on
  leadership and managing results, and (d) pool IT systems to ensure a unified system at the selected
  ministries and government agencies. This component did not involve any PBC.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost, Financing, and Borrower Contribution. The project was estimated to cost SDR 26.1
  million (US$40 million equivalent) at appraisal, of which SDR 16.3 million (US$25 million equivalent) or 62.5
  percent would be allocated to eligible expenditure programs under the IPF PBC structure. The project cost
  remained the same at restructuring, except that only SDR 1.26 million (US$1.8 million equivalent) or 4.8
  percent would be allocated to eligible expenditure programs under the IPF PBC structure. The project was
  financed with an IDA grant of SDR 26.1 million (US$40 million equivalent). There was no financial
  contribution from the grantee. The actual project cost (final disbursed amount) was SDR 25.74 million
  (US$36.5 million equivalent). The difference between financing and disbursement amounts in US$ terms
  also reflect changes in the SDR:US$ exchange rate.

  Dates. The project was approved on March 21, 2014, became effective on September 29, 2014, was
  restructured for the first time on October 24, 2016 (the amended financing agreement was signed three
  months later on December 13, 2016), and for the second time on July 17, 2021, and closed on December
  31, 2021, three years after the original closing date of December 31, 2018.

  Restructuring. The first restructuring in October 2016, with US$4.3 million disbursed (11.9 percent of the
  actual project cost), changed the: (a) project development objectives (see Section 2.A); (b) project

                                                                                                   Page 4 of 28
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NE-Capacity for Service Delivery (P145261)



   components and component costs (see Section 2.D); (c) the PBCs – revised from 13 to 4 (see Section 4);
   (d) results framework (see Section 4); (e) project implementing agency (from the Ministry of Planning to the
   Ministry of Finance); and (f) project implementation schedule and closing date (to December 31,
   2020). The second restructuring in July 2021, with US$29.7 million disbursed (81.3 percent of the actual
   project cost), changed: (a) some project activities to support the response to the COVID-19 pandemic; (b)
   the results framework (see Section 4); and (c) the project implementation schedule and closing date (to
   December 31, 2021).




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Original Project Objective

Binding Constraints to Development. The original project development objectives were relevant to
development constraints identified in the Republic of Niger Systematic Country Diagnostic – Priorities for
Ending Poverty and Boosting Shared Prosperity of November 2017 and in other Government development
planning documents and Bank diagnostic studies.

      Public Financial Management. Very limited progress had been achieved with reforms in public
       financial management, where Niger recorded inferior ratings on 21 of 31 indicators in 2012
       compared to 2008, according to the Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability Assessment of
       2012. Specifically: (a) the execution rate of the capital budget remained low at 59 percent in 2012,
       with the budget year typically cut by five months because of delayed budgetary releases to line
       ministries, according to the Rapport Niger: Stimuler l’Execution de Budget d’Investissement des
       Pays de l’Union Economique et Monetaire Ouest Africain Upour un Meilleur Impact sur le
       Developpement (World Bank, 2013); (b) the annual budget cycle was disconnected from the multi-
       year nature of capital projects; (c) the lack of commitment plans derailed the ability of the Treasury
       to develop reliable monthly cash flow projections; and (d) procurement and payment procedures
       were demanding, complex, and superfluous.
      Human Resource Management. Despite the 43 percent growth in public employment from 2006 to
       2012, the civil service remained comparatively small (at 4.3 percent of GDP, the wage bill was
       second to lowest among 12 countries in West Africa), which in turn limited the capacity of the
       Government to deliver on public services. Moreover, (a) the civil service was dominated by aging
       senior incumbents and junior new entrants; (b) there were disparities in staffing levels across
       regions; (c) with salaries and pensions low, the government could not recruit qualified personnel; (d)
       with merit-based promotions and results-based performance assessments wanting, staff lacked
       accountability, and (e) staffing decisions were highly politicized.
      Agriculture. For a country that had faced famine, food insecurity, and malnutrition for the last five
       decades, Niger needed to accelerate the implementation of its flagship food security program
       (Nigeriens Nourissent les Nigeriens) but could not plan, implement, and monitor the
       program. Significantly, inadequate high-grade seed, fertilizer, and irrigation equipment posed
       challenges to raising agricultural productivity and food production.
      Health. The quality of basic health care remained low for a country with the highest fertility rate and
       one of the world's most serious maternal mortality rates. The implementation of the Plan de

                                                                                                    Page 5 of 28
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NE-Capacity for Service Delivery (P145261)



       Developpement Sanitaire, 2011-15, had been challenged by: (a) limited capacity for planning,
       budget management, and monitoring, resulting in low health budget execution rates – 68 percent in
       2008-2010, dropping government spending on health from 15 percent of total government spending
       in 2006 to 7 percent in 2011; (b) inadequate deployment of health personnel to needy regions – 33
       percent of health personnel, including 40 percent of nurses, were based in the capital, Niamey; and
       (c) weak regulation of the pharmaceutical industry.
      Education. Although access to education has expanded, inefficiencies continued to undermine
       sector performance: (a) teacher assignment to schools favored urban over rural locations; (b)
       teacher absenteeism was high, and (c) school management skills were lacking. The lack of
       attention to these problems would derail the implementation of the Programme Sectoriel de
       l’Education et de la Formation, 2014-2024.

Bank Strategy. The original project development objectives aligned with the Bank Group strategy in Niger
at appraisal and closing.

      The Country Partnership Strategy for the Republic of Niger for the Period FY13-FY16 (CPS)
       committed Bank Group support for the country’s development priorities organized around two
       “strategic objectives” – promote resilient growth and reduce vulnerability. The original project
       objectives, “to strengthen public investment management capacity in targeted ministries” and “to
       strengthen civil service performance assessment processes in targeted ministries,” were aligned
       with the first CPS strategic objective, specifically with the CPS outcome “fiscal performance
       consolidated.” The original objective “to improve service delivery outcomes” was aligned with the
       second CPS focus area, specifically with the CPS outcomes “increased access to water, sanitation,
       health, and population services” and “improved education and employment skills for the youth.”
      The Country Partnership Framework for the Republic of Niger for the Period FY18-FY22 (CPF)
       committed Bank Group support for the country’s development priorities organized around three
       “focus areas” – increased rural productivity and incomes, better governance or jobs, service
       delivery, and growth, and improved human capital and social protection. The revised project
       objectives “to strengthen public finance management” and “to strengthen human
       resource management” were aligned with the third CPF focus areas, specifically with the CPF
       objective “strengthened public finance and human resource management for improved service
       delivery.” The revised project objective “to improve service delivery capacity in selected sectors”
       was aligned with the second CPF focus area, specifically with the CPF objectives “increased access
       to quality health services” and “increased access to quality education and training services.”

Performance-Based Conditions. The 13 original PBCs were associated with 12 eligible expenditure
programs (EEPs) in the five sector programs supported by this operation and were to reflect the
achievement of the original project objectives "to strengthen public investment management capacity in
targeted ministries," "to strengthen civil servant performance evaluation processes in targeted ministries,"
and "to improve service delivery outcomes." According to the Program Document, the combination of
results-based financing – in which the reimbursement of a proportion of eligible government expenditures
was linked to the achievement of agreed-upon performance indicators – and technical assistance would
support government-identified solutions to core public sector capacity deficits and produce tangible
development and service delivery results in the five sector programs and target ministries covered by this
operation. A total 62.5 percent of the project funds were allocated to the 13 original PBCs (see Section
2.E).



                                                                                                    Page 6 of 28
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      NE-Capacity for Service Delivery (P145261)



               Revised Project Objective

               Binding Constraints to Development. Like the original project development objectives, the revised
               project development objectives were relevant to development constraints identified in the Republic of Niger
               Systematic Country Diagnostic – Priorities for Ending Poverty and Boosting Shared Prosperity of November
               2017 and in other Government development planning documents and Bank diagnostic studies (see above).

               Bank Strategy. Like the original project development objectives, the revised project development
               objectives were aligned with the Bank Group strategy in Niger at appraisal and closing (see above).

               Performance-Based Conditions. The four revised PBCs were associated with 1 EEP and were to reflect
               the achievement of the first of the three revised objectives "to strengthen public finance
               management." According to the Restructuring Paper, the 13 original PBCs were difficult to
               implement. The four revised PBCs would be more focused, relevant to the revised project objective, and
               aligned with the government's implementation capacity. However, there were no PBCs defined for the
               other two revised objectives, an omission that was not explained in the restructuring document. A
               significantly reduced 4.8 percent of the project funds was allocated to the four revised PBCs (see Section
               2.E).


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To strengthen public investment management capacity in targeted ministries.



                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change. Support to the Ministry of Planning and the Ministry of Finance for the development and
                             coordination of tools and systems for budget management, program and project formulation, public
                             investment management, and monitoring and evaluation would help improve the execution rate of the
                             investment budget, including those of the agriculture, health, and education sectors, as well as the execution
                             rates of the treasury plans and the public procurement commitment plans.

                                        To support the Ministry of Planning and the Ministry of Finance to strengthen public investment
                                          management capacity, the project would finance EEPs that supported the National Economic and
                                          Social Development Plan (Plan de Développement Economique et Social): (a) EEP 2 - Establish
                                          coherent and realistic global and sector MTEFs; (b) EEP 3 - Strengthen capacity for the planning and
                                          execution of public procurement; and (c) EEP 4 - Rationalize and improve cash flow management;

                                                                                                                                  Page 7 of 28
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   NE-Capacity for Service Delivery (P145261)



       and (d) EEP 5 - Strengthen capacity for planning, programming, monitoring and evaluation
       of development programs.
      The associated PBCs would be: (a) that a National Medium Term Expenditure Framework rated with a
       score of C or higher is included in the Budget Law adopted by the National Assembly (DLI-iv); (b) the
       percentage execution of the investment budget of the Ministry of Agriculture (DLI-v); (c)
       the percentage execution of the investment budget of the Ministry of Health (DLI-vi); and (d) the
       percentage execution of the investment budget of the Ministry of Primary Education (DLI-vii). The

Outputs. The project activities supporting the objective of strengthening public investment management
capacity in targeted ministries were restructured. There is no data to determine that the following eight output
targets for this objective – four PBCs and four other intermediate results – were achieved. There are also
issues with the relevance of three of the PBCs.

Of which, Performance Based Conditions:

      A National Medium Term Expenditure Framework of "acceptable quality" is included in the Budget
       Law adopted by the National Assembly. "Acceptable quality" was defined as the framework rated "C"
       or higher under the PEFA PI-12 criteria of the Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability
       Assessment of 2012. For this PBC (DLI-iv), the target was to achieve this by July 2016. (Public
       Expenditure and Financial Accountability Assessments are planned for Niger every two years,
       according to the World Bank, Republic of Niger: 2012 Public Expenditure Review).
      Agriculture – Rate of execution of investment budget of the Ministry of Agriculture. For this PBC (DLI-
       v), the targets were 55 percent for July 2015, 58 percent for July 2016, 61 percent for July 2017, and
       64 percent for July 2018. While this results indicator targets quantitative progress with budget
       implementation by the Ministry of Agriculture, it cannot measure the quality of the investment
       spending in agriculture and hence fails to truly reflect the degree of achievement of the objective to
       strengthen public investment management capacity in the Ministry.
      Public Health – Rate of execution of investment budget of the Ministry of Health. For this PBC (DLI-vi),
       the targets were 55 percent for July 2015, 58 percent for July 2016, 61 percent for July 2017, and 64
       percent for July 2018. The same shortcoming cited above applies to this indicator.
      Education – Rate of execution of investment budget of the Ministry of Primary Education. For this PBC
       (DLI-vii), the targets were 55 percent for July 2015, 58 percent for July 2016, 61 percent for July 2017,
       and 64 percent for July 2018. The same shortcoming cited above applies to this indicator.

of which, Other Intermediate Results:

      Adoption of sector Medium Term Expenditure Frameworks (MTEFs) of “acceptable quality” by the
       Ministry of Agriculture, the Ministry of Health, and the Ministry of Primary Education. The target was to
       adopt the MTEFs by July 2016.
      Proportion of the National Investment Program included in the Investment Budget (Title V of the
       National General Budget adopted by the National Assembly in the Finance Law for the fiscal
       year). The target was to raise the percentage from 45 percent in the baseline to 60 percent by
       closing.
      Average rate of execution of public procurement commitment plans in the Ministry of Planning,
       the Ministry of Finance, the Ministry of Civil Service and Administrative Reform, the Ministry
       of Agriculture, and the Ministry of Health. The target was to raise the rate from 40 percent in the
       baseline to 55 percent by closing.

                                                                                                  Page 8 of 28
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   NE-Capacity for Service Delivery (P145261)




      Average rate of execution of the National Monthly Treasury Plan. The target was to raise the rate from
       60 percent in the baseline to 72 percent by closing.

Outcomes. The project activities supporting the objective of strengthening public investment management
capacity in targeted ministries were restructured. Although there is data on the outcome target, the result
cannot be attributed to the original project activities. There is also an issue with the relevance of this outcome
indicator.

      The investment budget execution rate rose from 49.5 percent in the baseline to 68 percent by
       closing. The target was to increase the investment budget execution rate to 75 percent. Like the
       output indicators that target quantitative progress with budget implementation, this outcome indicator
       cannot measure the quality of the investment spending and hence fails to truly reflect the degree of
       achievement of the objective to strengthen public investment management capacity.



Rating
Negligible


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
To strengthen public finance management.

Revised Rationale
Theory of Change. Reforms in six areas – budget planning and management, public investment monitoring
and evaluation, procurement, tax administration, tax and customs administration, and cash management and
treasury systems – would strengthen public finance management in Niger, which had performed poorly in the
Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability Assessment of 2012. Specifically, (a) reforms with VAT
administration, including the adoption of a VAT reimbursement system, would help improve VAT efficiency;
(b) the enactment and implementation of various legislation and administrative orders would help align Niger’s
public finance management practices to the standards set by the West African Economic and Monetary Union
(WAEMU), where the eight member states had been working toward greater regional integration; and (c) the
installation of IT tools for tax and customs administration, cash management and treasury services, and
public procurement, combined with the integration of the public finance IT system, would enable the
preparation of performance reports, public project implementation reports, and public procurement audits and
the dissemination of these documents to the public.

      To help the Ministry of Finance to strengthen public finance management, the project would finance
       one EEP that supported the National Economic and Social Development Plan: Support to Reforms of
       the Tax and Customs Administration.
      The associated PBCs would be: (a) the operationalization and staffing by the Ministry of Finance of
       the Tax Reform Unit in the Directorate General of Tax; (b) the adoption by the Ministry of Finance of a
       three-year Strategic Action Plan for the Directorate General for Tax; (c) a Ministerial decision to
       operationalize the VAT reimbursement system; and (d) the publication of the results of the User
       Survey of the Performance of Tax Administration. Although it was not explained in the Restructuring
       Paper, the new PBCs were either part of, or were related to, the "policies that Niger intends to

                                                                                                    Page 9 of 28
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   NE-Capacity for Service Delivery (P145261)



       implement in the context of its request for financial support from the IMF" in June 2016: (a) revenue
       mobilization reform focused on strengthening governance – paragraph 29 of the Memorandum of
       Economic and Financial Policies (MEFP) sent by the Government to the IMF together with the Letter
       of Intent and Technical Memorandum of Understanding; (b) the implementation of organizational
       reforms at the Directorate General of Tax – paragraph 36; (c) implementation of the VAT credit refund
       mechanism – paragraph 34; and (d) the transparent management of public finances – paragraph
       43. The IMF would subsequently approve a three-year arrangement for Niger under the Extended
       Credit Facility for SDR 98.7 million in January 2017.

Outputs. The project achieved four of the following seven output targets defined for the objective
to strengthen public finance management – two of four PBCs and two of three other intermediate results.

of which, Performance Based Conditions:

      The Tax Reform Unit in the Directorate General of Tax (Direction Generale des Impots) in the Ministry
       of Finance was operationalized with appropriate staffing (DLR 1.1), achieving the target. The
       achievement of this target was verified by an independent auditor hired under the project
       to conduct annual (i.e. until the closing of the project) assessments, verification, and validation of the
       Government's performance on this PBC by visiting and examining the offices the Tax Reform Unit,
       interviewing the staff, reviewing the ministerial decision nominating three new experts (one
       responsible for strategy and the reform program, another for monitoring and evaluating the reforms,
       and another for tax surveillance and analysis), verifying the qualification of the experts, interviewing
       the experts, and submitting a report, including all evidence, to the Bank.
      A three-year Strategic Action Plan for the Directorate General of Tax was adopted by the Ministry of
       Finance (DLR 1.2), achieving the target. The achievement of the target was verified by an
       independent auditor hired under the project to assess, verify, and validate the Government's
       performance on this PBC by examining the ministerial decision and government circular adopting the
       plan and submitting a report, including all evidence, to the Bank.
      A ministerial decision to operationalize VAT reimbursement system was not adopted (DLR 1.3), failing
       to achieve the target. The obstacle was the politically sensitive nature of the measure, according to
       the ICR.
      The results of the User Survey of the Performance of the Tax Administration were not published on
       the Ministry of Finance website and at least one local newspaper (DLR 1.4), failing to achieve the
       target. Public funds were not allocated for the surveys, according to the ICR.

of which, Other Intermediate Results:

      The Annual Performance Reports of the Ministry of Health and the Ministry of Education for 2019 were
       available by closing, achieving the target. In the baseline, the Organic Budget Law of 2012 and other
       WAEMU directives were adopted into legislation. The target was that the Annual Performance
       Reports of the Ministry of Health and the Ministry of Education for 2019 would be available by closing.
      The Report on the Implementation of Public Projects for 2014-2019 was not published by closing,
       failing to achieve the target. The online platform that would contain the comprehensive database of
       internally and externally funded public investment programs could not be operationalized because of
       delays in the adoption of the Public Investment Management Strategy. The target was to publish the
       Report on the Implementation of Public Projects by closing.


                                                                                                  Page 10 of 28
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   NE-Capacity for Service Delivery (P145261)




      The Performance Audits of Public Procurement for 2014 onwards were published, achieving the
       target. In the baseline, the Procurement Management Information System was not operational and
       statistics on public procurement were not available. The target was to publish the Performance Audits
       of Public Procurement beginning in 2014.

Outcomes. The project achieved two of three outcomes defined for the objective to strengthen public
finance management.

      VAT efficiency (defined as VAT collection / 0.19 x Final Consumption Expenditure) declined from 26
       percent in the baseline to 19 percent by closing, failing to achieve the target of at least 34
       percent. Apart from the result that the target was not met, there were problems with this outcome
       indicator and target: (a) the VAT reimbursement system was not adopted, which would have helped
       with the result; (b) the Government and the Bank differed on the baseline and closing numbers
       (see Section 9.B); and (c) even if the target were met, it could not be entirely attributed to the
       interventions under this program alone (see Section 9.A).
      Access of the public to the budget documentation (defined as the proportion of documents made
       available to the public during the budgeting process out of the 25 required documents specified in the
       Monitoring and Evaluation system) rose from 20 percent in the baseline to 60 percent by closing,
       exceeding the target of 52 percent.
      The percentage implementation of WAEMU directives on public financial management (defined as the
       share of community policies, programs, and projects implemented by Niger as assessed annually by
       the WAEMU Commission) rose from 60 percent in the baseline to 82 percent by closing,
       exceeding the target of 80 percent.

Additional Information. During ICR Review, the Bank team reported additional results from the
implementation of this project which were not included as output or outcome indicators in the original results
framework at project design.

      Technical assistance from the project beginning in 2016 enabled the Government to adopt and
       implement programmatic budgeting by 2018. The Bank team attributes improvements in the
       Government’s public financial management performance metrics under the Public Expenditure and
       Financial Accountability Assessment (PEFA) in 2022, from its performance in the PEFA in 2016, to the
       implementation of programmatic budgeting: (a) budget classification (grade of B in 2022 from C in
       2016); (b) budget documentation (A from D); (c) execution rate of planned activities (B from D); (d)
       performance plans for better service delivery (C from D); (e) macroeconomic and budgetary provisions
       (B from C); (f) medium term budgets (C from D); (g) Parliament budget review (A from B); and (h)
       procurement methods (A from C). The Bank team also noted that Niger improved its rank on the
       implementation of programmatic budgeting from 7th to 2nd among the eight states of the West African
       Economic and Monetary Union (WAEMU). Moreover, the issuance of a decree (Arrete No. 41/MP)
       governing the selection of investment projects and the installation of public investment monitoring and
       evaluation system laid the foundation for a stronger public investment management system, according
       to the Bank team. Niger improved its grade on public investment management to C+ in 2022 from D in
       2016.
      Audits of 14 state-owned enterprises (SOEs) performed under the project helped with the enactment
       of three decrees (Decret No. 2021-924, 2021-925, and 2021-926) governing the creation, control, and
       supervision of public enterprises and led to the creation of a new General Directorate of State-Owned


                                                                                                 Page 11 of 28
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   NE-Capacity for Service Delivery (P145261)



       Enterprises to consolidate the oversight of SOEs in a General Directorate-level agency. These
       measures have improved the governance framework for SOEs, according to the Bank team.
      The acquisition by the project of technology systems for Niger for the WAEMU Automated Interbank
       Clearing System (SICA) and WAEMU Real-Time Gross Settlement System (STAR) helped modernize
       the national payments system in Niger. The new payments system has helped improve government
       revenue mobilization, according to the Bank team.

      A diagnostic of the public financial management system undertaken by the project



Revised Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To strengthen civil servant performance evaluation processes in targeted ministries.



Rationale
Theory of Change. Support to the Ministry of Civil Service and the High Commission for State
Modernization for the development of a human resource performance evaluation system would raise the
proportion of civil servants whose performance were evaluated on the basis of results-based contracts,
helping address problems afflicting the civil service – politicized staffing decisions and the lack of merit-based
promotions.

      To help the Ministry of Civil Service and the High Commission for State Modernizations to strengthen
       civil servant performance evaluation processes, the project would finance EEPs that supported the
       National Economic and Social Development Plan: EEP 1 - Development of Human Resources
       Performance Evaluation System.
      The associated PBCs would be: (a) that Procedures for open, competitive, and merit-
       based performance management have been designed by the Ministry of Civil Service and
       Administrative Reform together with High Commission for State Modernization in accordance with the
       Civil Service Organic Law (Law 2007-26) (DLI-i); (b) the Proportion of civil servant managers
       (appointed by decree in the Ministry of Finance, Ministry of Planning, and Ministry of Civil Service and
       Administrative Reform) who were evaluated on the basis of individual results-based performance
       contracts (DLI-ii); and (c) the Number of ministries in which results-based action plans (performance
       contracts) linked to the National Economic and Social Development Plan (Plan de Développement
       Economique et Social) have been developed (DLI-iii).

Outputs. The project activities supporting the objective to strengthen civil servant performance evaluation
processes in targeted ministries were restructured. There is no data to determine that the following three
output targets for this objective – all PBCs – were achieved. There are also issues with the relevance of the
three PBCs.



                                                                                                   Page 12 of 28
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   NE-Capacity for Service Delivery (P145261)



of which, Performance Based Conditions:

      For the PBC (DLI-i), the target was for this to be achieved by July 2015. This target was weak as it
       stopped with the design, and did not aim for the adoption or implementation, of the merit-based
       performance management system.
      For the PBC (DLI-ii), the targets were 10 percent by July 2016, 20 percent by July 2017, and 30
       percent by July 2018.
      For the PBC (DLI-iii), the targets were three by July 2015, six by July 2016, nine by July 2017, and 12
       by July 2018. This was similarly a weak target as it stopped with the development, and did not aim for
       the adoption or implementation, of the results-based action plans.

Outcomes. The project activities supporting the objective to strengthen public investment management
capacity in targeted ministries were restructured. There is no data to determine the degree to which the
outcome target defined for this objective was achieved during the time when this original objective still
applied. The planned outcome was:

The proportion of civil servant managers (appointed by ministerial decree in the Ministry of Finance, the
Ministry of Planning, and the Ministry of Civil Service and Administrative Reform) who were evaluated on the
basis of individual results-based performance contracts. The target was 30 percent at closing.



Rating
Negligible


OBJECTIVE 2 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
To strengthen human resource management in the civil service

Revised Rationale
Theory of Change. Reforms in human resource management would enhance the ability of the civil service
to deliver essential public services. The key measures would include the adoption of a human resource
management strategy, the rollout of an integrated human resource management information system to inform
appointments, promotions, payroll and other staffing decisions, and the training of staff. Immediate outputs
would include a biometrics-enabled audited database of employees, the ability to pay salaries using the
human resource IT system, and a cadre of trained government staff.

Outputs. The project exceeded two but failed to achieve three of five outputs defined for the objective
to strengthen human resource management (i.e., three of five other intermediate results). However, there are
issues with the relevance of the two intermediate results indicators that were achieved.

of which, Performance Based Conditions: (There were no PBCs defined for this revised objective).

of which, Other Intermediate Results:




                                                                                                Page 13 of 28
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   NE-Capacity for Service Delivery (P145261)




      A new Human Resource Management Information System was not deployed at target ministries,
         failing to achieve the target. The terms of reference for feasibility studies were prepared but the
         feasibility studies were delayed (due to the COVID-19 pandemic). In the baseline the human
         resource regulatory framework and the human resource information system were "obsolete." The
         target was for a new Human Resource Management Information System, in its basic, secondary, and
         advanced forms, would be deployed in target ministries – the Ministry of Finance, the Ministry of
         Health, the Ministry of Education, the Ministry of Planning, and the Ministry of Civil Service and
         Administrative Reform – first at the national level a year before closing, and second at the regional
         level by closing. Earlier, the Government adopted the roadmap for the modernization of human
         resource management, adopted the human resource management strategy, and updated the
         regulatory framework for human resource planning. However, the Human Resource Management
         Information System was not developed according to plan.
        The audit report on the new Human Resource Management Information System was not available,
         failing to achieve the target. The biometric census of public sector agents was undertaken, but the
         data clean-up process was still ongoing at closing and was not expected to be finalized until 2022. In
         the baseline, there was no consolidated census and there were multiple identification systems of,
         public sector agents. Consequently, the data on staff, organized by grade, services, and assignment
         was never included in the Budget Law of 2020. The target was that the audit of the Human Resource
         Management Information System would be available by 2021, which would have required the
         full completion of the biometric census and availability of the biometric database by 2019.
        The number of public sector agents trained was 5,075 by closing, exceeding the target of 1,250. This
         is a weak indicator – it is more an input rather than an output indicator for the objective to strengthen
         human resource management in the civil service.
        The number of women public sector agents trained was 1,716, exceeding the target of 300. This is a
         weak indicator – it is more an input rather than an output indicator for the objective to strengthen
         human resource management in the civil service.
        An impact assessment and strategy to scale up the pilot incentive system for staff deployment in the
         education sector was not completed by closing, failing to achieve the target. The Government
         adopted the strategy and standards for deployment and incentives following stakeholder consultations
         and public debate, but the pilot was delayed because of the reorganization of the Ministry of Education
         and disruptions caused by the COVID-19 pandemic. The target was that the impact assessment and
         strategy would be available by closing.

Outcomes. The project failed to achieve the sole outcome defined for the objective to strengthen human
resource management.

      There was no credible data on public sector agents (civil servants, contract workers, alternative civil
         service workers, and students) who were paid through the new Human Resource Management
         Information System as the Human Resource Management Information System was not implemented
         as planned. The target was to raise the percentage of public sector agents paid through the Human
         Resource Management System from 40 percent in the baseline to 85 percent by closing.

Additional Information. During ICR Review, the Bank team reported an additional result from the
implementation of this project which was not included as an output or outcome indicator in the original results
framework at project design.



                                                                                                   Page 14 of 28
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   NE-Capacity for Service Delivery (P145261)




      The biometric census of employees done under the project in 2019 improved payrolls audits,
       according to the Bank team. Niger improved its grade on payroll audits to B in 2022 from D in 2016.



Revised Rating
Negligible


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
To improve service delivery outcomes in the agriculture, education, and health sectors

Rationale
Theory of Change. Support to the Ministry of Agriculture to enhance productivity in irrigated and rainfed
areas, to the Ministry of Health to improve human resource deployment, provision of medicines, and key
medical inputs, and to the Ministry of Education to improve teacher deployment and management and
information systems would help improve service delivery outcomes in the agriculture, education, and health
sectors. The key results would consist of: in agriculture, higher crop production in irrigated areas; in health, a
higher utilization rate of curative care; and in education, a higher primary school completion rate for students,
especially for female students.

      To support to the Ministry of Agriculture, the Ministry of Health, and the Ministry of Education to
       improve service delivery outcomes, the project would finance EEPs that supported the National
       Economic and Social Development Plan: (a) EEP 6: Improve productivity and revenue generation in
       irrigated areas; (b) EEP 7: Improve productivity of rain-fed agriculture; (c) EEP 8: Improve staff
       deployment across the country; (d) EEP 9: Improve provision of medicine and key medical inputs;
       (e) EEP 10: Governance and leadership; (f) EEP 11: Improve teacher deployment and management;
       (g) EEP 12: Information systems and monitoring and evaluation.
      The associated PBCs would be: (a) the Area under small scale irrigation (DLI-ix); (b) the Proportion of
       integrated health centers with staffing levels conforming to the established norms (DLI-x); (c) the
       Frequency of stock outs based on the Reference List of the most essential medications (DLI-xi); (d)
       the Teacher/Student ratio (DLI-xii); and (e) the Proportion of qualified teachers (DLI-xiii),

Outputs. The project activities supporting the objective to improve service delivery outcomes in the
agriculture, education, and health sectors were restructured. There is no data to determine that the following
15 output targets for this objective – six PBCs and nine other intermediate results – were achieved.

of which, Performance Based Conditions:

      Agriculture – Proportion of cultivated land on which certified improved sees are used. For this PBC
       (DLI-viii), the targets were 2.48 percent in July 2015, 7.32 percent in July 2016, 10 percent in July
       2017, and 12 percent in July 2018.
      Agriculture – Area under small scale irrigation (additional hectares compared to previous year). For
       this PBC, the targets were 200 additional hectares in July 2015, 300 additional hectares in July 2016,
       400 additional hectares in July 2017, and 500 additional hectares in July 2018.



                                                                                                   Page 15 of 28
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   NE-Capacity for Service Delivery (P145261)




      Public Health – Proportion of integrated health centers with staffing levels conforming to
       the established norms. For this PBC (DLI-x), the targets were 30 percent in July 2015, 31 percent in
       July 2016, 32 percent in July 2017, and 33 percent in July 2018.
      Public Health – Frequency of stock outs based on the Reference List of the
       most essential medications (drawn by the World Health Organization and approved annually by the
       Ministry of Health) at the level of the integrated health centers. This was a disbursement-linked
       indicator (DLI-xi), the targets for which were 2.5 percent in July 2015, 2 percent in July 2016,
       1.5 percent in July 2017, and 1 percent in July 2018.
      Education – Teacher/Student ratio. For this PBC (DLI-xii), the targets were 1:38 in July 2015, 1:39 in
       July 2016, 1:40 in July 2017, and 1:41 in July 2018.
      Education – Proportion of qualified teachers. For this PBC (DLI-xiii), the targets were 40 percent in
       July 2015, 43 percent in July 2016, 45 percent in July 2017, and 50 percent in July 2018.

of which, Other Intermediate Results:

      The number of Service Delivery Indicator (SDI) results that were published in the media. The target
         was 80 by closing.
        The percentage of ministries that had established dashboards. The target was 40 percent by closing
        The number of planners, budget analysts, financial controllers, and procurement specialists
         trained. The target was 500 by closing.
        The number of high-level seminars on Change Management for Development that were
         conducted. The target was one annually (i.e., four by closing).
        The number of orders enacted as a result of the high-level seminars. The target was one annually
         (i.e., four by closing).
        The number of ministries that implemented Rapid Results Initiatives which were aligned with the
         National Economic and Social Development Plan. The target was 18 by closing.
        The average number of Rapid Results Initiatives per ministry (that implemented Rapid Results
         Initiatives which were aligned with the National Economic and Social Development Plan). The target
         was 14 by closing.
        The average rate of completion of Rapid Results Initiatives per ministry (that implemented Rapid
         Results Initiatives which were aligned with the National Economic and Social Development Plan). The
         target was 90 percent by closing.
        The number of coaches who supported the implementation of the Rapid Results Initiatives. The target
         was 18 by closing.

Outcomes. The project activities supporting the objective to improve service delivery outcomes in the
agriculture, education, and health sectors were restructured. There is no data to determine the degree to
which four of the six outcome targets defined for this objective were achieved during the time when this
original objective still applied. The planned outcomes included:

      Agriculture – Irrigated cereal crop production at closing. The target was to raise annual irrigated
         cereal crop production from 70,383 tons in the baseline to 81,883 tons by closing.
      Health – Utilization rate of curative care at closing. The target was to raise the utilization rate from
         57.05 percent in the baseline to 63.05 percent by closing.
      The number of direct project beneficiaries. The target was 1,150 by closing.


                                                                                                     Page 16 of 28
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   NE-Capacity for Service Delivery (P145261)




      The number of female direct project beneficiaries. The target was 350 by closing.

For the two outcome targets for which data is available, the results cannot be attributed to the original project
activities.

      Education – The primary school completion rate declined from 54.6 percent in the baseline to 51
       percent at closing, failing to achieve the target increase to 57.6 percent.
      Education – The primary school completion rate for girls declined from 49.1 percent in the baseline to
       49 percent at closing, failing to achieve the target increase to 50.3 percent.



Rating
Negligible


OBJECTIVE 3 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
To improve service delivery capacity in the education and health sectors

Revised Rationale
Theory of Change. The adoption of a master plan and governance framework for the state intranet, the
upgrade of data and network operations centers, particularly those related to public finance management and
human resource management, and the operationalization of shared service infrastructure would help improve
public service delivery, and hence budget outturns, beginning in the education and health sectors, where
these interventions would be initiated. More generally, these ICT interventions would help with the
digitalization of government services during the COVID-19 crisis.

Outputs. The project achieved the sole output defined for the objective to improve selected service capacity
in the education and health sectors, but there are problems with the output indicator.

of which, Performance Based Conditions: (There were no PBCs for this revised objective).

of which, Other Intermediate Results:

      Video conference and networking equipment were acquired and deployed for the Ministry of Finance,
       the Ministry of Primary Education, the Ministry of Secondary Education, the Ministry of Planning, and
       the National Agency for the Information Society. In the baseline, there were low inter-connection
       capabilities across the agencies and the framework for information system management was
       "obsolete." The target was to acquire and deploy the video conference and networking equipment to
       enable the implementation of information and communication technology (ICT) solutions for
       government continuity and e-governance during the COVID-19 crisis. Earlier, the Government: (a)
       adopted the national interconnection strategy and the master plan for the state intranet; (b) adopted
       the regulatory framework for the governance of information systems and cybersecurity; (c)
       upgraded the data centers to make them accessible 24 hours a day; and (d) made operational the
       infrastructure for shared services (email, intranet, extranet, and cloud). Although it was achieved, this
       output - video conference and networking equipment acquired and deployed in the identified agencies


                                                                                                   Page 17 of 28
                                 Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                 NE-Capacity for Service Delivery (P145261)



                                     - was weak and appeared to be more an input rather than output. A more relevant output indicator
                                     would have measured the degree to which the video conference and networking equipment would
                                     have improved the performance of the data centers and shared services that were earlier
                                     operationalized by the Government.

                              Outcomes. The project achieved the sole outcome defined for the objective to improve service delivery
                              capacity in the education and health sectors, but there are problems with the outcome indicator.

                              The expenditure outturn in the health and education sectors (measured as the difference of the actual
                              expenditure from the approved budget) was reduced from 45 percent in the baseline to 10 percent by closing,
                              exceeding the target reduction to 30 percent (the objective was to reduce the difference of the actual
                              expenditure from the approved budget). However, while the target result was achieved in 2021, the data for
                              2019 and 2020 raises fundamental questions about whether the expenditure outturns and, hence, the service
                              delivery capacities in health and education have materially improved. The data point to a lack of consistency
                              – the budget execution rate in health was 33 percent in 2019 and 29 percent in 2020, while that in education
                              was 49 percent in 2019 and 47 percent in 2020. The ICR raises doubts about this performance.



                              Revised Rating
                              Negligible


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The degree of achievement of the original project objectives to strengthen public investment management
                            capacity in targeted ministries, to strengthen civil servant performance evaluation processes in targeted
                            ministries, and to improve service delivery outcomes in the agriculture, education, and health sectors are all
                            rated negligible. None of the 13 original PBCs were achieved.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating                                   Primary Reason
                            Negligible                                                Low achievement
                  OBJR1_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
                            The degree of achievement of the revised project objective to strengthen public finance management is rated
                            substantial, the objective to strengthen human resource management, negligible, and the objective to improve
                            service delivery capacity in the education and health sectors, negligible. Two of the four revised PBCs were
                            achieved, all under the first objective to strengthen public finance management.



                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating                        Primary Reason

                                                                                                                              Page 18 of 28
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      NE-Capacity for Service Delivery (P145261)



  Modest                                                    Low achievement


5. Efficiency
Original Project Objective

Economic Efficiency. The Project Appraisal Document did not calculate the original project's economic rate of
return (ERR) or financial rate of return (FRR). The ICR did not conduct an economic efficiency analysis for the
original project.

Operational Efficiency. According to the ICR, the project did not achieve meaningful results before the first
restructuring in 2016. Meanwhile, the project incurred costs of CFAF 2.3 billion during this period (September
2014 – December 2016), some 10 percent of the signed amount of CFAF 22 billion. None of the SDR 16.3
million (US$25 million equivalent) in project funds allocated for the 13 original PBCs was disbursed (0 of the 13
original PBCs were achieved) (see Section 4).

Revised Project Objective

Economic Efficiency. The Restructuring Papers did not calculate an economic rate of return (ERR) or a
financial rate of return (FRR) for the revised project. The ICR attempted FRR calculations for selected parts of
the revised project.

      VAT Reform. The net gain from VAT efficiency (the change in VAT efficiency at time t from that in the
       baseline times total private consumption at time t) totaled US$95 million from 2016 to 2021. The cost of
       the VAT reform activities, consisting primarily of technical assistance and training to improve collection
       and resource management, was US$1.85 million. The ICR, however, stops short of presenting a cost-
       benefit analysis, claiming that the gains in VAT efficiency “cannot be reasonably attributed to the
       operation since several exogenous macroeconomic factors outside the scope of the project influence
       VAT efficiency.”
      Biometric Census of Civil Servants. The payroll resources saved from cleaning up the personnel and
       payroll database were estimated at US$409.5 million for 2023-2032 (some 8,637 “ghost” employees,
       each paid an average annual salary of CFAF 200,000, resulted in annual losses to the government of
       US$34.7 million). The cost of the biometric census of civil servants was US$5.44 million. The net
       present value of this project activity was calculated at US$278.6 million, and the internal rate of return
       at 128.6 percent. The ICR takes this analysis further. If the payroll resources saved were to be “properly
       spent” by the government, then, applying fiscal multiplier methods (Nicoletta et al., 2014, A Simple
       Method to Compute Fiscal Multipliers), the additional gain to the economy would be US$353.6 million in
       net present value terms or 2.37 percent of GDP.
      Improving Service Delivery Capacity in Education. Using data envelopment analysis (a non-parametric
       method in operations research and economics for estimating production frontiers and calculating
       performance in converting inputs to outputs), the ICR concluded that there were no efficiency savings in
       the education sector in 2016-20 (this project supported raising actual education spending closer to
       budget).
      Improving Service Delivery Capacity in Health. Also, using data envelopment analysis, the ICR
       concluded that efficiency savings in the health sector amounted to 0.26 percent of GDP (this project
       supported raising actual health spending closer to budget).


                                                                                                    Page 19 of 28
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      NE-Capacity for Service Delivery (P145261)



Operational Efficiency. Almost all the project funds were disbursed by closing, except for some SDR 0.36
million. Of the SDR 1.26 million (US$1.8 million equivalent) allocated for the four revised PBCs: (a) SDR 0.54
million was disbursed for DLR 1.1 and DLR 1.2, which were achieved (see Section 4); (b) SDR 0.36 million set
for DLR 1.3, which was not achieved, was reallocated in November 2020 to cover project operating costs (an
option allowed under the Financing Agreement); while (c) SDR 0.36 for DLR 1.4 remained undisbursed at
closing. The project took three years longer to complete than originally planned.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?            Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                   0
 Appraisal                                                 0
                                                                                    Not Applicable
                                                                                   0
 ICR Estimate                                              0
                                                                                    Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome



The outcome of the project is rated as moderately unsatisfactory.

                                                               Original
                                                                                Revised Objective
                                                               Objective
Relevance of Objective                                         Substantial
Efficacy:
Original Objective 1: To strengthen public investment
management capacity in targeted ministries.
                                                             Negligible         Substantial
Revised Objective 1: To strengthen public finance
management.
Original Objective 2: To strengthen civil servant
performance evaluation processes in targeted ministries.
                                                             Negligible         Negligible
Revised Objective 2: To strengthen human resource
management.
Original Objective 3: To improve service delivery outcomes
in the agriculture, education, and health sectors.
                                                             Negligible         Negligible
Revised Objective 3: To improve service delivery capacity in
selected sectors.

                                                                                                  Page 20 of 28
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NE-Capacity for Service Delivery (P145261)



Overall Efficacy                                               Negligible         Modest
Efficiency                                                     Modest
                                                                                  Moderately
Outcome Rating                                                 Unsatisfactory
                                                                                  Unsatisfactory
Outcome Rating Value                                           2                  3
Amount Disbursed, US$ million                                  4.3                32.2
Disbursement, %                                                11.8               88.2
Weighted Value                                                 0.24               2.65
Total Value                                                    2.9
Overall Outcome Rating                                         Moderately Unsatisfactory




a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Unsatisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The project achieved few development outcomes. Of these, the operation of the Tax Reform Unit in the
Directorate of General Tax, the implementation of the Strategic Action Plan of the Directorate of General
Tax, the annual performance reporting by the Ministry of Health and the Ministry of Education, and the
annual performance audit of public procurement would be subject to institutional capacity risk.

      Institutional Capacity Risk. Institutional capacity constraints pose downside risks to sustaining the
       gains made by this project. A new Bank operation, the Public Sector Management for Resilience and
       Service Delivery Program, approved in June 2022, will help mitigate institutional capacity risks, at
       least in the health and education sectors. The development policy operation aims to strengthen
       public expenditure and human resources management to improve the availability of textbooks and
       teachers in public primary schools and essential medicines and health workers in public health
       centers in underserved areas.

In addition, the sustainability of the foregoing development outcomes would be subject to headline security,
political, and macroeconomic risks.

      Security Risk. Niger has been on the Bank’s list of countries in fragility and conflict-affected
       situations (FCS) since FY2020, with insecurity heightened by tensions over mineral resources and
       the activities of militant groups and terrorist and criminal gangs, especially in vulnerable border
       regions. Insecurity poses a downside risk to sustaining the few outcomes of this operation. To
       mitigate this risk, the Government has entered into security cooperation agreements with regional and
       international partners, increased spending on security, and is implementing a security plan for the
       Sahelian-Saharan zone.
      Political Risk. Political stability is at risk in Niger following the attempted coup in March 2021. Apart
       from insecurity, which feeds into political turmoil, the triggers could include electoral tensions (ahead
       of the next national election in 2024), severe environmental problems disrupting agricultural activity,

                                                                                                    Page 21 of 28
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NE-Capacity for Service Delivery (P145261)



      and the surge in commodity prices hurting livelihoods. Like insecurity, political instability poses a
      downside risk to sustaining the outcomes of this operation.

     Macroeconomic Risk. Reforms in public financial management are particularly at risk
      to macroeconomic shocks (forecasts of GDP growth of 10.1 percent for 2023 face considerable
      downsides). An ongoing three-year arrangement under the Extended Credit Facility of the
      International Monetary Fund (approved for SDR 197.4 million in December 2021) would help mitigate
      the macroeconomic risk.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  Project Design. The original project design was overly ambitious and was excessively complicated.

        The project covered five sectors – public finance, civil service, agriculture, health, and education –
         and involved six ministries plus the High Commission for State Modernization.
        The first component of the project would support the implementation of the capacity-building
         aspects of five sector programs that were part of the National Economic and Social Development
         Plan – the Third Public Finance Management Reform Program (Programme des Reformes en
         matière de Gestion des Finances Publiques) covering public financial management and public
         investment management, the State Modernization Program (Politique Nationale de Modernisation
         de l’Etat) covering human resource management, the Nigeriens Nourish Nigeriens Program (Les
         Nigériens Nourrissent les Nigériens) covering agriculture and food security, the Education Sector
         Plan (Programme Sectoriel de l’Education et de la Formation), and the Heath Sector
         Development Plan (Plan de Développement Sanitaire).
        To accomplish this, 62.5 percent of the project funds would be allocated to 12 EEPs –
         expenditures for goods, consultant services, non-consultant services, operating costs, and
         training incurred by the Government for the implementation of the project and financed through
         relevant budget lines – in these five sector programs. The financing disbursement would depend
         on the achievement of 13 PBCs, the targets of which were set annually over a four-year project
         implementation period.
        The PBC targets were set as disbursement rates for the associated EEPs, reducing the objective
         "to strengthen public investment management capacity in targeted ministries" to a mandate to
         simply "spend faster." There were no considerations for the quality of the public investment
         spending.
        The project was overly ambitious and not pitched to the implementation capacity of Niger: (a)
         there were capacity deficits at all levels of public administration to effectively carry out the
         activities in the five government programs; (b) the country had an unreliable record of budget
         execution – linking the disbursement of 62.5 percent of the project funds to 12 EEPs in the five
         government programs rendered this project highly dependent on the pace of government budget
         execution; (c) the project aimed to “strengthen civil servant performance evaluation processes,”
         however, an accurate database of civil servants was not even available; (d) the project aimed to
         “improve service delivery outcomes,” but the basic systems to implement programs were not in
         place; (e) the project would implement multiple ICT solutions for public investment management

                                                                                                    Page 22 of 28
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NE-Capacity for Service Delivery (P145261)



         and human resource management, but the Government lacked the capacity to manage complex
         technical projects and carry out the associated procurement processes; (e) project ownership was
         weak among the implementing agencies; and (f) M&E systems were practically non-existent.
        The Program Document and the Restructuring Papers made little effort to explain the links
         between the fiscal and public finance management measures supported by this project and the
         larger set of fiscal policy and public finance management structural reforms eventually adopted by
         Niger under the Extended Credit Facility arrangement with the IMF in 2017. The context would
         have provided a better understanding of the project activities and results targets for the objective
         to strengthen public finance management (see Section 4 - Objective 1, Revision 1).

  Project Organizational Structure. The project organizational structure, involving six targeted ministries
  and their associated agencies, assumed levels of administrative capacity and technical preparedness
  that were lacking in many of these government bodies. A Steering Committee would assume overall
  leadership of the project while a Project Coordination Unit would support the targeted ministries on
  financial management, disbursement, accounting, reporting, procurement, and monitoring and evaluation.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Adaptation and Restructuring. The Bank restructured the project twice. With little activity in key project
 components and with about 10 percent of the project funds spent during the first two years of project
 implementation, the Bank acted proactively to restructure the project, initiating the dialogue with the
 Government in September 2015, less than a year after project effectiveness, and receiving the official
 request for restructuring six months later in March 2016. At restructuring, the Bank: (a) amended the
 project objectives (see Section 2.A); (b) dropped the two original project components and introduced three
 revised project components (see Section 2.D); (c) reduced the project funds allocated to PBCs from 62.5 to
 4.8 percent of total financing (see Section 2.E) – reducing the 12 EEPs (EEP 1 – EEP 12) to 1 EEP and the
 13 PBCs (DLI-i – DLI-xiii) to 4 PBCs (DLR 1.1 – DLI 1.4) (see Section 4). The Bank also attempted to be
 responsive to the changed priorities of the Government following the outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic
 in March 2020 and restructured the project a second time in July 2020 to, among others, support digital
 solutions to continue vital government services during the health and economic crisis (the COVID-19
 pandemic would not be relevant to other project components).

 Nonetheless, according to the ICR, the Bank adaptation and restructuring effort was inadequate because:
 (a) the restructured project design remained complex relative to the institutional capacity of the
 Government and the target results were overly ambitious, as reflected in the poor ratings on overall
 implementation progress (IP) documented in the ISRs and in the weak assessment for efficacy cited in this
 ICR; (b) studies conducted before the restructuring were inadequate to fully inform the design of reforms to
 improve VAT collection; and (c) the Restructuring Papers did not clearly define the project activities needed
 to improve domestic resource mobilization.

 Supervision and Implementation Support. The Bank supervised the project regularly, fielding 13
 implementation support missions and preparing 13 ISRs over the seven-year life of the project (or twice a
 year, the average for investment project financing operations). The project had four task team leaders over

                                                                                                  Page 23 of 28
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NE-Capacity for Service Delivery (P145261)



 the period, although the changes did not create any leadership void, according to the ICR. The
 implementation support missions included qualified technical and fiduciary staff. At implementation, the
 Bank had to contend with abrupt changes in Niger’s bureaucracy and with weaknesses in the project
 organization. The Ministry of Planning and the Ministry of Finance were merged to become the Ministry of
 Economy and Finance in August 2015, a year after project effectiveness. The new Ministry of Economy
 and Finance would eventually be split into the Ministry of Planning and the Ministry of Finance in March
 2016, half a year before the first restructuring in October 2016. The Steering Committee, tasked to provide
 leadership and oversight of the project and consisting of representatives of the President’s Office, the
 Prime Minister’s Office, and the target ministries, would not be set up until March 2016 and would only
 meet once before the first restructuring in October 2016.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Unsatisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Unsatisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The Project Appraisal Document defined 26 output (intermediate results) indicators, including 13
 disbursement-linked indicators and eight outcome (project development objective-level) indicators to
 measure the achievement of the project objectives. The ability of the results indicators to measure the
 impact of the project activities was not often clear and credible. For example, the project activities to
 improve service delivery capacity in agriculture consisted of technical assistance to producers to improve
 productivity in irrigated and rainfed areas. The associated output targets – an increase in the proportion of
 cultivated land in which certified improved seeds were used and an increase in the area using small-scale
 irrigation – far exceeded what the project technical assistance activities alone could deliver. For the 13
 original PBCs, the targets were set in terms of the disbursement rates of the associated EEPs, absent any
 reference to the quality of the spending.

 After the restructuring, all 26 original output indicators, including the 13 original PBCs, would be replaced
 by a new set of 13 revised output indicators, including 4 revised PBCs. Similarly, all eight original outcome
 indicators would be replaced by a new set of 5 revised outcome indicators. In general, the revised results
 indicators were better linked to the project activities and were sufficient to measure the achievement of the
 project objectives. Yet some exceptions remained. The project supported measures to improve tax
 administration and to develop a VAT reimbursement system. The associated outcome target – an increase
 in VAT efficiency – could not be entirely attributed to the project and would result from various exogenous
 macroeconomic factors. Moreover, the project documents did not define the project activities that would
 improve VAT collection, ex-ante, and the actual project activities, ex-post, were marginal to affect VAT
 collection, according to the ICR. The number of public sector agents trained and the number of women
 public sector agents were more input, rather than output, indicators for the objective to strengthen human
 resource management in the civil services.


                                                                                                   Page 24 of 28
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NE-Capacity for Service Delivery (P145261)




b. M&E Implementation
  The original M&E plan was not implemented. The results indicators were not reported either by the
  Government or the Bank (in its ISRs) during the first two years of project implementation. According to
  the Bank ISR of January 2016: (a) the Government found it difficult to track the large number of indicators
  – only 15 percent of the disbursement-linked indicators could be measured using current information
  systems; and (b) although a couple studies and procurement activities were initiated, there was little
  progress made to achieve the project development objectives.

  The revised M&E plan was implemented. The results indicators were measured regularly, reported in the
  ISRs, and analyzed methodically, according to the ICR. However, the Government (the Project
  Coordination Unit) and the Bank (ICR team) differed on the data for two outcome indicators.

        The Government reported that VAT efficiency rose from 30 percent in the baseline to 42 percent
           by closing, achieving the target of more-than-34 percent. However, the Bank states that: (a) the
           baseline value was overstated and was more likely 26 percent, when Final Consumption
           Expenditure was used in the calculation, and 22 percent, when GDP was used; (b) the
           Government’s Final Consumption Expenditure and GDP data were also not reliable; and (c) a
           recalculation indicates that VAT efficiency declined from 26 percent in the baseline to 19 percent
           by closing (see Section IV, Objective 1 Revision 1).

        The Government reported that the proportion of public sector agents that were paid through the
           new Human Resource Management Information System rose from 40 percent in the baseline to
           99 percent by closing, achieving the target of 85 percent. According to the Government, 85,257
           of 86,033 civil servants and 622 of 650 contract workers who were registered in the Ministry of
           Finance database were paid by bank transfers. The Bank, however, contests these numbers: (a)
           the intent was to consolidate the databases of the target ministries into a single database and not
           simply to use the Ministry of Finance database; (b) the consolidated payroll database would have
           to be cleaned up, but this process was still ongoing by closing; (c) in short, the new Human
           Resource Management Information System was not yet operational, and hence the outcome was
           not achieved (see Section IV, Objective 2 Revision 1).



c. M&E Utilization
  A reconciliation by the Government and the Bank of their data on VAT efficiency and the payroll
  database early during project implementation would have served the M&E function better.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues


                                                                                                    Page 25 of 28
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NE-Capacity for Service Delivery (P145261)



a. Safeguards
   Environmental Safeguards. The project was classified as an environmental assessment category “C” (no
   environmental review required) at appraisal and restructuring. No environmental safeguards policies were
   triggered.

   Social Safeguards. No social safeguards policies were triggered at appraisal or restructuring.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Procurement. The proper and consistent use of the Bank’s Systematic Tracking of Exchanges in
   Procurement (STEP) during project implementation could have improved procurement performance,
   including the monitoring of procurement activities. At the end of December 2021, the database showed
   that were 92 activities, including 57 that were cleared, 26 canceled, and 9 awaiting review. Among the 57
   activities that were cleared, 31 were completed, contracts for 11 were signed, 3 procurement processes
   were still ongoing, and 12 had not yet been launched. However, according to the ICR, this information was
   not consistent with the real procurement situation at the time of project closing, when all contracts should
   have been either fully implemented or cancelled. Procurement was rated moderately satisfactory at
   closing (ISR of December 2021).

   Financial Management. The project complied with all financial management requirements. Interim
   financial reports were submitted on time. Annual audited financial statements were also submitted on time
   and were of acceptable quality. Financial management was rated satisfactory at closing (ISR of December
   2021).




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                   IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
                                Moderately           Moderately
Outcome
                                Unsatisfactory       Unsatisfactory
                                                                                 The project design was overly
                                                                                 ambitious, excessively
                                Moderately
Bank Performance                                     Unsatisfactory              complicated, and not pitched to
                                Unsatisfactory
                                                                                 the implementation capacity of
                                                                                 the government agencies.
Quality of M&E                  Modest               Modest

                                                                                                   Page 26 of 28
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       NE-Capacity for Service Delivery (P145261)



Quality of ICR                    ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

Two lessons are drawn from the ICR, with some adaptation.

Weak institutional capacity undermines the impact of investment project financing
operations with performance-based conditions. In this project, the Government was unable to
meet the 13 original performance-based conditions that would have advanced the implementation of
12 eligible expenditure programs under the National Economic and Social Development Plan. The
original project suffered from a mismatch of scope and capacity: (a) the project development
objectives and project activities were overly ambitious; (b) the performance-based conditions were
too numerous; (c) project implementation required considerable central coordination; (d) the
implementing agencies did not completely understand the project, and (e) the information system
was ill-equipped to measure performance against plans. A restructuring of the project, with the
project development objectives and activities revised and the original 13 performance-based
conditions scaled down to four, did not materially improve the results with the Government delivering
on only two of the performance-based conditions.

Where technical skills are lacking to implement information and communication technology
projects, considerable preparatory work and direct implementation support are needed. The
restructuring of this project recast the original ICT project activities (ICT solutions for customs, public
investment management, human resource management, statistics, and monitoring and evaluation)
into a revised set of ICT project activities (public investment management, procurement
management information system, human resource management information system, and monitoring
and evaluation). However, even the revised ICT sub-projects were not operational at project closing
(after seven years of project implementation). According to the ICR, the hurdles included: (a) the
lack of technical skills in the country; (b) the ill preparedness of the government agencies to plan and
implement major ICT programs; and (c) political resistance to transparency and accountability
objectives that are embedded in ICT programs. Preparatory capacity-building initiatives would have
helped, including project preparation advances and non-lending technical assistance. Moreover,
extensive implementation assistance would have been beneficial, including direct implementation
support to facilitate the procurement process and ensure adequate contract management.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

Consistency with Guidelines.  The ICR is consistent with OPCS guidelines on ICRs for investment project
financing operations. With the project objectives revised, the ICR uses a split rating to assess the project's
overall outcome.


                                                                                                       Page 27 of 28
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      NE-Capacity for Service Delivery (P145261)



Conciseness.  The numerous changes to the project activities and results indicators and targets are thoroughly
documented. Annex 8 (Summary Changes from Phase I to Phase II), Table 1 (PDO Outcomes and Indicators),
Table 3 (Changes to the PDO Indicators During the July 2020 Restructuring), Annex 6 (Detailed Intermediate
Results Indicators – Phase I), and Annex 7 (Detailed Intermediate Results Indicators – Phase II) summarize the
revisions.

Results Orientation. The efficacy assessment is outcome-oriented and based on the degree of achievement of
the results targets. The ICR presents FRR analyses of selected parts of the project. Annex 4 (Financial and
Economic Analysis) is detailed regarding methodology, data, assumptions, calculations, and conclusions.

Quality of Evidence. The ICR presents ample evidence to support its assessment of the Bank’s performance at
design and implementation and M&E design and implementation.

Quality of Analysis. The assessment of the efficacy of the program is candid. The scope of the project and the
results targets remained overly ambitious even after restructuring. However, like the Program Document and
the Restructuring Papers, the ICR made little effort to explain the links between the fiscal and public finance
management measures supported by this project and the larger set of fiscal policy and public finance
management structural reforms eventually adopted by Niger under the Extended Credit Facility arrangement
with the IMF in 2017. The context would have provided a better understanding of the project activities and
results targets for the objective to strengthen public finance management (see Section 4 - Objective 1, Revision
1).

Lessons. The ICR draws lessons about reform programs that are difficult to implement with the limited
institutional capacity of the government.

Shortcoming. The ICR team failed to include evidence that was relevant to assessing the efficacy of the project
beyond the original set of performance-based, intermediate results, and outcome indicators that were defined at
appraisal and restructuring. The additional information (see Section 4 – Objective 1 Revision 1 and Objective 2
Revision 1) would turn out to be material in rating the efficacy of the project to achieve the project development
objectives.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                    Page 28 of 28
