     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Togo COVID-19 Education Response (GPE) (P174166)



                                                                                Report Number: ICRR0023367

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P174166                                   Togo COVID-19 Education Response (GPE)

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Togo                                      Education


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-B3360                                  31-Dec-2021                                           6,839,172.46

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 18-Aug-2020                               30-Jun-2022

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            6,850,000.00                                    6,850,000.00

 Revised Commitment                             6,850,000.00                                    6,839,172.46

 Actual                                         6,839,172.46                                    6,839,172.46




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Rosen Asenov               Eduardo Fernandez            Eduardo Fernandez              IEGHC (Unit 2)
                            Maldonado                    Maldonado




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   As stated in the Grant Agreement (GPE Grant Number TF0B3360, dated September 04, 2020, between the
   Republic of Togo (“Recipient”) and the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (“Bank”),
   acting as Grant Agent of the Global Partnership for Education Fund (“GPE”), p. 5), the Project Development
   Objective was “…to increase access to distance learning in grades 1-9 and support the safe and effective re-
   opening of schools.” The Project Appraisal Document (PAD, p. 11) and the Project Restructuring Paper (p. 1)
   articulated the same objective. The PDO remained unchanged throughout the life of the project.


                                                                                                 Page 1 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Togo COVID-19 Education Response (GPE) (P174166)




b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Component 1: Ensuring Education continuity (Original allocation: $1.13 million; Actual expenditure:
   $0.59 million). Component 1 aimed to ensure education continuity in order to prevent learning losses
   during school closures by: (i) supporting multimodal distance learning for grades 1 to 9 students; and (ii)
   providing support to teachers, parents and caregivers for effective distance and home-based schooling.

   Component 2: Supporting safe schools re-opening and student re-entry (Original allocation: $4.90
   million; Actual expenditure: $5.22 million). Component 2 aimed to support the safe re-opening of
   schools, as well as learning assessment and recovery plans by providing safe and healthy learning
   environments for students, teachers, and school staff; providing targeted school grants to support readiness
   and functioning of School Management Committees (SMC) while awaiting the transfer of Government-
   allocated school grants; and carrying out back-to-school media campaigns and remedial programs for at-
   risk students.

   Component 3: Project Management, Capacity building and Monitoring and Evaluation (Original
   allocation: $ 0.82 million; Actual expenditure: $1.03 million). Next to Project management and M&E,
   Component 3 - based on consolidated and build upon lessons from the Covid-19 crisis - provided (i)
   technical assistance to The Ministry of Primary, Secondary, and Technical Education and Crafts / Ministère
   des Enseignements Primaire, Secondaire, Technique et de l’Artisanat (MEPSTA) for developing a
   multimodal distance learning approach that takes into account the Togolese context and the education
   sector’s needs; and (ii) the equipment of a remote working platform, including a video conference system, to
   support the MEPSTA’s capacity to work remotely.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Cost. The total actual cost of the project was $6.84 million, or over 99 percent of the original estimate of
   $6.85 million. The actual cost of Component 1 was around half of its original allocation due to unutilized
   amounts for purchasing software for the remote learning platform, and the lower actual amount spent on
   supporting teachers, parents, and caregivers for effective distance/home-based schooling. The unutilized
   amounts under Component 1 (around $0.5 million) were used under Components 2 and 3, which enabled
   the full utilization of the Project grant and contributed to achieving or surpassing envisaged project outputs
   and outcomes. The actual cost of Component 2 was around 7 percent higher (or $320,000 more) than the
   original allocation due to: (1) almost a third higher than expected cost of purchasing handwashing stations,
   as due to local capacity constraints suitable materials for some of the handwashing stations came at a
   higher cost as they had to be imported; and (2) higher than planned cost of school grants as by the time the
   project became effective the number of basic education schools in Togo had grown from 10,521 to 10,613.



                                                                                                    Page 2 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Togo COVID-19 Education Response (GPE) (P174166)



   Component 3’s actual cost was 22 percent higher (or $200,000 more) than the original estimate due to the
   higher actual cost of project management activities (sub-component 3.1).

   Financing and Borrower Contribution: The project was financed by a Global Partnership for Education
   (GPE) grant. Of the original grant in the amount of $6,850,000, $6,839,172 (99.8 percent) were disbursed.
   No contribution from the Borrower was planned or delivered.

   Dates: The Project became effective on October 9, 2020, less than two months after its approval on August
   18, 2020. The mid-term review took place on May 17, 2021. The project was restructured on December 22,
   2021 a few days before the original closing date of December 31, 2021, at which time an amount of $6.01
   million had been disbursed, or 88 percent of the total actual disbursements ($6.84 million). The
   Restructuring involved a six-month extension of the closing date (from December 31, 2021 to June 30,
   2022) to allow completing pending activities so to ensure the achievement of all envisaged outputs and
   outcomes of the operation, as well as the full disbursement of the Project’s outstanding balance of
   $840,000. This change was reflected in the Project’s results framework, loan closing date, disbursement
   estimates and implementation schedule.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The PDO is relevant to current country conditions. In March, 2020, the government of Togo (GoT) in its
efforts to reduce the spread of the coronavirus closed all preschools, primary and secondary schools,
vocational training centers and universities, leaving over 2.6 million children out of school and 75,413
teachers unable to teach. This could negatively affect the country’s education system and human capital
formation in many ways, among which: increasing learning inequalities, deterioration of children’s nutritional
and health status, higher dropouts, especially among girls and disadvantaged children, increased school
repetition, decrease in parental and government spending on education, poorer quality of teaching and a
decline in the overall quality of education. To reduce the negative impacts of the Covid-19 pandemic on
Togo’s education system and human capital, the GoT adopted a sector national preparedness and
response plan with three objectives: (i) ensure continuity of learning; (ii) prepare for school re-opening and
support safe practices in schools; and (iii) reinforce system resilience (PAD, p. 9). This GPE-funded Project
is in line with Togo’s national preparedness and response plan, as it aims to support continued learning
during the Covid-19 pandemic, support safe and effective re-opening of schools, contribute to learning
recovery, and contribute to strengthening the resilience of Togo’s education system to the ongoing Covid-
19 crisis and future crises.

The PDO is relevant to Togo’s current development priorities. The Project objectives are in line with the
objectives set out in Togo’s National Development Plan (NDP) for 2018-2022 - which provides a framework
for integrating and implementing the Sustainable Development Goals – namely, increasing access to and
quality of education; addressing social exclusion; increasing access to drinking water and sanitation
services; and strengthening the performance of the public administration.

Moreover, the PDO is relevant to the Bank’s Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for FY 17-20
(extended to FY22) in place during the Project’s (extended) life. The Bank’s CPF identifies weak
governance, poor human development and inequality as key constraints to reducing poverty and helping

                                                                                                    Page 3 of 21
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Togo COVID-19 Education Response (GPE) (P174166)



               the country shift from a low-income fragile state to an emerging economy with a robust, inclusive and
               sustainable growth. The Project attempts to address these constraints by addressing emergency needs for
               equitable learning continuity and recovery, and disease prevention, as well as strengthening institutional
               capacities in the education sector. Specifically, the Project objectives are aligned with CPF’s: (i) Second
               Focus Area: Inclusive Public Service Delivery, which aims to address the weak quality of education services
               and the skills mismatch, with special attention to gender, particularly in secondary and higher education,
               and (ii) the cross-cutting theme of governance and institutions (i.e. the CPF supports the strengthening of
               key government institutions involved in delivering results under each Focus Area). Additionally, the Project
               is well aligned with the Bank’s commitment to support countries in managing the impact of the Covid-19
               crisis on the education sector, and GPE’s goals of: (a) ensuring that all children master basic literacy and
               numeracy in early grades; (b) building national systems that have capacity and integrity to deliver, support
               and assess education quality; and (c) targeting the most marginalized groups, including schools in rural and
               remote communities.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To increase access to distance learning for grades 1-9.

                             Rationale
                             The theory of change (results chain) was built on the premise that increasing the access to distance/home-
                             based schooling for grades 1-9 students can enable these students to continue learning during the school
                             closures caused by the Covid-19 pandemic (ICR, p. 7, and Figure 1, p. 8; and PAD, p. 12, and Figure D, p.
                             18).

                             To this end, the theory of change (results chain), as stated in the ICR (pp. 7-10), consisted of the following:

                                        Supporting multimodal remote learning for grades 1-9 to reach most learners in Togo - given the
                                         context of inequitable access to connectivity and basic technologies - considering equity factors, such
                                         as age group, education levels, geographical location, place of residency, socioeconomic status,
                                         gender, learner with disabilities (PAD, p. 12) through: (i) delivery of remote learning lessons via local
                                         radios and national televisions; (ii) provision of printed materials, including braille materials developed
                                         for visually impaired students; and (iii) acquisition of the necessary software for establishing
                                         MEPSTA’s distance learning platform.
                                        Training primary and secondary teachers and school inspectors in distance learning content
                                         development and/or teaching methods.



                                                                                                                                       Page 4 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Togo COVID-19 Education Response (GPE) (P174166)




      Supporting parents and caregivers to be involved in home-based schooling and able to monitor
         children at home so to ensure effective distance/home-based schooling and relay gender-based
         messages through sensitization campaigns aimed to increase awareness on the importance of girls’
         education and spread gender-based messages aimed to reduce the negative impacts of school
         closures. These messages targeted all community members, with a focus on girls.

Outputs and intermediate results

      A total of 1,298,581 children received learning kits, stationary packages and printed materials,
         surpassing the target of 982,507. Printed learning materials were distributed to all targeted students,
         except for grades 6 and 9 students, who during the schools’ partial re-opening in June, 2020 received
         in person support for the preparation of end-of-cycle exams. Distribution of printed materials was the
         most effective remote learning modality, reaching over 59 percent of the targeted students. However,
         the insufficient budget, the project envisaged printed learning materials to be distributed only once.
        Remote learning content was delivered to students (grades 1-9) via national and community
         radios and televisions (i.e., TVT and NEW WORLD TV). At the primary level (grade 1 to 5), one
         French lesson was broadcasted in national television twice a week (i.e., 10 French lessons per week);
         at the secondary level (grades 6, 7, 8, and 9), one lesson was broadcasted once a week in French,
         Mathematics, English, Physics, Chemistry and Technology. The use of radio and TV to support
         remote learning started shortly before schools’ re-opening and continued for six months from June to
         December, 2020 with the same frequency as before schools’ re-opening. A total of 368,785 of the
         targeted students (16.8 percent) were reached through radio and TV programs.
        A total of 311 teachers were trained in using distance learning methods and/or provided
         materials to support distance learning, exceeding the target of 261 teachers. The breakdown of
         the trained 311 teachers by primary and secondary education teachers was not provided in the ICR.
        While not specified as an output in the results framework, a total of 118 school inspectors were
         trained in distance learning content development and teaching methods, attaining the target.
         As noted at the interview with the Project’s Task Team Leader (TTL), dated March 7, 2023, while not
         part of the Grant Agreement, this activity was included in the PAD based on the discussions and
         agreement between the Bank and the GoT about the need for a systemic approach to distance
         education in order to ensure its effectiveness, which required in addition to training teachers, school
         inspectors to be trained in using technology for providing guidance and support to teachers in
         delivering distance learning.
        Technical assistance was provided to MoE for the expansion of distance learning across all
         education levels, taking into account equity factors and the Togolese context.
        The MEPSTA was equipped with a remote working platform, including a VC system, for virtual
         meetings and more effective remote work. A reliable internet and video conference (VC)
         connectivity, remote access and laptops for senior officials were provided.
        a Health-SABER diagnostic was carried out to help the GoT to assess the state of its school
         health and feeding policy. The findings from this diagnosis were to be leveraged under the follow-on
         project, Improving Quality and Equity of Basic Education Project - PAQEEB (P172674).

Note: The envisaged support for the establishment of the MEPSTA distance learning platform by financing
the acquisition of the necessary software was not delivered based on a mutual agreement between the GoT
and the WBG that it was over-ambitious given the insufficient Project timeframe and budget and it would be
supported under the follow-on project, PAQEEB (P172674).


                                                                                                  Page 5 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Togo COVID-19 Education Response (GPE) (P174166)



Outcomes

      Almost 75% of grades 1-9 children were supported with distance learning/home-based learning
       in 2022, far exceeding the target of 50%.
      Around 75% of female students in 1-9 grade were supported with distance/home based
       learning in 2022, significantly overachieving the target of 50%;
      The percentage of children supported with distance learning/home-based learning in the
       region of Lomé reached 69.50 in 2022, thus surpassing the target of 50 percent;

Component 1’s objective was to ensure education continuity during school closures by increasing access of
1-9 grades students to distance learning through radio, television and printed learning materials (sub-
component 1.1) and supporting teachers, parents and caregivers for effective home-based schooling (sub-
component 1.2). The targeted students, however, had limited access to the multimodal distance learning
opportunities supported by the project. Only about 17 percent of the targeted students were reached through
radio and television education programs. The distributed printed learning materials in Mathematics had a far
greater outreach (about 60 percent of the targeted students). However, due to insufficient budget, printed
materials in Mathematics were planned to be delivered only once during the life of the project, which
happened with a delay. Also, due to the need to adhere to social distancing measures, the training of 115
secondary teachers in distance learning content development and teaching methods was delayed
(Restructuring Paper, p. 5). In November, 2021, a month before the project end, about 35 percent of the
envisaged 50 percent of the students in grades 1-9 were supported with distance learning (ISR 2, p. 10, dated
12/9/2021). By the extended project end, this target was exceeded and around 75 percent of grades 1-9
students benefited from remote learning activities but the delays in the delivery of these activities resulted in
their implementation around school reopening, instead of during school closures as planned (ISR 4, p. 2,
dated 7/8/2022). Notwithstanding the challenges related to the delayed delivery of and limited access to
multimodal distance learning activities, in an interview (dated March 7, 2023), the task team noted that remote
learning activities remained relevant to the learning continuity’s PDO level objective, as they could be used to
mitigate learning losses stemming from further disruption to education caused by the Covid-19 pandemic and
they also contributed to learning recovery after schools reopened by complementing school-based learning.

While the objective of Component 1 was fully achieved given that all outcome targets were achieved or
exceeded by the (extended) end of the project, the expected under Component 1 education continuity during
school closures was not implemented in a sufficiently prompt and effective way, as indicated by
implementation delays and limited outreach of multimodal distance learning activities during school closures.
The ICR does not discuss whether and to what extent the students with access to multimodal distance
learning took advantage of it to continue learning while schools were closed. For home-based schooling to be
effective, the Project provided support to parents and caregivers to ensure their involvement in home-based
schooling and ability to monitor children at home. Specifically, this support included carrying out awareness
raising campaigns on the availability and importance of participating in distance learning, and the importance
of education continuity and girls’ education during the crisis (sub-component 1.2). While not offering a more
detailed assessment of the efficacy of the support provided to parents and caregivers for effective home-
based schooling during school closures, the ICR reports a lesson of this project that without proper support –
beyond the awareness raising campaigns implemented under sub-component 1.2 - it was hard for parents
and caregivers to engage in effective home-based schooling during school closures (ICR, p. 29). While
Objective 1 was achieved by the extended end of the project, implementation delays, limited access to and
unclear effectiveness of both the remote learning activities (sub-component 1.1) and the support provided to



                                                                                                   Page 6 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Togo COVID-19 Education Response (GPE) (P174166)



parents and caregivers (sub-component 1.2) for ensuring education continuity during school closures results
in a substantial rating.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Support the safe and effective re-opening of schools

Rationale
The project’s theory of change envisioned that re-opening of schools and keeping learners safe can be
achieved through: (a) provision of access to water, sanitation, and hygiene (WASH) services; (b) equipping
schools and staff with prevention tools and measures such as distribution of masks and disinfecting schools;
(c) the payment of three months salaries to volunteers’ teachers (EVs) to ensure the schools’ re-opening with
all teachers present in schools; (d) provision of targeted school grants to support readiness and functioning of
the school management committees (SMCs); (e) the undertaking of post-crisis student learning assessments
that inform follow-on remedial programs for at-risk students; and (f) the implementation of back-to-school
campaigns, as well as a communication campaign to raise awareness for the Covid-19 prevention (PAD, p.
13, Figure D, p. 18 and ICR, p. 7, and Figure 1, p. 8).

Outputs and intermediate results

      Ensured schools re-opening with all teachers present through payment of the salary for three
         months of 8,849 volunteer teachers not supported by the cash transfer platform put in place by
         the GoT during the COVID-19 crisis. This represented an equivalent of FCFA 422 million
         (US$767,272), around FCFA 22,000 (US$40) per teacher per month.
        School grants provided to 6,095 primary and general secondary schools for a total amount of
         USD 1.22 million exceeding the target of 5,700 schools. SMCs were trained in the management
         and use of school grants, and monitoring of school activities. They played a key role in managing and
         monitoring Project activities in beneficiary schools, including the management of school grants and
         WASH activities, and maintenance of handwashing stations. According to the Project beneficiary
         survey, 94.5% of respondents attested that school grants were efficiently managed by SMCs.
        Back-to-school media campaigns were carried out. SMCs played a key role in relaying gender-
         based messages aimed at raising awareness on the importance of girls’ education and minimizing the
         negative impacts of school closures.
        A communication campaign was implemented to raise awareness on the importance of girls’
         education and Covid-19 prevention targeting parents, teachers, students, school staff and the
         community (distributed 598,230 posters and flyers to relay important messages on disease
         prevention, audio spots were produced in French and 18 national languages and broadcasted on 36
         community radio stations, along with interactive programs hosted in radio stations across the country).
        A total of 2,195,149 children accessed the sensitization campaigns aimed at minimizing the
         negative impacts of school closures such as gender-based violence and issues related to
         unequal social norms, exceeding the target of 1,965,014. The project experienced delays in the

                                                                                                  Page 7 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Togo COVID-19 Education Response (GPE) (P174166)



         implementation of sensitization campaigns due to Covid-19-related restrictions and the need to adhere
         to social distancing protocols.
        The share of schools that re-opened was 98.9 percent, exceeding the target of 90 percent.
        Simple school-based learning assessments were conducted for grades 1-9 students at
         schools’ re-opening to identify at-risk students. Of the targeted schools, 98.2 percent took part in the
         assessment, 80.7 percent of students from grades 1-7 were assessed, 55 percent of students were
         found to be “at risk” students (55.1 percent boys and 54.8 percent girls).
        The share of schools that offered remedial programs once the school system was re-opened
         reached 87.6 percent, surpassing the target of 70 percent. The remedial programs focused on
         foundational competencies (reading and numeracy) at the lower primary level (grades 1-3), Math and
         Language at the upper primary level (grades 4, 5), and Math, French, English, and Physics,
         Chemistry, Technology at the junior secondary level (grades 6-9).
        In 2021, a total of 2,195,149 students benefited from direct interventions to enhance learning,
         attaining the target. All students enrolled in grant-supported schools (i.e., schools that received
         school grants) under the Project benefited from direct interventions to enhance learning.
        A total 1,059,600 female students benefited from direct interventions to enhance learning,
         attaining the target.

Outcomes

      A total of 10,613 grants-supported schools were equipped with minimum hygiene standards for
         prevention of Covid-19, exceeding the target of 10,528. The Project supported the provision of
         sanitary protocols, masks, hand soap and sanitizers in all targeted schools. This included the
         installation of 10,118 handwashing stations in beneficiary schools (all targeted schools used the
         school grants to acquire artisan-made handwashing stations); distribution of 2,000,000 sanitary
         protocols; provision of 120,000 liters of soap and hand-washing kits, as well as 1,200,000 face
         coverings for students, teachers, and school staff).
        Almost 98 percent of the targeted children (2,195,149) returned to school once the school
         system was reopened, exceeding the target of 80 percent.
        Around 98 percent of the targeted girls returned to school once the school system was
         reopened, exceeding the target of 80 percent.
        Of the targeted students with disability, 99,3 percent returned to school once the school
         system was reopened, exceeding the target of 80 percent.
        Teachers and school heads reported a positive impact from administering learning
         assessments followed by a remedial program. According to the ICR (p. 37), although learning
         assessments and remedial programs were implemented with some delays, “at risk students” that
         participated in the remedial programs were performing above expectations in upper grades, and the
         Ministry intends to adopt the administering of regular simple school-based learning assessments
         followed by remedial programs throughout the school-year.

The objective is assessed as fully achieved since all of the envisaged outcomes were either achieved or
exceeded by the project end.



Rating

                                                                                                   Page 8 of 21
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Togo COVID-19 Education Response (GPE) (P174166)



                            High


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Each of the two objectives (increase access to distance learning for grades 1-9 and support the safe and
                            effective re-opening of schools) was met and all PDO targets were either achieved or exceeded by the
                            Project’s (extended) end - contributing to, among others, low dropout rates and high percentage of student re-
                            entry at school re-opening. Almost 98 percent of the targeted basic school students (2,151,246 out of
                            2,195,149) returned to school against the target of 80 percent and, as indicated by the national survey
                            conducted under the project, the dropouts were mainly due to illness, pregnancies, and/or family relocation.
                            The Project also contributed to strengthened institutional capacities and better preparedness of the education
                            sector to provide equitable access to continued education during times of crises.

                            According to the ICR (pp. 20-21), in addition to achieving the PDO, the Project contributed to institutional
                            strengthening, which increased the education system’s resilience to the ongoing pandemic and future crises.
                            This included:

                                    Increased capacity of the Ministry of Education to design equitable remote learning programs.
                                    Improved capacity of teachers and inspectors to develop remote learning resources and
                                     teaching methods.
                                    Enhanced national, regional and school-level capacities for designing and administering
                                     formative learning assessments and implementing remedial programs informed by these
                                     assessments. According to the Project’s beneficiary survey, 97 percent of respondents were
                                     satisfied with the quality of training received, although due to its short duration (i.e., one day) some
                                     teachers were still unable to effectively administer learning assessments, pointing to the need for
                                     additional support in this area. Further strengthening for all of these activities was expected under the
                                     PAQEEB (P172674), which supports strengthening of the National Learning Assessment System as
                                     well as the National Learning Assessment Unit’s capacity to measure and monitor learning outcomes.
                                    Improved ability of School-Based Management Committees to manage and use school grants,
                                     and monitor school activities. The Project’s beneficiary survey showed that school grants were
                                     efficiently managed by SMCs and they considered the respective training to be beneficial.
                                    Strengthened capacity of the Ministry of Education to work virtually and more effectively,
                                     including through its good appropriation of the Geo-enabling method for monitoring and supervision
                                     (GEMS) that enables carrying out remote real-time M&E activities. The Project supported capacity-
                                     building activities online or in-country for relevant MEPSTA and Project Coordination Unit (PCU) staff.
                                     A total of 383 MEPSTA’ officials from the regional directorates of education and school inspections,
                                     PCU staff, and Project implementation leads, received training in monitoring of activities using GEMS.

                            While Togo still needs to improve significantly on its human capital development in order to reach its full
                            economic potential, further reduce poverty and increase shared prosperity (ICR, p. 21), the Project
                            contributed to mitigating the negative effects of the Covid-19 pandemic on Togo’s human capital. And since
                            human capital development is a prerequisite for poverty reduction and economic growth, the Project’s
                            achievements if not directly contributing to these ends, helped reducing the negative impact of the Covid-19


                                                                                                                                 Page 9 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Togo COVID-19 Education Response (GPE) (P174166)



 crisis on Togo’s human capital gains achieved before the pandemic and thus contributed to Togo’s ability to
 stay on the path to growth and shared prosperity.

 Attribution

 Urgent actions under the Government’s Covid-19 Response Plan were implemented not only through this
 GPE-funded project but also with support from the Government and – to a much lesser extend – other
 international partners such as UNICEF, UNDP, Humanité & Inclusion, and Help and Action (ICR, p. 17). As
 indicated by the TTL, compared to other international partners that were engaged in Togo, the GPE-funded
 Project had the greatest outreach as it targeted all basic education schools and introduced remote learning
 across the entire country, and therefore, the bulk of the reported achievements in the education sector under
 the Government’s Covid-19 Response Plan is to be directly attributed to this Project and the Government-
 supported interventions. Furthermore, this was a forward-looking project that went above and beyond a
 typical emergency project by supporting not only the Government’s short-to-medium term emergency
 response to the crisis that affected the education sector but also contributing to increasing the education
 sector’s resilience to future shocks by strengthening the country’s capacities to deliver remote learning,
 develop and administer large-scale learning assessments and use their results to inform remedial programs
 that were introduced under the Project, which the Government intends to mainstream.

 Counterfactual

 Learning outcomes in Togo were low before the Covid-19 pandemic and even worse among students from
 poor, rural, and marginalized households. Around 2,6 million children were out of school when schools closed
 due to the Covid-19 pandemic. As reported by the TTL, due to the uncertainty and risks related to the Covid-
 19 pandemic, many parents were afraid to send their children back to school. If no actions were taken to
 ensure uninterrupted learning and safe and effective re-opening of schools, learning outcomes would have
 deteriorated and learning inequalities would have deepened because, as noted in the ICR (p. 49), only
 students from wealthier and more educated families were likely to have the support to learn at home. The TTL
 noted that the Project played an important role for mitigating the risks of learning loss, school dropout and
 repetition due to the Covid-19 crisis through the support it provided for ensuring learning continuity and
 recovery, and safe re-opening of schools which helped the parents overcame their fears, as demonstrated by
 the fact that almost 98 percent of the targeted children (2,195,149) returned to school once the school system
 was re-opened. All this suggests that the Project contributed to mitigating the negative impact that the Covid-
 19 pandemic could have had on Togo’s education system and the country’s already weak human
 development and limited inclusion. Furthermore, a learning assessment would not have been undertaken, nor
 the evidence-based remedial programs to raise the performance of students who were not performing to
 grade level, nor the capacity or path to institutionalizing this very important aspect of Togo’s education sector.



 Overall Efficacy Rating
 Substantial



5. Efficiency



                                                                                                    Page 10 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Togo COVID-19 Education Response (GPE) (P174166)



Economic efficiency. A cost-benefit analysis was conducted at the time of project appraisal. The cost of higher
repetition rates due to school closures was estimated under two scenarios: (1) the public sector would incur the
equivalent of CFA 352.6 million (about US$0.6 million) in losses and households would incur inefficiency-related
costs equivalent CFA 805.5 million (about US$1.37 million) at primary and secondary levels under the first
scenario of 0.5 percent increase in repetition rates; and (ii) under the second scenario, a 1 percent increase in
repetition rates, could cost the public sector about CFA 1,058.8 million (about US$1.80 million) at the primary
and secondary levels, and would cost households about CFA 1,610.9 million (about US$2.73 million) at the
primary and secondary levels (PAD, p. 24). As benefits of investments in education in Togo were identified
higher returns on education and better employment opportunities to individuals and households, as well as
reduced inequality in access to education and post-education labour market outcomes (PAD, p. 24). At the
national level, one additional year of schooling was found to increase income by 13 percent. The rate of return
on education ranged from 67 percent for individuals with some primary education to 217 percent for individuals
with higher education when compared to individuals with no education. Also, compared to individuals with no
education, those with some primary education and those with TVET education were respectively 62 percent and
160 percent more likely to find wage employment. (PAD, pp. 58-59).

An ex-post economic analysis was undertaken as part of ICR preparation, which measured the quantifiable
benefits of Component 1 and sub-component 2.3 through the impact of additional remote learning opportunities
and remedial program on lifetime income. The percent of targeted basic school students with access to remote
learning increased from a baseline of 0 percent to 79.7 percent (1,298,581 students) at the end of the project. A
conservative assumption was made that this had increased the targeted students’ expected years of schooling
by a year (please see the Note below). Multiplied by the returns to one additional year of primary or secondary
schooling, the project impact was estimated as increasing lifetime earnings by 13 percent for each project
beneficiary. The analysis concluded that the project’s quantifiable benefits had a positive net present value
(NPV) and an internal rate of return (IRR), thereby demonstrating the project’s efficiency and strongly supporting
the investment on the project. The present value of the overall project benefits was estimated to be US$ 971.4
million while the present value of costs was estimated to be US$ 174.2 million. The corresponding NPV of the
intervention benefits was US$ 797.2 million. The IRR associated with this NPV was 28.7 percent (ICR, pp. 52-
54). Annex 4 of the ICR provided underlying assumptions and other details.

Note: While a year of remote schooling may not be directly equivalent to a year of in-person schooling, this
remains a conservative assumption. It accounts for the increase in the quality of remote teaching and learning,
as well as bearing the fixed cost of implementing many of these new remote technologies, as this project will
likely benefit many more than the 9 cohorts studied in this analysis.

Implementation Efficiency. Due to delays associated mostly with Covid-19 restrictions, remote learning
activities were only implemented around the time of school re-opening, instead of during school closures.
Nevertheless, they remained relevant to the learning continuity’s PDO-level objective. Training in distance
learning content development and teaching methods for the 115 secondary school teachers that remained to be
trained was delayed mainly due the need to adhere to Covid-19-related social distancing measures, and, as
reported at the TTL interview, partly because this was an innovative training and there was a need for more time
to adjust to it and prepare training materials in distance learning. Due to the high expense of printed materials
for all learners (grade 1-9), which exceeded the budget, the distribution of printed learning materials was
delayed (Restructuring paper, p. 5). The implementation of simple school-based learning assessment to
students (grades 1-9) and condensed remedial programs were also delayed because it had taken longer for the
learning assessment tool to be adapted to the Togolese context. The project implementation period was
extended by six months, which enabled the implementation of pending activities: (i) the development of the
strategy for the establishment of the distance learning platform; (ii) the distribution of handwashing stations in

                                                                                                    Page 11 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Togo COVID-19 Education Response (GPE) (P174166)



the remaining 5,395 targeted primary and secondary schools; (iii) the payment of volunteer teachers’ (volunteer
teachers not covered by the NOVISSI’s platform due to lack of required identification documentation); and (iv)
the deployment of the Systems Approach for Better Education Results Assessment on school health and
feeding (Health-SABER).

Above-cited delays notwithstanding, implementation efficiency was substantial. Considering the obstacles
associated with Covid-19 restrictions, the implementation of all pending activities and achievement of all
envisaged outputs and outcomes within that six-month extension, as well as the full disbursement of the
Project’s outstanding balance of US$840,000, represents a notable achievement. GPE funds were fully utilized,
with the GPE grant of $6,85 million fully (99.8 percent) disbursed. Outcome targets were achieved or exceeded,
and positive impacts beyond the PDO were reported. For two of the three project components, actual
component costs remained close to original estimates. The exception was lower than the estimated cost of
Component 1: Ensuring Education Continuity (estimated $1,13 million versus $0,59 million approved at project
closing), which was partly due to a modification to the planned project activity under sub-component 1.1 related
to acquiring a software to support a distance learning platform. The activity was not delivered as it was
considered overambitious given the Project’s insufficient budget and timeframe. It was agreed that the project
would focus only on the development of the strategy for the establishment of the distance learning platform,
while the remote learning platform was going to be established under PAQEEB (P172674) through the
acquisition of the necessary software and hardware (ICR, p. 15).


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                    0
 Appraisal                                                 0
                                                                                     Not Applicable
                                                                                    0
 ICR Estimate                                              0
                                                                                     Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The PDO was highly relevant to the current country situation, the government’s development priorities and its
Covid-19 Response Plan, as well as the WBG’s current strategy in Togo and the Bank’s commitment to
providing a fast and flexible response to the Covid-19 pandemic. Efficacy is rated as substantial. By the
Project’s end both objectives embedded in the PDO were achieved, targets were achieved or exceeded, and
institutional strengthening impacts beyond the PDO were reported. However, there were delays with regard to
some outputs that had to be delivered within the Project's short-to-medium term response, resulting in the
targeted students’ limited access to remote learning during school closures. The project timeline had to be


                                                                                                   Page 12 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Togo COVID-19 Education Response (GPE) (P174166)



extended in order to implement pending activities. Delays in implementation notwithstanding (due largely to
Covid-19-related restrictions), the project completed all planned activities and was fully disbursed within the six-
month extension. Project efficiency was also substantial overall. The strong economic rationale for investing in
education and the robust results of the cost-benefit analysis before and after the project implementation, provide
convincing evidence that the project was economically viable and efficient. The delays in the implementation of
some activities were mainly due to Covid-19-related restrictions and country capacity constraints. These
findings are consistent with a satisfactory overall outcome rating, reflecting only minor shortcomings in the
project's preparation, implementation, and achievement.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Improved institutional capacities were sustained and extend beyond the current emergency, as they would
be useful for future crises affecting the education sector. Capacity risks identified at the project’s outset were
mitigated through (i) providing greater access to remote and hybrid education; (ii) ensuring better quality
education through the improved capacity to conduct formative learning assessments and remedial programs;
and (iii) improving MoE’s capacity to work virtually. These institutional capacities are going to be maintained
and further improved under PAQEEB (P172674), which will end in October, 2026 and aims to: (i) expand
distance learning interventions through the deployment of a multimodal distance learning platform; and (ii)
carry out remedial programs with the support of performance-based school grants. As reported at the TTL
interview (dated March 7, 2023), schools in Togo have already developed harmonized school improvement
plans which envisage administering formative learning assessments and conducting remedial programs,
expected to take place during the 2023-2024 school year. This suggests that the development outcomes
achieved under the GPE-funded Project will likely be sustained and further improved at least until 2026,
when the successor project - PAQEEB (P172674) is expected to end.

As indicated by the task team, there are two major risks to sustaining the development outcomes achieved
under this GPE-funded project: (1) the learning loss risk that stems from the ongoing Covid-19 pandemic;
and (2) the Government’s ownership of the innovations in the education sector introduced by the GPE-
funded project. The GoT’s commitment to increase access to and quality of education was reaffirmed in
GoT’s new national 2025 roadmap. Furthermore, the GoT has indicated its intention to provide performance-
linked funding for maintaining regular administration of learning assessments and hybrid learning programs,
and has already developed a clear agenda on digitalization and ICT-based distance learning. Still, it is yet to
be seen whether and how effectively these will be implemented, also given that such activities are expensive
to maintain and the public expenditure on education declined from on average 18 percent of the total
expenditure over the period 2009-2019 to below 15 percent in 2022.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry

                                                                                                      Page 13 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Togo COVID-19 Education Response (GPE) (P174166)



The Investment Project Financing funding modality of this GPE-funded project was suitable as it allowed
Togo’s education sector to implement the needed response to the Covid-19 crisis, and included technical
assistance and institutional strengthening to support the implementation of remote education and learning
recovery activities, which Togo’s education sector was insufficiently prepared to design and implement.
The Project design was based on emerging international good practices on the education sector’s
response to Covid-19 that could be applied to the Togolese context to mitigate the negative effects
stemming from the Covid-19 pandemic on the education sector. The Project’s theory of change was
sound and evidence-based, the selected activities were logically linked to the Project’s overarching
objectives, and fully aligned with the Education Sector Covid-19 Response Plan and the ESP (2020/30).
The Sector's Covid-19 Response Plan was based on the GoT’s commitment to mitigate learning losses
and reduce the risk of school dropouts and repetitions. The Project was designed with a view not only to
provide an emergency response in the education sector to the Covid-19 crisis, but also to go beyond that
by strengthening the education system’s resilience and ability to effectively respond to the ongoing and
future shocks to Togo’s education sector. The original project design was well aligned with the Bank’s
CPF (FY17- 22) and GPE’s goals on mitigating the negative impact of Covid-19 on education systems.
The design quality was enriched by consideration of WBG and GPE peer reviewers’ recommendations.
Preparation for the Project was a highly collaborative and consultative process with strong participation
by both the GoT and the Local Education Group (LEG), led by UNICEF and including education partners
and civil society within the already existing partnership framework (PAD, pp. 21-22).

The design teams identified risks and activities for their mitigation, and relevant technical expertise was
brought to the design process. The overarching risk was the Covid-19 pandemic itself, as when the
Project was prepared, the negative effects of Covid-19 were still unfolding and threatening to deepen
existing challenges faced by the education sector. The main mitigation measures included: (a) the
development and implementation of multimodal distance learning programs, taking into account children
with disabilities; (b) providing minimum sanitary and hygiene standards in schools to prevent and reduce
the spread of the Covid-19 disease; and (c) administering learning assessments followed by remedial
programs to further mitigate the learning loss. Risks associated with Project design included: (i)
MEPSTA’s limited capacity to develop necessary distance learning programs; (ii) low teachers’ capacity
to teach remotely; (iii) limited access to basic technologies; and (iv) connectivity challenges especially in
rural and disadvantaged areas. Moreover, once schools re-opened, there was a risk that students would
not return to school. Mitigation measures included, among others, ensuring strong ownership by
MEPSTA and national ad hoc committee in place, with dedicated leaders and appropriate technical staff
involved in implementation and monitoring. Implementation arrangements were adequately prepared,
including institutional arrangements, financial management, procurement and social aspects, and
grievance redress services (PAD, pp. 21-31).

A PCU in the MEPSTA had the overall responsibility for the management of the Project. An
Interdepartmental Committee for the Management of the Covid-19 Pandemic Crisis in the Education
Sector (ICMCES) was established with the responsibility to provide strategic guidance and coordination
among line ministries and donors and review the implementation progress of this project and other
interventions that were part of the country’s Covid-19 education sector response. Additionally, a Project
Steering Committee (PSC) for the GPE Covid-19 Education Response Project under the MEPS was set
up. The project’s institutional and implementation arrangements were built on the implementation of the
Education and Institutional Strengthening Project 2 (PERI-2) that closed in 2019. The project design was
informed by lessons learned from the previous GPE-funded projects (PERI-1 (2010-2014) and PERI-2
(2015-2019), P146294) and other recent education projects in Togo, particularly the AFD-funded
Education for All project and UNICEF’s education program (PAD, p. 19). Given the relevant and recent

                                                                                                   Page 14 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Togo COVID-19 Education Response (GPE) (P174166)



  experience of the PERI-2 team and the Project’s urgency and short duration, members of the PERI-2
  team were included in the Covid-19 PCU. It was also envisaged decentralized education authorities and
  communities to play a key role in the Project (PAD, pp. 20-21).




  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Key factors affecting poject implementation on the GoT’s part included the challenges associated with the
 Covid-19 pandemic, particularly the need to adhere to social distancing measures, and difficult remote
 working conditions for the implementing agencies, mainly related to internet connectivity challenges. As
 already mentioned, during implementation, the MEPSTA/PCU experienced challenges related to setting up
 a distance learning platform, which was not delivered as it was considered to be over-ambitious, and the
 acquisition and distribution of handwashing stations in schools were delayed. Additionally, the Project had
 to be restructured and extended by six months so that pending activities could be implemented and the
 unused funds fully utilized (ICR, pp. 23-24).

 In regard to factors subject to the Bank’s control, the Bank’s supervision and implementation support were
 reportedly proactive and of high quality, which allowed early identification of implementation bottlenecks
 and measures to address them. A total of five supervision missions were carried out throughout the project
 properly staffed with education specialists, fiduciary and safeguards staff, and also an EdTech specialist for
 the first three missions. In addition, the Bank’s team conducted virtual supervision missions, given the
 Covid-19 restrictions. Progress was documented in aide memoires, back-to-office reports, and ISRs. The
 Bank’s task team consistently and regularly reported on financial management, procurement, and
 safeguards progress and compliance, and worked with the PCU and other implementation agencies to
 build their capacity in these areas. The task team maintained good communication with the PCU and
 project stakeholders, and weekly meetings were held to provide additional guidance to help solve urgent
 matters and bottlenecks as they arose (ICR, p. 24). The Bank’s approval of the government’s request for
 project extension and the proactive and supportive Bank task team enabled the completion of the few
 pending activities at the project’s original end, which ensured the achievement of all envisaged project
 outputs and outcomes. For example, through holding unplanned weekly and bi-weekly supervision
 meetings, the Bank’s task team contributed to overcoming the delays in the delivery of handwashing
 stations in targeted schools by the (extended) end of the project (ICR, p. 28).




  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating

                                                                                                   Page 15 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Togo COVID-19 Education Response (GPE) (P174166)



  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The PDO was clearly stated. Indicators were measurable and with defined targets. M&E design and
 arrangements were well embedded institutionally, enabled robust and systematic tracking of project outputs
 and outcomes and included regular monitoring and reporting by the PCU. The Project’s M&E system was
 strengthened by simple school-based learning assessments; a Geo-enabling Method for Monitoring and
 Supervision; a Systems Approach for Better Education Results Assessment on school health and feeding
 (Healthy-SABER); and a beneficiary survey (ICR, p. 25).

 The project’s results framework included an indicator measuring the number of students who received
 printed learning materials but did not include other aspects such as frequency and duration of this remote
 learning modality. The TTL clarified that printed learning materials were distributed only once during the
 project’s life due to insufficient budget. The ICR’s results framework did not indicate whether and how the
 duration and frequency of remote learning broadcasted via TV and radio as part of the newly adopted
 hybrid learning changed after schools re-opened. At the TTL interview, it was clarified that remote learning
 lessons via TV and radio were delivered for six months between June and December, 2020 with the same
 frequency regardless of schools’ full re-opening in November, 2020.

 Although the ICR notes that trainings for 118 school inspectors were held and all students in grades 1-9,
 including ‘’at risk’’ students were targeted by the Project, no indicators and targets were included in the
 ICR’s results framework for: (i) the school inspectors that were trained under the Project; (ii) other ‘’at risk’’
 groups of students that accessed multimodal distance learning under Component 1, such as students with
 disability, students from rural and urban areas, or students from poor families; (iii) the share of printed and
 digital learning content broadcasted via TV and radio that was adapted to the needs of students with
 disability; and (iv) the share/number of targeted students broken down by region – although the Results
 Framework includes such indicator and related target but only for one region (i.e. the region of Lomé). At
 the TTL interview, it was confirmed that all at-risk students – including those with disability and those in
 rural and urban areas across the country - were targeted by the Project and data on the number of project
 beneficiaries disaggregated by at-risk group were collected but the GPE required only some of the at-risk
 students, namely, female students and students with disability to be included in the ICR's Results
 Framework. Also, the TTL reported that the region of Lomé was selected to be included in the Results
 Framework because it was easier to collect data for that region as compared to the other regions. The task
 team confirmed also that printed materials adapted to the needs of students with vision impairment were
 distributed but their share in the total share of distributed printed learning materials was not required to be
 included in the ICR's results framework. Additionally, the TTL noted that the GoT has a policy of inclusive
 classrooms.



b. M&E Implementation
  The project performance and outcome data were collected regularly. The results framework’s indicators
  and targets related to multimodal remote learning were not revised after schools’ reopening to reflect the
  duration and frequency of using remote learning as part of the newly adopted hybrid learning. The
  MEPSTA agencies at all levels monitored the return of students to school once schools re-opened. The

                                                                                                       Page 16 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Togo COVID-19 Education Response (GPE) (P174166)



  use of Geo-enabling method for monitoring and supervision (GEMS) enabled remote real-time M&E data-
  collection and supported the roll out of the beneficiary survey. Additionally, the Project conducted a
  Systems Approach for Better Education Results Assessment on school health and feeding (Healthy-
  SABER). Also, a school-based learning assessment was carried out to identify the number of at-risk
  students. The assessment results informed the remedial programs that followed on (ICR, p. 25).



c. M&E Utilization
  M&E findings were used for regular monitoring and progress tracking, updating the results framework,
  directing the project, and informing supervision, ISRs, including the MTR, and the ICR. The results of the
  simple school-based learning assessment were used to identify students at risk after schools re-opened,
  develop remedial programs for these students, and train teachers to help them to catch up on learning.
  Additionally, the Health-SABER diagnostic tool assessed the current state of the school health and
  feeding policy and was expected to inform government actions for improving education results. Follow-
  up on these results were to be implemented under the Improving Quality and Equity of Basic Education
  Project - PAQEEB (P172674) financed by the Bank and the GPE, which was designed to support the
  GoT in the implementation of critical policy recommendations of the Health-SABER diagnosis, in
  collaboration with the World Food Program and the Health, Nutrition, and Population Global Practice.
  (ICR, p. 25-26).



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The Project’s environmental and social risks were assessed to be Moderate at the time of appraisal. Most of
   the Project-related potential adverse environmental impacts and risks were ranked from minimal to
   negligible. The Project included mainly capacity building investments and no construction or rehabilitation
   activities. Among social risks identified at appraisal were: (i) the potential exclusion of students from the
   poorest families living in rural and remote areas from distance learning provided through TV and radio due
   to these students’ more limited access to such technology; (ii) increased violence against children observed
   during the Covid-19 pandemic, including sexual exploitation and abuse/sexual harassment and other forms
   of gender-based violence, (iii) potential mild tensions within local communities over accessing project
   resources; and (iv) a risk of project benefits such as school grants reaching ineligible and less-deserving
   locations and individuals (PAD, pp. 27-28).

   According to the ICR (p. 26), an Environmental and Social Review Summary (ESRS), an Environmental and
   Social Commitment Plan (ESCP), a Labor Management Plan (LMP), an Environmental and Social
   Management Plan (ESMP), and a Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) were prepared and disclosed. The
   Project was prepared under condensed processes and the additional safeguards instruments were
   prepared and disclosed within thirty days following Project effectiveness (i.e., ESMP, LMP, an updated
   SEP, and Sexual Exploitation and Abuse and Sexual Harassment (SEA/SH) Action Plan). Safeguards were
   supervised and monitored on a regular basis throughout project implementation, consistently receiving

                                                                                                  Page 17 of 21
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Togo COVID-19 Education Response (GPE) (P174166)



  ratings in the satisfactory range (moderately satisfactory or satisfactory). Additionally, a Project’s code of
  conduct for Project stakeholders was prepared and implemented. A grievance redress mechanism was
  prepared and became operational with a delay (i.e., 6 months before Project’s closing). All quarterly
  environmental and social monitoring reports were produced on time and reviewed by the WBG’s
  environmental and social safeguard (ESS) colleagues. In addition, capacity building trainings were provided
  to PCU, stakeholders (COGEP/COGERES, teachers, inspectorates, etc.) and workers to increase their
  awareness, commitment and participation in identifying and implementing effective management measures
  against negative environmental and social impacts related to the Project. At the end of the Project, the
  environment and social performance of the Project and the Environmental and Social Risk Classification
  (ESRC) were rated Moderately Satisfactory due to the following reasons: (i) the Grievance Redness
  Mechanism (GRM) was established and became operational in December 2021, only 6 months before the
  Project’s closing; and (ii) although the ESMP for the management of waste, nuisances and risks had been
  in place, no monitoring of the waste management actions was undertaken.

  The PCU received a complaint through the GRM about the non-payment of artisans who produced some
  parts of the handwashing stations. The MEPSTA/PCU settled the payment before Project closing. An
  environmental and social monitoring and control mission of the Project by the national environmental
  agency (ANGE) and a mission to monitor the appropriation and implementation of the health protocol took
  place during Project implementation. No accident / incidents were registered as of Project closing (ICR, pp.
  26-27).




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management (FM).

  At appraisal, a financial management assessment was conducted. The overall FM risk for the project was
  assessed to be Moderate contingent on the undertaking of several mitigation measures: (i) using existing
  FM and disbursement arrangements of the closed GPE-funded PERI-2 project, which met the minimum
  fiduciary requirements under Bank Policy and Directive for IPF (with some adjustments to be made for the
  specific needs of this project), (ii) improving the FM capacity of the PCU, and (iii) ensuring the audit of
  project annual accounts by an independent external auditor (PAD, p. 25).

  According to the ICR (p. 27), the Project’s Financial Management performance was rated Satisfactory.
  Regular reporting, internal controls, and timely completion and transmission of internal audit reports
  supported the Satisfactory rating of the Project’s FM performance. All of the Project’s submitted interim
  financial reports (IFRs) and audit reports were deemed acceptable to the WBG. There was no pending IFR
  and audit report for this Project. At Project’s closing, the Project disbursed a total of US$6.84 million and
  the remaining US$102,045.56 were fully disbursed by the end of the grace period extended from October
  31, 2022 to December 31, 2022. The rationale for the two-month extension was acceptable to the WBG
  because it enabled the GoT to submit the final justification of the payment made for the voluntary teachers’
  allowances following the authorization for direct payment and to submit final payment requests for activities
  completed prior to the Project’s closing date in order to avoid any risk of loss of funds due to the ineligibility
  of payment (ICR, p. 12). The amended contract for the external audit was approved. An external audit
  covering the period of the Project from its start to June 30, 2022 was carried out and considered



                                                                                                      Page 18 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Togo COVID-19 Education Response (GPE) (P174166)



   acceptable by the Bank. In a meeting with IEG on March 7, 2023, the task team confirmed reception of the
   final audit and its unqualified/clean opinion.

   Procurement

   At project approval, the Project Procurement Strategy for Development and Procurement Plan were
   prepared on time and approved by the WBG, and the Procurement Plan was updated and submitted to the
   WBG as required throughout the Project. The Bank team conducted regular procurement performance
   assessment missions, with ratings in the satisfactory range throughout the project period. The Bank
   procurement staff provided training to the PCU to ensure compliance with the procurement guidelines. The
   PCU used the WBG’s Systematic Tracking of Exchanges in Procurement for uploading procurement
   documentation. There were some challenges related to the contract management that required ongoing
   capacity development support. The planned activities were implemented in compliance with procurement
   standards and regulations, except for the delayed acquisition of handwashing stations due to low capacity
   of the contracted firm. This delay was eventually overcome and handwashing stations were provided to all
   beneficiary schools by the end of the Project (ICR, p. 27).




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None reported.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                   IEG
                                                                                Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                          Satisfactory         Satisfactory

Bank Performance                 Satisfactory         Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                   Substantial          Substantial

Quality of ICR                   ---                  Substantial


12. Lessons

As reported in the ICR (pp. 29-30), the following key lessons were generated during the Project’s
implementation:

      The education system’s resilience to future shocks requires the availability of both remedial
         programs for at-risk students and alternative teaching and learning options that can ensure
         education continuity in times of crises and complement teacher-led instruction.

                                                                                                    Page 19 of 21
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Togo COVID-19 Education Response (GPE) (P174166)



        To be effective, distance/home-based schooling requires proper support to parents and
         caregivers that goes beyond communication campaigns to raise awareness about the
         availability of distance learning modalities and the importance of education continuity during
         the crisis, especially for girls.
        Performance-based school grants can strengthen school autonomy and accountability and
         improve the quality of educational services. Experience has shown that school grants are
         most effective when they are aligned with school improvement plans.
        Regular administration of simple school-based learning assessments can strengthen the
         national learning assessment system capacity to assess children throughout the school year
         and inform recovery plans for improved results.
        Strengthening sectoral coordination around school health and school feeding can help the
         government design effective policies to improve the framework for the establishment of
         school health and feeding programs.

Also, IEG, in its review of this ICRR offers an additional lesson:

It is possible to include in an emergency operation, designed to respond to acute needs caused by a
crisis, a medium-term sector development perspective that builds capacity and contributes to sector
resilience. In the case of this project, the Ministry of Education was able to lay a strong foundation
for remote/home-based learning that addressed immediate needs, continued to be utilized for
remedial purposes once schools re-opened, and made the education sector better prepared to
respond to future crises.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

This ICR is well-written and provides a clear and coherent storyline. The quality of the evidence is strong,
relying on the M&E system that was strengthened by simple school-based learning assessments; a Geo-
enabling Method for Monitoring and Supervision; a Systems Approach for Better Education Results
Assessment on school health and feeding (Healthy-SABER); and a beneficiary survey. The ICR is generally
results-oriented, stressing and highlighting how activities inform outcomes, although given the Project’s
emergency nature and short duration, the ICR’s results chain and results framework provided intermediate
outcomes rather than outcomes. The ICR presents a strong economic rationale for investing in education based
on the robust results of the cost-benefit analysis before and after the project implementation. The proposed
ratings for Relevance of Objectives, Efficacy, Efficiency and Bank Performance are appropriate and consistent
with the evidence presented in the ICR. Also, the ICR is candid about implementation delays and provides a
generally adequate critical assessment of the Project's main achievements and shortcomings. The lessons
learned are informative, relevant and evidence-based, reflecting the Project’s specific experiences and findings.

This was a Project that, among other things, aimed to provide equitable access to multimodal remote
learning. The ICR, however, included indicators and targets disaggregated by vulnerable group only for some of

                                                                                                    Page 20 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Togo COVID-19 Education Response (GPE) (P174166)



the targeted vulnerable groups such as female students and students with disability, while indicators and
targets for the other targeted vulnerable groups, such as students living in rural and remote areas or those
living in poverty were not included in the ICR’s results framework. The Project design envisaged training school
inspectors in addition to teachers as part of a systemic approach to implementing multimodal remote learning,
however, the ICR’s results framework does not include indicators and targets on the school inspectors that
were trained. The TTL clarified that the ICR’s results framework included only key indicators and targets that
were required by the GPE and were less challenging to monitor.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                  Page 21 of 21
