     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Ethiopia PFM Project (P150922)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0023248

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P150922                                    Ethiopia PFM Project

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Ethiopia                                   Governance


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-57660                                  07-Apr-2020                                          28,857,466.65

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 26-Feb-2016                                07-Mar-2022

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            33,000,000.00                                                 0.00

 Revised Commitment                             33,000,000.00                                                 0.00

 Actual                                         28,857,466.65                                                 0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Giuseppe Iarossi            Clay Wescott                 Jennifer L. Keller              IEGEC (Unit 1)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The PDO of this project is to improve efficiency, transparency, and accountability of public expenditure
   management at the federal and regional levels.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
   No

                                                                                                   Page 1 of 11
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Ethiopia PFM Project (P150922)




c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
      1. Expenditure Management and Information Systems Support (US$22.5 million at appraisal,
           US$20.12 million at closure). This component aims to support the government in implementing the
           next generation of PFM reforms through the government-funded IFMIS rollout plan.
        2. Strengthening Accountability Institutions (US$9.4 million at appraisal, US$7.67 million at
           closure). This component aims to support accountability institutions in performing their tasks.
        3. Project Management, Monitoring, and Evaluation (US$1.1 million at appraisal, US$1.07 million at
           closure). The objective of this component is to support program management and coordination-
           related tasks to ensure proper project implementation, effective monitoring and evaluation of results,
           and a consistent and effective approach to capacity development.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   The actual disbursement was 87 percent of the project cost (US$28.8 million). The ICR attributes this to
   efficiency in implementing some activities. For example, the project supported the Federal Ethics and
   Anticorruption Commission (FEACC) with less than 60 percent of the planned budget.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
While the government had significantly improved the legal framework of PFM in Ethiopia, many areas for
improvement persisted at the central and woreda (district) levels that were binding constraints on delivering
quality public services. At the central level, weak areas were the unavailability of well-qualified professional
accountants, audit quality and the need for adequate training facilities, and oversight by an enforcement
authority. At the district level, these included poor infrastructure; weaknesses in internal audit; weak
property management; weak cash control and delays in bank reconciliation; high staff turnover; delays in
budget notification; low financial audit coverage and audit backlogs; and inadequate training. Most IDA
resources from the former Protection of Basic Services (PBS) and other larger IDA-financed projects, such
as the Productive Safety Nets Project (PSNP), flowed to district levels. Thus, PFM system strengthening
needed to be accompanied by measures to promote transparency and accountability at the woreda (district)
level.

Hence this project focused on supporting the introduction of an eGP (e-Government Procurement) system
by linking the eGP system to the IFMIS to improve efficiency and accountability in the procurement process
and to reduce costs. Further, the project intended to support capacity gap assessments and capacity-
building activities to address fraud, corruption, and data quality issues and increase public awareness of
fraud and corruption at the local government level.




                                                                                                     Page 2 of 11
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Ethiopia PFM Project (P150922)



               Both the Country Program Strategy (CPS) at design and the Country Partnership Framework (CPF) at
               closure identify governance, accountability, and transparency as critical areas for the development of
               Ethiopia. The CPF 2018-2022 includes as one of the three focus areas, “Supporting Institutional
               Accountability and Confronting Corruption” (p. 39), recognizing the rising demand for government
               accountability in the country. This objective is aligned with the Government of Ethiopia’s (GoE) Second
               Growth and Transformation Plan (GTP II), which emphasizes strengthening governance.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Improve the efficiency of public expenditure at the federal and regional levels

                             Rationale
                             The PAD did not develop a theory of change (TOC), but the ICR developed one for this objective. The
                             activities supporting this objective (rollout of Integrated Financial Management Information System,
                             improvements in Integrated Budget and Expenditure System, capacity building, implementation of audit
                             software) were expected to increase the efficiency of the PFM system by reducing cash float, by disclosing
                             fiscal documents promptly, and by improving capacity. Additional activities (building PFM capacity, increasing
                             financial management awareness, training in debt management, reorganization of internal audit structure,
                             improve transparency) were expected to improve fiscal management, improve the realism of the budget and
                             instill fiscal discipline by increasing budget execution rate and rolling out a new Chart of Accounts. The design
                             drew from several analytical reports that a strong PFM was necessary for improved service delivery in
                             Ethiopia (e.g., IFMIS for PFM Efficiency, Effectiveness & Transparency! Ministry of Finance Ethiopia, 2021;
                             Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability (PEFA) Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia (Federal
                             Government) Performance Assessment report, Final report November 13, 2019).

                             The underlying assumptions of the TOC were: political stability of Government, no external shocks, readily
                             available funds for implementation of the envisaged interventions, and close follow-up and collaboration
                             within the various implementing entities. Some of these assumptions still need to materialize. During project
                             implementation, frequent changes in the State Minister and turnover of key Ministry of Finance and Economic
                             Cooperation (MOFEC) directors led to initial slow implementation. Collaboration was hampered initially by
                             limited commitment and misunderstanding of the impacts of the interventions by top management.
                             Unexpected events such as the pandemic and the onset of the war in the North also impacted the project,
                             such as the achievement of the indicator on the number of contracts with 180 days benchmark.

                             The project used three indicators to measure the achievement of this objective, (1) The cash float reduced for
                             the Federal and Regional Governments (in percent of the annual federal budget). The baseline was 22
                             percent, the target was 18.7 percent, and the actual was 16.75 percent. (2) Target agencies progressively

                                                                                                                                Page 3 of 11
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Ethiopia PFM Project (P150922)



increase the number of contracts awarded within the agreed benchmark of 180 days for works contracts>
US$ 5 million & Goods >US$500,000. The baseline was 10 percent, the target was 50 percent, and the actual
was 33 percent. (3) The number of Direct Beneficiaries who receive the standardized training the project
provides. The baseline was 47,000 beneficiaries, the target was 84,000, and the actual was 86,484
beneficiaries. At the regional level, the budget execution rate of Health, Education, Agriculture, and Water
increased from 55 percent in 2016 to 92.16 percent in 2021. The contracts for works and goods above US$5
million increased in 2020. Still, they fell significantly in 2021, largely due to the conflict in the northern part of
the country, which implied a significant reduction in capital expenditures. Targets were reasonable, and
indicators were appropriate. External factors (e.g., the war in the North) did not allow the full achievement of
the indicator on 180 days benchmark for public contracts.

Thanks to the Integrated Financial Management Information System (IFMIS) rollout and improvements made
with Integrated Budget and Expenditure System (IBEX), the project achieved the objective of improving the
efficiency of public expenditures at the federal and regional levels. At closure, 111 federal headquarters and
62 branches used IFMIS, and over 19,000 end users received training. After IBEX was updated and the
project provided training, the quality of financial statements significantly improved at the regional level,
according to interviews conducted by the ICR. IFMIS covers 78 percent of the federal budget, and IBEX is
operational in over 2,100 places nationwide. In addition, the June 2022 Audit report from the Office of the
Federal Auditor General (OFAG) reported a 12 percent increase in audit reports with unqualified audit
opinions and an eight percent decrease in adverse opinions.



Rating
High


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Improve transparency of public expenditure at the federal and regional levels.

Rationale
The PAD did not develop a TOC, but the ICR developed one for this objective. Based on repeated
assessments (e.g., IFMIS for PFM Efficiency, Effectiveness & Transparency! Ministry of Finance Ethiopia,
2021; Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability (PEFA) Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia
(Federal Government) Performance Assessment report, Final report November 13, 2019) indicating that audit
and oversight institutions were the weakest link in the PFM chain in Ethiopia, the activities of this component
(e-GP for public procurement, capacity development for OFAG, improved media engagement on audits
activity, professional certifications, capacity building of Federal Ethics and Anticorruption Commission) were
expected to increase efficiency, transparency, and accountability of public expenditure, by increasing the
number of contracts awarded promptly and with competitive bidding, increasing in audits performed,
increasing the capacity of auditors and members of the Finance and Budget Standing Committee, and
simplification of reports published.

Assumptions of the TOC were: political stability of Government, no external shocks, readily available funds for
implementation of the envisaged interventions, and close follow-up and collaboration within the various
implementing entities. Some of these assumptions still need to materialize. During project implementation,
there was political instability and frequent leadership turnover, such as frequent changes in State Minister and

                                                                                                       Page 4 of 11
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Ethiopia PFM Project (P150922)



turnover of key MOFEC directors led to initial slow implementation; also, collaboration was hampered initially
by limited commitment and misunderstanding on the impacts of the interventions by top management.



The indicator used for measuring the achievement of this objective was the timely disclosure of key
fiscal/budget documents. The baseline was 24 months, the target was nine months, and the actual was six
months. In about 893 woredas, the IBEX system is connected to regional-level data centers. Execution and
additional debt reports, Finance Transparency and Accountability reports, and various audit reports are now
available on the updated and upgraded MOFEC website, providing timely information. Similarly, the MOFEC
website provides bi-annual budget execution and audited financial statements. Targets were reasonable, and
indicators were appropriate.

The project supported upgrading the Debt Management and Financial Analysis System (DMFAS), which
allowed the Debt Management Directorate to generate timely and quality debt-related reports, including
Public debt statistics and Debt portfolio reports. In addition, the project helped integrate debt payments and
collection into the accounting and reporting system thanks to the IFMIS. The online availability of debt
collection and repayments allows the Government Accounting Directorate to include information on debt in
the government’s annual financial statements. Overall, the project improved the reliability of the Debt
Management and Financial Analysis System database and enabled the Debt management department to
publish Public Sector Debt Statistical Bulletins in line with best practices.



Rating
High


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
Improve accountability of public expenditure at the federal and regional levels.

Rationale
There was no TOC in the PAD for this component. The activities sponsored by this component aim to support
project management and coordination across tasks to achieve proper implementation, monitoring, and
achievement of objectives.

The indicator used for measuring the achievement of this objective was an Increase in the percentage of
audits conforming to International Standards of Supreme Audit Institutions. The results framework didn’t
indicate a baseline or target. The ICR reports that in 2021 the African Branch of the International Organization
of Supreme Audit Institutions (AFROSAI) conducted the audit quality assurance without reporting any
percentages.

Members of woreda councils’ finance and budget committees received training to allow them to scrutinize
proposed budgets submitted by the executives to ensure that they align with strategic priorities and
assumptions and also enable them to evaluate the performance of the executives. The project suspended
such training in 2020 because of COVID-19, and it was impossible to ascertain if it had resumed. Simplified
budget execution reports produced by woredas increased to 95 percent in 2020 but declined to 89 percent in

                                                                                                   Page 5 of 11
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               Ethiopia PFM Project (P150922)



                            2021 due to COVID-19 and the conflict. Competitive procurement methods in awarding public contracts
                            increased in the first three years of the project implementation period. Still, later COVID-19 and the conflict in
                            the North had a negative impact. The project supported the Accounting and Auditing Board of Ethiopia
                            (AABE). AABE's capacity improved after implementing the Practice Review Manual, Financial Reporting &
                            Monitoring Review manual, and Audit Quality manuals. AABE reviewed three audit firms and 12 financial
                            statements and delivered an International Auditing Standard training for 152 audit firms. The Federal Ethics
                            and Anticorruption Commission (FEACC) trained over 513 ethics officers on fraud and corruption prevention
                            from three regional states. The training enhanced the woreda-level ethics officers' capacity to record and
                            report fraud and corruption cases, as demonstrated by a qualitative review of documents and interviews that
                            improved the quality of fraud and corruption recording and reporting. Because of weak follow-up by OFAG
                            and a failed procurement contract, the project couldn’t complete some planned activities, such as an exercise
                            to improve the audit quality, strengthening the training center, and strengthening the Audit Service
                            Corporation. However, the OFAG improved the audit quality thanks to a gap analysis and an Audit Quality
                            Assurance assessment by the African Branch of the International Organization of Supreme Audit Institutions
                            (AFROSAI). The Internal Audit function quality improved after adopting the risk-based internal audits method.
                            However, the client could not establish a baseline to measure the achievement of the objective and did not
                            because of procurement rules and the political economy (senior leadership turnover).



                            Rating
                            Modest


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The Bank achieved most of the project objectives, including the objectives of component 1, which absorbed
                            2/3 of the project expenditures.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   The ICR and PAD presented some estimates of savings. The financial model in the PAD suggested an Internal
   Rate of Return (IRR) of 27 percent over 20 years and a positive net present value (NPV) at discount rates of 10
   percent, 15 percent, and 20 percent. The Bank estimated the NPV at 10 percent was US$408 million. The ICR
   didn’t validate these values stating that direct attribution of economic and financial benefits of PFM reforms is
   challenging but endorses the above estimates reported in the PAD (p. 45). In addition, the ICR reports that
   estimated saving from the decrease in cash float would be about US$428 million per annum from interest on
   government borrowing.


                                                                                                                                Page 6 of 11
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Ethiopia PFM Project (P150922)



Yet, the project presented several inefficiencies: low disbursement, high staff turnover, and procurement
challenges. Throughout its life, the project had a low implementation pace, resulting in low budget utilization and
a low disbursement rate. The Bank extended the project deadline twice, although the second extension was due
to COVID and the internal war in the North, factors not attributable to the project. Staff turnover was both internal
– with 3 TTLs assigned to the project, and on the client’s side, which was more difficult to handle and had a
higher impact on the efficiency of the project. Procurement delays also reduced the efficiency of the project.
Further, the Federal Ethics and Anticorruption Commission successfully implemented the project’s activities with
less than 60 percent of the budget, implying that resources were not efficiently planned. Finally, while
procurement procedures were followed, the Channel one Program Coordination Directorate (COPCD) failed to
upload procurement process documents for Post Review on time.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?              Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                       100.00
 Appraisal                                                  27.00
                                                                                        Not Applicable
                                                                                       100.00
 ICR Estimate                                               27.00
                                                                                        Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The project achieved most of its objectives, and systems and capacities improved, notwithstanding the onset of
COVID and the internal war. Relevance is rated high because the project supported critical reforms at the
central and woreda levels. Efficacy is rated substantial because the project achieved most of its objectives.
Efficiency is rated modest because of several inefficiencies related to procurement, low disbursement, and staff
turnover. Combining these indicates an overall outcome rating of Moderately Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The ICR identified three potential risks to the Development Outcomes. First, high staff turnover can
jeopardize the achievements of e-Government Procurement (e-GP), IFMIS, program budgeting, and website
maintenance. Second, there are doubts about the resources needed to achieve the additional activities

                                                                                                       Page 7 of 11
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Ethiopia PFM Project (P150922)



required, such as security and network monitoring licenses and the rollout of the e-GP beyond the pilot.
Finally, the conflict and other pressing political issues might take precedence over the activities sponsored by
this project. Project team members acknowledged that the Bank was aware of the high staff turnover and
suggested that the client pay higher salaries to technical specialists to reduce or eliminate such risk. While
political uncertainty remains due to the potential instability of the recent peace accord, the other two risks are
less likely to occur, given that the PAD recognized that the GoE provided its resources to reform PFM. The
Bank is also committed to supporting PFM in Ethiopia with other projects.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project was consistent with the government priorities at the design time, as identified in the Growth
  and Transformation Plan (GTP II). The ICR claims that the project design drew from analytical products
  and referred to PEFA and other reports (e.g., FMIS for PFM Efficiency, Effectiveness & Transparency –
  annex 7). Interviews with team members revealed that many analytical reports on PFM in Ethiopia
  represented the analytical underpinning of several FM projects and were also used for this project,
  although not directly mentioned in the PAD. An interview with the ICR’s TTL revealed that field staff
  interviews and document reviews show that the design considered technical and financial factors,
  including procurement and financial management. The Bank also considered lessons from previous
  projects, including lessons from an IMF review, and included mitigating measures.

  Yet, the Bank didn’t identify several challenges during the appraisal stage: lack of expertise, focal point,
  poor infrastructure, and inadequate budget estimates.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The Bank allocated sufficient budget and staff for supervision, conducted regular missions and reports, and
 alerted the client to problems as they occurred. A local co-TTL supported the two international TTLs, and
 the Bank team identified performance indicators and proposed solutions to problems. For example, Bank
 staff assisted the client in tailoring the procurement support structure to their specific needs; they engaged
 proactively in supervision by going beyond a simple review of reports; and notwithstanding the extended
 implementation period, TTL’s turnover was minimal.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

                                                                                                       Page 8 of 11
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Ethiopia PFM Project (P150922)




  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The PAD did not include an explicit TOC, which is important in a Fragile, Conflict, and Violence country
 (ICR, p. 62), although it was not required. The indicators were appropriate to monitor progress. The PDO
 didn’t include project beneficiaries, but the PAD mentioned them.



b. M&E Implementation
  At the beginning of the implementation, monitoring was insufficient because of a lack of staff. Later a
  project task force was established and conducted periodic meetings to monitor the project. Implementing
  units were required to submit a progress report to the task force. Weekly or bi-weekly meetings identified
  issues and discussed them with representatives of the implementing units to explain progress and
  challenges. The meetings agreed upon action plans to address these issues.



c. M&E Utilization
  The task force would review the progress report in each meeting, discuss findings, identify remedies,
  and assign responsibilities. This helped regions support poorly performing woredas and sector bureaus.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project did not trigger any safeguard as it involved capacity-building activities.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   The project complied with fiduciary covenants. The project had internal controls, maintained adequate
   records, and followed procurement guidelines. Initially, the project had a Satisfactory FM rating, which later
   became MS and MU because of low disbursement, staff turnover, and unreconciled differences. Finally,
   the rating returned to MS.


                                                                                                     Page 9 of 11
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Ethiopia PFM Project (P150922)




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   No



d. Other
   The project was not gender tagged, but 41 percent of civil servants participating in the training sessions
   were women.



11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                    IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
                                 Moderately
Outcome                                                Moderately Satisfactory
                                 Satisfactory
                                                                                  The Bank didn’t identify several
Bank Performance                 Satisfactory          Moderately Satisfactory
                                                                                  challenges at the design stage.
Quality of M&E                   Modest                Modest

Quality of ICR                   ---                   Modest


12. Lessons

When a government assigns procurement responsibilities to multiple agencies, it is critical to ensure
close coordination (for example, with secondment arrangements across agencies) and to set up a
clear dispute-resolution mechanism to avoid delays. In this project, OFAG had technical
responsibility for procurement, and MOFEC had selection responsibility. Lack of coordination among
these agencies and political economy factors generated delays in procurement.

To improve disbursement in the early years and improve project performance, the project should
frontload some activities during design, such as ToR design. In this project, limitations in ToR and a
weak follow-up of the OFAG contributed to the failed contract.

To avoid or limit the impact of turnover in senior leadership on project implementation, it is advisable
to delegate project responsibilities to more junior government officials. In this project, there was
significant senior leadership turnover in the first two years, which significantly impacted the project's
pace of implementation.



13. Assessment Recommended?


                                                                                                     Page 10 of 11
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Ethiopia PFM Project (P150922)



  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provides a good account of the project design, implementation, and achievement of its objectives. The
analysis was mostly impartial. At times the ICR could have presented better evidence. For example, the ICR
could have included clear tables on the indicators and achievement of objectives. The ICR refers to background
material without indicating which or where it could be found. Lessons could have been better articulated,
focusing more on ‘how’ problems can be solved in similar circumstances.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Modest




                                                                                                Page 11 of 11
