     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BR-FIP: Cerrado Monioring Systems (P143185)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0023095

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P143185                                   BR-FIP: Cerrado Monioring Systems

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Brazil                                    Environment, Natural Resources & the Blue Economy


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-A1787                                  29-May-2020                                            9,149,320.30

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 28-Mar-2016                               29-Dec-2021

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            9,250,000.00                                     9,250,000.00

 Revised Commitment                             9,149,320.30                                     9,149,320.30

 Actual                                         9,149,320.30                                     9,149,320.30




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Chikako Miwa               Christopher David            Christopher David Nelson        IEGSD (Unit 4)
                            Nelson




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The objective of the project was to enhance the Member Country’s institutional capacity in monitoring
   deforestation, in providing information on fire risks, and in estimating related GHG emissions in the Cerrado
   (PAD, para 27). The “Member Country” refers to the Federative Republic of Brazil in the context of the World
   Bank Group’s global partnership (PAD, footnote 17, page 13).

   The following three objectives are assessed in this ICRR:


                                                                                                  Page 1 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BR-FIP: Cerrado Monioring Systems (P143185)



        1. Enhance the Member Country’s institutional capacity in monitoring deforestation in the Cerrado
        2. Enhance the Member Country’s institutional capacity in providing information on fire risks in the
           Cerrado
        3. Enhance the Member Country’s institutional capacity in estimating related GHG emissions in the
           Cerrado



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Component 1: Deforestation monitoring (Estimate: US$ 4.39 million, Actual: US$ 4.39 million) financed:
   a) designing and implementing a deforestation monitoring system for the Cerrado, including annual
   deforestation mapping and near real-time deforestation detection based on the PRODES and DETER
   systems; b) training to selected stakeholders on access, interpretation and use of the information generated
   by the Cerrado deforestation monitoring system; and c) designing and implementing a data quality control
   system for the Cerrado deforestation monitoring system.

   Component 2: Information systems on forest fire risk and GHG emissions estimation (Estimate: US$
   3.31million, Actual: US$ 3.31million) financed: a) improving INPE’s fire risk information system by
   designing, implementing, and providing, inter alia, (i) localized fire risk warning barometers, (ii) applications
   for interactive fire risk updates, (iii) higher fire risk resolution maps, (iv) instruments for fire risk statistical
   analysis, and (v) automatic status updates; b) adapting a fire ignition, spread and carbon model to the
   Cerrado, including the integration of daily-updated, on-line fire spread forecast information on INPE’s
   Queimadas website, and applying such model in selected conservation units as a fire management tool; c)
   adapting INPE’s GHG emissions estimation system to the Cerrado; and d) hands-on training on the
   practical application of fire risk modelling tools to selected stakeholders.

   Component 3: Project management, monitoring, and evaluation (Estimate: US$ 1.55 million, Actual:
   US$ 1.55 million) provided support for managing the technical and administrative aspects of the Project,
   including financial management, procurement, annual audits, overall project coordination, monitoring, and
   evaluation of project implementation.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project Cost: At appraisal, the project was estimated to cost US$9.25 million (PAD, para 31). At project
   closing, the actual cost was US$9.25 million (ICR, page 45).

   Financing: As envisioned at appraisal (PAD, para 31), the project was fully financed by a grant from the
   Strategic Climate Fund (ICR, para 29).

   Dates: The project was approved on March 28 2016, and became effective on June 22 2016. The Mid-
   Term Review was concluded in May 2019 (based on additional information provided through a meeting with

                                                                                                           Page 2 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BR-FIP: Cerrado Monioring Systems (P143185)



   the last TTL of the project, hereafter, TTL meeting). The project was closed on December 29, 2021, which
   was a year and seven months after the original closing date of May 29, 2020.

   Restructuring: The project conducted two restructurings on August 1, 2019 and November 4, 2020. At the
   first restructuring, the results framework (the theory of change diagram and three intermediate results
   indicators) were revised to better capture the project results. In addition, the project closing date was
   extended for ten months to: (i) compensate for initial delays due to the implementing agency’s unfamiliarity
   of the World Bank’s guidelines and procedures and the insufficient human resources; and (ii) develop
   another annual deforestation map for the Cerrado (covering the year 2019-2020) to inform the other two FIP
   Projects under implementation (ICR, para 37). At the second restructuring, the project closing date was
   further extended for nine months due to restrictions on field visits and face-to-face meetings under the
   COVID-19 outbreak (ICR, para 38).




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country and Sector Context: The Cerrado biome, located in the Brazilian Central Plateau south of the
Amazon region, covers almost one quarter of the country’s territory, or approximately 200 million hectares,
providing a home to 5 percent of all biodiversity on the planet (ICR, para 10). To a large extent, Brazil’s
agricultural growth occurred over the last decade in the Cerrado biome (PAD, para 2). The expansion of
agriculture in the Cerrado caused deforestation and use of fire, resulting in not only degradation of
biodiversity, soil, and pasture and changes to water and sedimentation regimes, but also in large carbon
emissions and methane releases from cattle ranching (ICR, para 11). Land-use data indicated that only
54.5 percent of the Cerrado biome maintained its natural vegetation (ICR, para 11). Considering that much
of the land in the Cerrado was available for legal deforestation and considered as having high agricultural
potential, it was expected that agricultural activities would keep increasing in the region for some time
(PAD, para 17). Given challenges in the Cerrado, the Brazil Investment Plan (BIP) was approved in May
2012 under the Forest Investment Program managed by the World Bank (PAD, para 18). The BIP aimed to
promote sustainable land use and forest management in the Cerrado biome, contributing to reducing
pressure on the remaining forests, reducing GHG emissions, and increasing carbon dioxide (CO2)
sequestration (PAD, para 18). This project was designed as a part of BIP to implement an early-warning
system for preventing forest fires and a system for monitoring the vegetation cover under Theme 2
(Production and Management of Forest Information) (PAD, annex 5, page 49). The Results Framework of
the project was designed to be integrated at the BIP level, contributing to the annual reporting requirements
under the FIP (PAD, annex 5, page 49).

Relevance to Government Strategies: At appraisal and at project closing, the objectives were in line with
the National Policy on Climate Change (Law No. 12.187/2009) and the Nationally Determined Contribution
to reduce greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions submitted during the Paris Climate Conference in 2016 (ICR,
para 42). The objectives were also in line with the Action Plan to Prevent and Control Deforestation and
Fires in the Cerrado Biome (PPCerrado) launched in September 2010 with aims to promote sustained
reduction in the rate of deforestation and forest degradation (including fires) in the biome by improving
monitoring and control capabilities of federal agencies, while promoting the regularization of rural
properties, sustainable production activities, and the restoration of degraded lands (PAD, para 16).


                                                                                                   Page 3 of 16
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                      Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      BR-FIP: Cerrado Monioring Systems (P143185)



               Relevance to Bank Assistance Strategies: At appraisal, the objectives aligned with the Country Partnership
               Strategy (CPS) FY2012-2015, particularly with Strategic Objective 4 (Improving sustainable natural
               resource management and climate resilience), which aimed to enhancing the World Bank’s Amazon
               Initiative approach of combining conservation with development and employment opportunities to cover the
               Cerrado savannah region (CPS, para 69). At project closing, the objectives aligned with the Country
               Partnership Framework (CPF) FY18-FY23, which aimed to resolve conflicts over land and natural
               resources, especially in Brazil’s Amazon and Cerrado biomes in Objective 3.1 (Support the achievement of
               Brazil’s NDC with a particular focus on land use) under Focus Area 3 (Inclusive and sustainable
               development) (CPF, para 99).

               Bank Experience in the Sector: This project was complementary to another two World Bank projects
               financed under BIP, namely, FIP: Environmental Regularization of Rural Lands in the Cerrado of Brazil
               (P143334, FY16); and Sustainable Production in Areas Previously Converted to Agricultural Production
               (P143184, FY15) (PAD, annex 5, table 7, page 48). The project results were expected to also inform the
               later World Bank projects financed under BIP, namely, the Dedicated Grant Mechanism for Indigenous
               People and Traditional Communities (P143492, FY15); the Integrated Landscape Management in the
               Cerrado Biome (P164602, FY19); and the Brazil Investment Plan Coordination (P152285, FY18) (ICR,
               footnote 3, page 6).

               The objectives were in line with the strategies of the government and the World Bank’s assistance at
               appraisal and project closing. This project complemented other projects financed by BIP. On the other
               hand, the relevance of the objectives was pitched at a level that did not adequately reflect a potential
               solution to development challenges of unsustainable land use, deforestation and forest degradation, and
               GHG emissions in the Cerrado biome. While acknowledging the difficulty of the operational environment, a
               shortcoming here was that the PDO formulation to "enhance the Member Country’s institutional capacity in
               monitoring deforestation, in providing information on fire risks, and in estimating related GHG emissions in
               the Cerrado" was not outcome focused and did not help in understanding what development results were
               expected as a consequence of the project. The expected results were described in the PAD (para 18) as
               the objective of the BIP program (“to promote sustainable land use and forest management in the Cerrado
               biome, contributing to reducing pressure on the remaining forests, reducing GHG emissions, and increasing
               carbon dioxide (CO2) sequestration”) that the project was part of, but they were not reflected in the PDO
               formulation. These might be longer term targets but tracking them and identifying them was an important
               aspect of a successful development operation. The relevance of objectives, therefore, is rated substantial.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Enhance the Member Country’s institutional capacity in monitoring deforestation in the Cerrado

                                                                                                                              Page 4 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BR-FIP: Cerrado Monioring Systems (P143185)




Rationale
Theory of Change (TOC): The PDO statement focused on outputs, as described in section 3, resulting in
insufficient articulation of expected outcomes of objective 1. According to information in the ICR (figure 1,
page 12) and the PAD (annex 5, page 49), the TOC of objective 1 targeted the national and subnational level
government institutions. The TOC postulated that monitoring deforestation by satellite and a national real-time
deforestation detection system, publishing the deforestation through a web portal, and providing training to
the government institutions to utilize the deforestation information would result in outputs including the
publishment of the deforestation information, contributing to an outcome of sustainable land use and forest
management in the Cerrado biome promoted. In the long-term, the outcome was envisioned to contribute to
improved land use planning and management, pressures on the remaining forests reduced, GHG emissions
reduced, and carbon dioxide (CO2) sequestration increased.

Critical assumptions included: (i) there was adequate institutional capacity and experience in monitoring
deforestation; (ii) information systems developed by leading specialized government agencies would improve
use of government resources and service delivery; (iii) the deforestation information would be incorporated
into daily operations improve coordination and law enforcement; and (iv) relevant stakeholders would
participate in the training.

Outputs (ICR, paras 44-62 and Annex 1):

      9 annual deforestation maps on the scale of 1:250,000 were publicly available (PRODES-Cerrado),
       exceeding the revised target of 5 annual deforestation maps. In addition to the data collected during
       project implementation, the data kept from years prior to appraisal was used to create the annual
       deforestation maps (TTL meeting).
      Deforestation data on the scale of 1:500,000 was delivered to the public (DETER-Cerrado), achieving
       the original target.
      31 government institutions were provided with capacity building to improve management of forest
       resources, doubling the original target of 15 government institutions.
      88.89 percent of users satisfied with data provided by the project, exceeding the original target of
       65.00 percent.

Outcomes (ICR, paras 44-62 and Annex 1):

      Information on deforestation in the Cerrado was regularly made available to the public and to relevant
       institutions, achieving the original target. Though this indicator was designed as a PDO indicator, it
       measured the output-level results because this indicator did not measure anything beyond
       achievements of the two Intermediate Results indicators (publishing annual deforestation maps
       through PRODES and publishing deforestation data through DETER) (ICR, page 35).
      21 government institutions, which were in charge of policy, deforestation control, and fire prevention,
       were using the information on deforestation and fire risk in the Cerrado at project closing, exceeding
       the original target of 15 government institutions. Both national and subnational level intuitions
       were using the information provided by the project (ICR, page 36). On the other hand, no evidence
       was provided regarding how the information on deforestation was used and whether the information
       was used to promote sustainable land use and forest management in the Cerrado biome.




                                                                                                  Page 5 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BR-FIP: Cerrado Monioring Systems (P143185)



In addition to the outcome defined in the Results Framework, the ICR reported on the following achieved
outcome which did not have any formal target.

      According to the external evaluation of the project conducted in 2021, 100 percent of beneficiary
       agencies’ interviewees recognized that the project contributed to institutional strengthening, while 79
       percent of managers in the beneficiary institutions recognized the availability of almost real time and
       improved quality information and of the systems to enable them to access the information (ICR, para
       63).

In summary, information on deforestation was regularly published and used by the relevant government
institutions, where the managers were generally aware of the availability of the good quality and nearly
spontaneous information and the system through which they can access it. Two PDO targets were met or
exceeded. On the other hand, one of the PDO indicators did not provide evidence on outcome-level results.
Referring to the TOC above, no evidence was provided regarding to what extent the achieved PDO targets
contributed to promoting sustainable land use and forest management in the Cerrado biome, which was the
objective of the Brazil Investment Plan. The achievement of objective 1, therefore, is rated substantial but
marginally due to limited evidence to support the credibility of critical assumption (iii). More detail on the
application of the relevant data and information would have provided a more complete picture of how effective
the project had been.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Enhance the Member Country’s institutional capacity in providing information on fire risks in the Cerrado

Rationale
Theory of Change (TOC): The PDO statement focused on outputs, as described in section 3, resulting in
insufficient articulation of expected outcomes of objective 2. According to information in the ICR (figure 1,
page 12) and the PAD (annex 5, page 49), the TOC of objective 2 targeted the national and subnational level
government institutions and envisioned that improving the fire risk information system, developing the fire
ignition spread and carbon (FISC) model for the Cerrado biome, and providing training to the relevant
government institutions on the forest fire risk would result in outputs including the information on fire risk
hazard made available to the public, the information on the risk of fire spreading in the Cerrado made
available to the public and selected UCs, and the estimate of GHG emissions in the Cerrado made available
to the public, contributing to an outcome of improved production and dissemination of biome-scale
environmental information. In the long-term, the outcome was envisioned to contribute to improved land use
planning and management in Brazil.

Critical assumptions included: (i) the national space research institute and universities would collaborate with
the project to improve the fire risk and fire spread information systems; (ii) the government institutions
would utilize the modern modelling approaches and the data on fire risk, fire spread, and GHG emissions



                                                                                                   Page 6 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BR-FIP: Cerrado Monioring Systems (P143185)



provided under the project; (iii) the deforestation information would be incorporated into daily operations
improve coordination and law enforcement; and (iv) relevant stakeholders would participate in the training.

Outputs (ICR, paras 44-62 and Annex 1):

      63 new fire risk information products were available to users on interactive communication devices,
       exceeding the original target of 26 new fire risk information products (243 percent of the target).
      Off-line fire ignition spread and carbon (FISC) model was piloted in 3 conservation areas, meeting the
       revised target of 3 FISC conservation areas.
      On-line fire ignition and fire spread risk (FISC) data was published on INPE’s website, meeting the
       target.
      88.89 percent of users satisfied with data provided by the project, exceeding the original target of
       65.00 percent. Though this indicator was designed as an intermediate results indicator, it measured
       the outcome-level results.

Outcomes (ICR, paras 44-62 and Annex 1):

      Real-time information on potential fire spread in the Cerrado was publicly available, achieving the
       original target. Though this indicator was designed as a PDO indicator, it measured the output-level
       results.
      Improved information on forest fire risk was publicly available, achieving the original target. Though
       this indicator was designed as a PDO indicator, it measured the output-level results.
      21 government institutions, which were in charge of policy, deforestation control, and fire prevention,
       were using the information on deforestation and fire risk in the Cerrado at project closing, exceeding
       the original target of 15 government institutions. Both national and subnational level institutions were
       using the information provided by the project (ICR, page 36). However, more detailed systematic
       information on how it is being used and whether it is likely to have the required impact is missing.

In addition to the outcome defined in the Results Framework, the ICR reported on the following achieved
outcome which did not have any formal target.

      Chico Mendes Institute for Biodiversity Conservation (ICMBio: Instituto Chico Mendes de
       Conservação da Biodiversidade), local fire brigades, and other stakeholders used the information to
       improve planning and implementation of fire prevention activities in the Serra do Cipó National Park
       (ICR, para 58).
      The project results were used during policy discussions to demystify fallacies related to a federal law
       passed in 2016 (law 4508/2016) allowing cattle to enter the legal reserve areas dedicated to
       conservation for six months a year (ICR, para 47). The project verified that the presence of cattle
       ranching was highly associated with the high-impact fires, refuting a false hypothesis of the law that a
       larger cattle herd could reduce the size of fires by reducing the amount of highly combustible grasses
       (ICR, para 47).
      According to the external evaluation of the project conducted in 2021, 100 percent of beneficiary
       agencies’ interviewees recognized that the project contributed to institutional strengthening, while 79
       percent of managers in the beneficiary institutions recognized about the availability of almost real
       time and improved quality information and of the systems to enable them to access the information
       (ICR, para 63).


                                                                                                   Page 7 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BR-FIP: Cerrado Monioring Systems (P143185)



In summary, information on potential fire spread and forest fire risk was published and used by the relevant
government institutions, where the managers were generally aware of the availability of the good quality and
nearly spontaneous information and the system through which they could access it. There was anecdotal
evidence regarding how the information generated by the systems was used to improve planning and
implementation of fire risk management activities. Three PDO targets were met or exceeded, though two of
the three PDO indicators focused on output-level results. Referring to the TOC above, some evidence was
provided regarding to what extent the achieved PDO targets contributed to promoting sustainable land use
and forest management in the Cerrado biome, which was the objective of the Brazil Investment Plan. The
achievement of objective 2, therefore, is rated substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
Enhance the Member Country’s institutional capacity in estimating related GHG emissions in the Cerrado

Rationale
Theory of Change (TOC): The PDO statement focused on outputs, as described in section 3, resulting in
insufficient articulation of expected outcomes of objective 3. According to information in the ICR (figure 1,
page 12) and the PAD (annex 5, page 49), the TOC of objective 3 targeted the national and subnational level
government institutions and envisioned that extending the existing national GHG emissions estimate system
to cover the Cerrado biome would result in outputs including the publication of GHG emissions estimates for
the Cerrado, contributing to an outcome of improved production and dissemination of biome-scale
environmental information. In the long-term, the outcome was envisioned to contribute to improved land use
planning and management in Brazil.

Critical assumptions included: (i) the modern modelling approaches and the data on fire risk, fire spread, and
GHG emissions provided under the project were used by government institutions for policy development and
implementation, deforestation control, and fire event response and prevention; and (ii) a broad range of
relevant stakeholders would participate in training, increasing their awareness and developing capacities to
interpret and use information generated by the project.

Outputs:

No Intermediate Results indicator to measure achievements of results for objective 3 was set in the Results
Framework.

Outcomes (ICR, paras 44-62 and Annex 1):

      GHG emissions estimates for the Cerrado were publicly available, achieving the original target.
       Though this indicator was designed as a PDO indicator, it measured output-level results. No evidence
       was provided regarding how the GHG emissions estimates were used.



                                                                                                 Page 8 of 16
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                BR-FIP: Cerrado Monioring Systems (P143185)



                            In addition to the outcome defined in the Results Framework, the ICR reported on the following achieved
                            outcome which did not have any formal target.

                                  According to the external evaluation of the project conducted in 2021, 100 percent of beneficiary
                                   agencies’ interviewees recognized that the project contributed to institutional strengthening, while 79
                                   percent of managers in the beneficiary institutions recognized the availability of almost real time and
                                   improved quality information and of the systems to enable them to access to the information (ICR,
                                   para 63).

                            In summary, information on GHG emissions estimates was published. The PDO indicator for objective 3 was
                            met. On the other hand, no evidence on the outcome-level results was provided because evidence on
                            utilization of the information was missing. Referring to the TOC above, no evidence was provided regarding to
                            what extent the achieved PDO target contributed to promoting sustainable land use and forest management
                            in the Cerrado biome, which was the objective of the Brazil Investment Plan. The achievement of objective 3,
                            therefore, is rated modest due to insufficient evidence on outcomes.



                            Rating
                            Modest


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Of the three objectives, achievements of two objectives were rated substantial and that of one objective was
                            rated modest. The overall efficacy, therefore, is rated substantial.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   Economic and Financial Analysis: At appraisal, no cost-benefit analysis (CBA) was conducted because the
   technical assistance nature of the project would not render meaningful results (ICR, annex 4, page 50). At
   project closing, a CBA was conducted in an external evaluation of the project to assess the impact on
   stakeholders and their perception of project’s results by using the Social Return on Investment method for
   measuring extra-financial value with 200 scenarios (ICR, para 63). The ex-post CBA revealed that every
   Brazilian Real invested by the project generated a total monetary return of more than five times the investment
   amount and only one out of the total 200 scenarios had a cost-benefit ratio lower than one (ICR, para 63).

   Aspects of design and implantation that affected efficiency: The project was extended for a total of 19
   months due to the following two aspects. First, the implementation delays in early years were caused by the

                                                                                                                              Page 9 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      BR-FIP: Cerrado Monioring Systems (P143185)



implementing agency’s unfamiliarity with the World Bank’s procurement and financial management procedures
and requirements and insufficient human resources contributed to the project extension (ICR, para 37). Second,
after the emergence of COVID-19 pandemic, the need for social distancing measures changed the delivery
format of knowledge exchange activities from face-to-face to online and/or hybrid, negatively affecting the
participants to acquire the necessary knowledge swiftly (ICR, para 49). No additional financing was made.

The ex-post CBA indicated that the project’s investments generated the total monetary return more than five
times the invested amount. The extension of project duration was accompanied by results of a larger number of
beneficiaries reached and an additional annual deforestation map developed, without additional costs. The
efficiency, thus, is rated substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                    0
 Appraisal                                                 0
                                                                                     Not Applicable
                                                                                    0
 ICR Estimate                                              0
                                                                                     Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The relevance of objectives was substantial, as the objectives aligned with the strategies of the government and
the World Bank’s assistance but the PDO formulation focused on outputs. The efficacy was substantial, as
achievements of two objectives were substantial and another objective was modest. The efficiency was
substantial based on the results of the ex-post cost benefit analysis. Overall, the outcome is rated satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Ownership and commitment risk: There was a potential risk that the commitment from the Federal
Government and involved institutions might not be sustained to maintain the institutional arrangements, the
monitoring systems, and the associated human capacity and costs (ICR, para 100). A continued awareness
and implementation of fire prevention and control that were demonstrated in selected National Parks might

                                                                                                   Page 10 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      BR-FIP: Cerrado Monioring Systems (P143185)



not be guaranteed after project closing (ICR, para 100). The potential risk was partially mitigated by the
country’s uniqueness. The institutions in the fields were highly developed and with expertise, supporting
them was not dependent on external aid and technical assistance (ICR, para 100).

Political risk: There was a potential risk that changes in the political leadership might negatively affect the
financial sustainability of the monitoring system of the Cerrado biome established under the project. To
mitigate the risk, the project widely provided data not only to the other projects under the Brazil Investment
Plan but also to the general public. There exists a high demand for the data produced by the monitoring
system of the Cerrado biome from broadcasting entities and the international community (TTL meeting). The
proven usefulness of the data might ensure the sufficient future financing for the system under possible
political turnovers.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The strategic relevance and approach were adequate in general, as described in section 3. The
  technical, institutional, and environmental and social aspects were well considered. Implementation
  arrangements were well-designed and a key element of project success. The risk assessment was
  adequate to identify and mitigate fiduciary risks related to the weak financial management mechanism in
  the implementing agency at appraisal. Components were adequately designed to achieve the PDO
  statement with the capacity of the implementing agencies. On the other hand, the output-focused PDO
  statement negatively affected the M&E arrangements, as described in section 9. The project design and
  preparation took more time than initially expected (ICR, para 93). The quality at entry, therefore, is rated
  satisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The supervision of fiduciary and safeguard aspects was adequate. The World Bank team maintained close
 communications with the grant recipients and implementing agencies through technical meetings and
 phone conferences and gave prompt support as needed. Joint meetings and other technical meetings in
 Brasília were crucial to integrate the various implementation agencies, identify emerging issues, and
 provide needed support. The risks associated with the high turnover of Financial Management Specialists
 at the World Bank were mitigated by adequate transition arrangements (ICR, para 95). On the other hand,
 the focus on development impact was not strong due to the output-focused PDO and the Results
 Framework. Because the other projects under the Brazil Investment Plan are still under implementation,
 outcome-level achievements of the Brazil Investment Plan are yet to be monitored and reported (TTL
 meeting). The quality of supervision, therefore, is rated satisfactory.



                                                                                                    Page 11 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BR-FIP: Cerrado Monioring Systems (P143185)



 Both the quality at entry and the quality of supervision was satisfactory; thus, the overall Bank performance
 is rated satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The M&E arrangements were well embedded institutionally. The MCTI provided M&E oversight to the
 project by establishing an independent technical evaluation group to review and assess the quality of
 intermediate products and reports and provide feedback to the Project Institutional Coordination Committee
 and the participating entities (ICR, para 82). The objectives in the PDO statement were clearly specified.
 On the other hand, the PDO formulation was not pitched at the right level, as described in section 3. The
 theory of change diagram in the ICR (figure 1, page 12) did not indicate outputs of the project. Instead, the
 theory of change diagram presented output-level results as outcomes. Both the PDO and Intermediate
 Results (IR) indicators in the Results Framework focused overly on measuring output-level results.



b. M&E Implementation
  All the indicators included in the Results Framework had baseline data and were measured and reported.
  Three IR indicators were revised as follows based on changes that occurred during project
  implementation. The IR indicator on independent reports on the quality of the project products was
  dropped due to the loss of relevance (PAD, page 17). The IR indicator on the number of conservation
  areas which piloted off-line fire ignition and spread risk model decreased its target from four to three due
  to high costs (human resources and time) to monitor the large geographic areas (ICR, page 40 and TTL
  meeting). The IR indicator on the number of annual deforestation maps publicly available increased its
  target due to the project extension (ICR, page 38). The MCTI and the independent technical evaluation
  group fulfilled their responsibilities on M&E oversight (ICR, para 83). The reliability and quality of M&E
  data were adequate. M&E functions and processes are likely to be sustained after project closing given
  that the whole project aimed to strengthen the monitoring capacity of the Cerrado biome by the
  government institutions. On the other hand, the output-oriented PDO statement and the Results
  Framework were not adequately adjusted during implementation. Some outcome-level results were
  verified by the endline evaluation at project closing, compensating the weakness of the Results
  Framework to a certain extent.



c. M&E Utilization


                                                                                                   Page 12 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BR-FIP: Cerrado Monioring Systems (P143185)



  The M&E findings were communicated to the stakeholders and used for annual project planning (ICR,
  para 86). Some positive shifts in the implementation direction of the project were attributable to findings
  of the Mid-term Review and follow-up actions. The M&E data and system developed under the project
  provided pertinent information on forest management, forest fire risks, and GHG emissions to the
  parallel and subsequent projects in BIP. On the other hand, focusing on this project itself, the M&E data
  mainly provided evidence of application of inputs or achievement of outputs under the project.

  The weaknesses in the M&E design were partially addressed during M&E implementation, resulting in
  the limited utilization of the M&E data. Endline evaluation of the project supplemented the Results
  Framework by providing additional evidence on outcomes. The M&E quality, therefore, is rated
  substantial.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Environmental Safeguards: The project was assigned a category C with no further requirements on
   environmental assessments (ICR, para 88). The project triggered policies on Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)
   and Forests (OP/BP 4.36) and generated positive impacts on protected areas in the Cerrado biome (ICR,
   para 88).

   No social safeguard policies were triggered throughout project implementation (PAD, para 39 and ICR, para
   89). No adverse social impacts were identified by the supervision team at project closing (ICR, para 89). No
   complaints were received through the Grievance Redress Mechanism during project implementation (ICR,
   para 92).




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management: The financial management arrangements including staffing, budgeting,
   accounting, internal control, funds flow, financial reporting, and auditing adhered to the standards required
   by the World Bank (ICR, para 90). The audit reports were received mostly in a timely manner with minor
   delays (ICR, para 90). The auditors expressed positive opinions on the financial reports and confirmed the
   project’s compliance with financial covenants (ICR, para 90). On the other hand, the project management
   unit’s mistake of classifying consultancy costs as operating costs had not been corrected since 2018,
   despite the action plans agreed during the supervision missions (ICR, para 90).

   Procurement: The risks concerning procurement function for the project identified in the PAD (page 43)
   were not fully mitigated by the risk mitigation measures, resulting in initial implementation delays due to the
   Research Development Foundation (FUNDEP: Fundação de Desenvolvimento da Pesquisa)’s unfamiliarity
   with the World Bank Group’s procurement procedures and insufficient technical capacity to identify


                                                                                                    Page 13 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BR-FIP: Cerrado Monioring Systems (P143185)



   required specifications of goods and equipment (ICR, para 91). The procurement capacity of FUNDEP
   gradually increased, especially in the last two years of project implementation (ICR, para 91).




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   No unintended impacts were reported by the ICR.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                               Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                   IEG
                                                                               Disagreements/Comment
                                                                               The relevance of objectives was
                                                                               substantial, as the objectives
                                                                               aligned with the strategies of the
                                                                               government and the World
                                                                               Bank’s assistance but the PDO
                                                                               formulation focused on outputs.
                                                                               The efficacy was substantial, as
Outcome                        Highly Satisfactory   Satisfactory
                                                                               achievements of two objectives
                                                                               were substantial and another
                                                                               objective was modest. The
                                                                               efficiency was substantial based
                                                                               on the results of the ex-post cost
                                                                               benefit analysis. Overall, the
                                                                               outcome is rated satisfactory.
Bank Performance               Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                 Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                 ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR (paras 101-107) presented five lessons. Three of them are presented below with
rephrasing because these lessons may be useful for future projects related to the biome-level
environmental monitoring.

Newly targeting the Cerrado savanna-forest biome is a necessary change from the prior
operations with nearly exclusive emphasis on the Amazon rainforest for reducing
deforestation and GHG emissions in Brazil. Progressively increasing recognition on the
importance of the Cerrado biome for the economy, biodiversity conservation, and adaptation and

                                                                                                 Page 14 of 16
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       BR-FIP: Cerrado Monioring Systems (P143185)



mitigation of climate change has expanded funded initiatives in the area. A more intentional focus on
addressing the issue of land-use change (Brazil’s primary source of GHG emissions) in both the
Amazon and the Cerrado is of paramount importance and would be a bold initiative to better account
for and reduce GHG emissions at the national and global levels.

The Project demonstrated the transformational potential of a tightly focused, science-based
project led by experienced, technically sound, and sophisticated institutions. INPE's solid
experience with activities like those of the Project but focused on the Amazon was a key advantage
in replicating that successful experience in the Cerrado biome, thereby minimizing uncertainty and
difficulties in implementation and delivery. The synergies between three executing institutions, INPE,
UFG and UFMG, enhanced and strengthened the development of the information systems,
datasets, and tools. The complementarity between the technical expertise of INPE and UFMG
enabled the development of information and first-of-its-kind modelling approaches (e.g., Fires risk,
fire spread forecasts). Improved estimation of GHG emissions for the Cerrado biome contributes to
enhanced global accountability of Brazil, considering its commitments in the context of the UNFCCC
and towards 2025. Developing and scaling up of monitoring and accountability systems for other
biomes of Brazil (which are incredibly vast and biologically diverse in nature) contribute to global
climate change efforts and deliver benefits beyond the national border. As an outcome, the Project
represents a persuasive argument for engaging in larger-scale environmental monitoring projects in
Brazil. This is especially so when the agencies demonstrate excellence and national capacity (even
in times of shifting government priorities and uncertain budgeting prospects), and when a disciplined
approach limits project scope to a set of essential, nationally proven, and well-integrated activities
that build upon the expertise of the agencies involved in implementation.

The systematic provision of better information systems is a cost-effective public investment
to pursue improved planning, response, and action on deforestation and fire risk. Access to
accurate data, information, technology, and forecasting knowledge represents a game-changer at
multiple levels within government and society, with the added value of increased awareness and
validation of results. The application of such monitoring and modelling systems is particularly
impactful when it is implemented to bridge the gap within institutional environments which are not
used to such technology systems to effectively engage complex coordination efforts to the benefit of
progressing its operations in office and field settings (e.g., local fire brigades, ICMBio, local
stakeholders). The TerraBrasilis platform allows institutional and public users anywhere in Brazil
(and abroad) to rapidly access deforestation information, analyze and verify it, and apply it to their
specific purpose. The development of a state-of-the-art fire risk ignition and spread probability
models is a major advance in the effort to control and prevent fires in the Cerrado biome with no
equivalent anywhere in the world. These results will require continued support and expansion
moving forward.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR


                                                                                                   Page 15 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BR-FIP: Cerrado Monioring Systems (P143185)



The ICR provides a detailed overview of the project. The narrative is supported by available evidence that was
collected from the project’s M&E system and the external evaluation. The ICR aimed to triangulate data to
reach conclusions where possible. The ICR’s lessons are responding to the specific experiences and findings
for the project. The quality of evidence and analysis is aligned to the messages outlined in the ICR. On the
other hand, the theory of change was brief and did not articulate the links between activities, outputs, and
outcomes. Orientation of the narrative to the theory of change was limited and constrained the broader
emphasis on essential transformations in the sector. Overall, the quality of ICR is rated substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                 Page 16 of 16
