     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Cote D'Ivoire COVID-19 Emergency DPO (P174110)



                                                                                Report Number: ICRR0023349

1. Operation Information



 Operation ID                             Operation Name
 P174110                                  Cote D'Ivoire COVID-19 Emergency DPO

 Country                                  Practice Area (Lead)
 Cote d'Ivoire                            Macroeconomics, Trade and Investment



 Non-Programmatic DPF

 L/C/TF Number(s)                         Closing Date (Original)                   Total Financing (USD)
 IDA-68310                                31-Dec-2021                                         300,345,840.00

 Bank Approval Date                       Closing Date (Actual)
 16-Feb-2021                              31-Dec-2021

                                          IBRD/IDA (USD)                               Co-financing (USD)

 Original Commitment                        300,000,000.00                                                0.00

 Revised Commitment                         300,000,000.00                                                0.00

 Actual                                     300,345,840.00                                                0.00




 Prepared by               Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 William F. Steel          Clay Wescott                 Jennifer L. Keller              IEGEC




2. Program Objectives and Pillars/Policy Areas
DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives

The Cote D'Ivoire COVID-19 Emergency Response and Recovery Development Policy Financing operation
(Cote D'Ivoire COVID-19 Emergency DPO) was a single-tranche standalone credit “designed to support the
Government in the response to the pandemic” (ICR, para. 1). The Program Development Objectives (PDOs)



                                                                                                 Page 1 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Cote D'Ivoire COVID-19 Emergency DPO (P174110)



were to: “(i) strengthen the COVID-19 emergency response; and (ii) promote sustained economic recovery”
(ICR, para 1; PD, para. 4.2.1).


b. Pillars/Policy Areas
The Program Document (PD) and Implementation Completion and Results Report (ICR) structured the
program around two pillars.

Pillar 1, to strengthen the COVID-19 emergency response, involved prior actions (PAs) “to support poor and
vulnerable households affected by COVID-19” through cash transfers (PA 1) and electricity consumption
subsidies (PA2), along with measures to ensure effective management, implementation, and oversight (PA 3).

Pillar 2, to promote sustained economic recovery, sought to “lay the foundations for a sustained recovery of
the private sector while ensuring that public resources dedicated to supporting these efforts are managed
transparently” (PD, para. 4.1.1) through measures to streamline the importation of medical equipment (PA 4),
support access to finance (especially for small- and medium-scale enterprises [SMEs]) through credit
guarantee and land titling (PAs 5 and 6), and enhance debt transparency and administration through monthly
reporting (PA 7).




c. Comments on Program Cost, Financing and Dates

The IDA credit of EUR 253.2 million (US$ 300 million equivalent) was a single-tranche operation based on seven
prior actions. It was approved on February 16, 2021, with US$ 300,345,840 fully disbursed by the intended
closing date of December 31, 2021.


3. Relevance of Design

a. Relevance of Objectives

 Before the 2020 coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic, Côte d’Ivoire had a strong record of economic growth
 (nearly 8.2 percent per year over 2012-19) and sound macroeconomic policies, enabling it to meet the
 convergence criteria of the West African Economic and Monetary Union (WAEMU) (ICR, para. 3). Poverty had
 declined from 44.4 percent in 2015 to 39.4 percent in 2018 (ICR, para. 5). However, “the pandemic led to a
 sharp economic downturn in 2020”: GDP per capita fell by 0.6 percent, and poverty increased to 43 percent
 (ICR, paras. 7-8). This severely impacted the budget and debt situation. Domestic resource mobilization
 capacity was already limited (ICR, para. 4). World Bank support was warranted to help finance “a large-scale
 emergency response plan worth 1.5 percent of GDP” (ICR, para. 9). The plan included substantial financial
 relief to poor and vulnerable households, funds for enterprises (small, large and state), and “measures to
 ensure transparency and accountability” (ICR, para. 9).

 The objectives were appropriate to minimize the negative impact on Côte d’Ivoire’s long-term strategic
 commitment to poverty reduction and private sector-led development (PPAR for First, Second, and Third
 Poverty Reduction Support Credits [PRSCs]). Following disbursements in 2020 from an arrangement under

                                                                                                  Page 2 of 16
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Cote D'Ivoire COVID-19 Emergency DPO (P174110)



the IMF's Rapid Credit Facility/Rapid Financing Instrument and previously planned World Bank development
policy financing, “the government requested further World Bank support to bridge the financing gap and
prevent the country from falling into an economic, social and health crisis” and “to reinforce the nascent
structural economic change by promoting private sector led-growth despite the crisis” (ICR, paras. 10-11).

While broadly aligned with the country’s 2016-20 National Development Plan (NDP), to cope with the
pandemic situation, the economic response package made some relevant modifications to cushion the
poverty impact and prepare for a return to growth. These included “well-targeted direct cash transfers and in-
kind support [that] have helped save lives, preserve savings, and build up resilience to the shock while
preventing those households from sliding into (deeper) poverty” and “lightening fiscal pressure, and providing
emergency access to finance” to enterprises (PD, para. 3.3).

The operation was relevant to preserving and carrying forward the progress of the Poverty Reduction Support
DPOs (2016-18), whose lessons included “the importance of (i) fostering inclusive growth and better social
services delivery; (ii) sound and transparent fiscal management good practices; and (iii) balancing well the
Government’s capacity to rapidly implement key reforms in the context of the current pressure and urgency of
a crisis” (ICR, para. 60; PPAR). In particular, PAs supported key priorities of the Country Partnership
Framework (CPF) for FYs 16-19 in the areas of social cohesion, private sector-led growth, and public financial
management (PFM) (ICR, para. 13). The electricity subsidies to households under the social tariff indirectly
complemented the IDA-supported debt restructuring of the energy sector (CI-Energies-P164145; ICR, paras.
13 and 27).

Table 1. Objectives and Prior Actions (PAs) for Cote D'Ivoire COVID-19 Emergency DPO

Objective 1: Strengthen the COVID-19 emergency response
PA 1: To support poor and vulnerable households affected by COVID-19 with a strengthened social
protection system that quickly and reliably targets and ensures adequate coverage, the Recipient
has adopted an interministerial arrêté, and the Solidarity Fund Management Committee has
published an implementation plan/methodology of said arrêté that prioritizes cash transfers to
eligible households over other types of transfers, defines the principles of the methodology for
identifying and prioritizing eligible households, and a mechanism for registering beneficiary
households in the Single Social Register.
PA 2: To protect poor households affected by COVID-19, the Recipient has financed, through a
budget subsidy for a period of two months, the electricity consumption of the most vulnerable
households subscribing to the social tariff.
PA 3: To ensure appropriate traceability, efficiency, transparency and control in the management of
the COVID-19 special funds, the Recipient has adopted inter-ministerial arrêtés defining for each
emergency fund: (i) mechanisms for managing cash flow and the flow of funds in Resources and
Uses; (ii) simplified disbursement procedures; (iii) mechanisms for accounting for operations and
publication of periodic reports; and (iv) provisions for internal control and audit.
PA 4:* To facilitate access to medical equipment in response to the COVID-19 crisis, and to
alleviate the tax burden on companies, the Recipient has adopted circulars to approve for a period
of three months: (i) an exemption from payment of VAT and customs duties on products used in the
prevention and treatment of COVID-19; (ii) a simplification of customs procedures for the
importation of logistical materials, medicines, and medical devices; (iii) an extension of the
deadlines for the declaration and payment of taxes and duties by companies; and (iv) the
simplification of the procedure for reimbursement of VAT credits.
Objective 2: Promote sustained economic recovery

                                                                                                  Page 3 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Cote D'Ivoire COVID-19 Emergency DPO (P174110)



 PA 5: To mitigate immediate and medium-term liquidity challenges faced by SMEs, the Recipient’s
 Council of Ministers adopted a decree on July 8, 2020 creating a Credit Guarantee Fund for SMEs
 that adheres to international good practices.
 PA 6: To simplify the land titling process, improve land tenure security, and facilitate economic
 recovery through access to financing, the Recipient has adopted an inter-ministerial arrêté defining
 how to generate, manage, and apply the Unique Land Identifier (IDUF) in order to institute a unique
 identification number to be assigned to every plot of land regardless of its legal nature.
 PA 7: To improve debt transparency and administration, the Recipient has: (i) published on the MEF
 website a post-COVID-19 2020 annual debt plan consistent with its medium-term debt strategy; and
 (ii) adopted inter-ministerial arrêtés committing it to publish monthly reports on the operations of the
 four Emergency Funds, including a breakdown of beneficiary companies on the MEF website.

Source: ICR, Table 7.

*Note: While PA4 appears as a prior action in Pillar 2 (promoting sustained economic recovery) in the Program
Document, and as discussed in section 3b, the nature of the actions relates more closely to the objectives of
Pillar 1 (strengthening the COVID-19 emergency response)


b. Relevance of Prior Actions

Rationale

The prior actions were reasonably limited in number (seven PAs with a total of 14 sub-actions) and scope, as
appropriate for an operation with an 18-month time horizon between decision review and closing. The actions
carried through on objectives and measures of previous operations. However, some sub-actions did not
correspond to the PDO under which the PA was listed. Although the PD didn’t present an explicit theory of
change, the measures generally aimed at cushioning the negative impacts of the pandemic and the associated
economic downturn. While the actions related to enhancing access to finance (credit guarantee fund and land
titling) were meaningful steps, the World Bank could have better articulated the rest of the results chain to
indicate the future steps and support that would be needed to actually achieve the intended results and
objective[GC1] [WS2] . Measures to improve debt transparency addressed generic more than country-specific
problems.

Objective 1: Strengthen the COVID-19 emergency response

PA 1 (interministerial arrêté and implementation plan that prioritizes cash transfers to eligible households,
defines the principles of the methodology, and a mechanism for registering beneficiary households in the Single
Social Register) directly addressed the negative impact of the pandemic on the livelihoods of the poor and
vulnerable by expanding the safety net, based on a theory of change that prioritizes targeted cash transfers for
immediate relief while building the social register to strengthen the social protection system (as stated in the
ICR, para. 43, though not in the PD). The PA included measures to define the methodology (including targeting)
and a monitoring mechanism, representing an implicit results chain. Rating: Satisfactory.

PA 2 (budget subsidy for a period of two months for the electricity consumption of the most vulnerable
households subscribing to the social tariff) directly addressed a critical expenditure that many poor households
[cw1] could not afford in the wake of Covid shut-downs while simultaneously minimizing associated financial


                                                                                                      Page 4 of 16
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Cote D'Ivoire COVID-19 Emergency DPO (P174110)



difficulties for the energy sector. Vulnerable households were defined as those “subscribing to the basic
electricity tariff for less than 100 kWh consumption per month” (PD, para. 4.2.10). The expected impact on
households and the electricity company was direct and clear. Rating: Satisfactory.

PA 3 (interministerial arrêté for each emergency fund defining: i. mechanisms for managing cash flows and the
flow of funds in resources and uses; ii. simplified disbursement procedures; iii. mechanisms for accounting for
operations and publication of periodic reports; and iv. provisions for internal control and audit) was well
designed “to ensure appropriate traceability, efficiency, transparency, and control in the management of the
COVID-19 special funds” that the government had set up as part of its emergency response program. It was
relevant to implementing PFM directives under WAEMU and the strategic framework for PFM reform initiated
under the PRSC DPO series (PPAR, p. 50). The World Bank considered these measures important to “pave the
way for effective ex-post audits” and “ensure that the funds meet their targets” (ICR, para. 28). Rating:
Satisfactory.

PA 4 (to facilitate access to medical equipment in response to the COVID-19 crisis and to alleviate the tax
burden on companies, the Recipient has adopted circulars to approve for a period of three months: i. an
exemption from payment of VAT and customs duties on products used in the prevention and treatment of
COVID-19; ii. a simplification of customs procedures for the importation of logistical materials, medicines, and
medical devices; iii. an extension of the deadlines for the declaration and payment of taxes and duties by
companies; and iv. the simplification of the procedure for reimbursement of VAT credits) was considered critical
for the rapid implementation of the health response to Covid-19 by relieving constraints on the importation of
needed medical equipment, as well as providing relief to companies that were adversely affected by the
economic downturn. Hence IEG has placed it under PDO1 rather than PDO2 (as in the PD and ICR); clearer
separation of actions by objective is preferable. Complex and lengthy customs procedures tended to slow the
delivery of essential medical equipment and constituted an undue burden on businesses. These constraints
were addressed directly through measures to exempt critical imports and facilitate liquidity to businesses
(through VAT reimbursements), which would also contribute to PDO2. Rating: Satisfactory.

Objective 2: Promote sustained economic recovery

PA 5 (the Council of Ministers adopted a decree on July 8, 2020, creating a Credit Guarantee Fund for SMEs
that adheres to international good practices) was intended to address access to finance by SMEs, which “was
perceived as one of the top four barriers to private sector led-growth” (according to a survey for the 2020
Country Private Sector Diagnostic; ICR, para. 31). However, the ICR (para. 32) observes that the Fund was
inappropriately located in the SME Ministry, whereas other neighboring countries (e.g., Senegal, Mali, Niger,
Guinea) typically locate such agencies in the ministry in charge of finance. While the TTL has stated that “the
Ministry of SMEs would have relied on the recommendations of the Phoenix strategy for the implementation of
the Guarantee Fund,” it is questionable whether a consultant’s report would be sufficient for a ministry lacking
relevant financial experience to deal with the range of issues that would arise in establishing and implementing
a financial agency. Furthermore, it served only solvent, creditworthy businesses, so did not address firms that
were near closure due to the pandemic or were established after 2018. Although the time required to
operationalize a new guarantee fund limited the likely contribution of this action to PDO1, a partial guarantee
fund is a desirable component of improving the institutional framework for access to finance. Rating: Moderately
Satisfactory.

PA 6 (the Recipient has adopted an inter-ministerial arrêté defining how to generate, manage, and apply the
Unique Land Identifier [IDUF] in order to institute a unique identification number to be assigned to every plot of
land regardless of its legal nature) was critical to simplify the land titling process as an important step toward


                                                                                                     Page 5 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Cote D'Ivoire COVID-19 Emergency DPO (P174110)



 the intended results of improving land tenure security and facilitating collateral that borrowers could use to
 access finance. The arrêté addressed the constraint of cumbersome procedures needed to obtain a permanent
 concession certificate by setting forth “the new characteristics, management system, and operational
 procedures” to link “spatial and textual data from the land registry office” to the IDUF, with the expected results
 of “reducing the processing time to obtain land property titles, the number of land disputes…and issues such as
 multiple files for the same plot” (PD, para. 4.2.33). While these results would only be realizable over time, the
 PA focused on what could be manageable within a limited time frame as a step in the desired direction. Rating:
 Satisfactory.

 PA 7 (the Recipient has: i. published on the MEF website a post-COVID-19 2020 annual debt plan consistent
 with its medium-term debt strategy; and ii. adopted inter-ministerial arrêtés committing it to publish monthly
 reports on the operations of the four Emergency Funds, including a breakdown of beneficiary companies on the
 MEF website) was aimed at improving debt transparency and management, consistent with measures under
 the PRSC DPOs and other operations in support of the long-term objective of improving PFM and meeting
 WAEMU guidelines. While the PD (para. 2.2.6) stated that "CIV’s debt management practices have improved in
 recent years,” it also identified some weaknesses (para.4.2.36): “ABP have never been published, and there
 are frequent deviations;” and “debt documents, including emergency-related execution reports or ABPs are
 frequently not published.” Sub-action (i) mainly aimed to continue on-going measures to improve long-term debt
 transparency and debt management. Sub-action (ii) to ensure adequate oversight of the emergency funds was
 related more to PDO1. Rating: Moderately Satisfactory.



Rating

Satisfactory


4. Relevance of Results Indicators

Rationale

The DPO used eight results indicators (RIs) to track the impact of the eight PAs in making progress
toward the objectives. The RIs were relevant to the proposed actions but, in some cases, were insufficient
to capture the achievement of the intended results of those actions. As noted by the ICR (para. 35), “some
prior actions could have benefited from a refinement or breakdown of the result indicators to reflect better
the achievements” (ICR, para. 35), because not all of the 14 sub-actions supported results that were
captured by the eight RIs. Given the short time frame of the operation, the RIs tended to focus on
implementing specific actions rather than achieving the ultimate intended outcomes. The PD did not
explicitly articulate results chains leading to outcomes, although the impact was direct for those actions
involving subsidies. The baseline was nil in most cases, with data generally available.

 Table 2: Results indicators by Objective and PAs; baseline and target values; status and
 achievement
   Results indicator (RI) Asso-     RI    Baseline Target      Actual     Actual as    RI
                           ciated                                           % of    Achieve-
                            PAs Rele- (2019)        (2021)      (2021)    targeted    ment
                                  vance                                    change    rating

                                                                                                     Page 6 of 16
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Cote D'Ivoire COVID-19 Emergency DPO (P174110)



                                                                   2022
Objective 1: Strengthen the COVID-19 emergency response
        RI 1: Number of
   household beneficiaries
       from the Solidarity
                                                                   (331,055)
        Emergency Fund
                                 PA 1     S       0      200,000                216%         H
             (including
                                                                   431,930*
   women, female-headed
  households and climate-
  vulnerable households).*
        RI 2: Number of
 households of women and
                                                          90,000   (108,000)
 female-headed household
                                 PA 1     S       0                             199%         H
     beneficiaries from the
                                                         (refined)  179,145
     Solidarity Emergency
                Fund.
        RI 3: Number of                                 1,052,749
   households temporarily
  benefiting from a budget PA 2          MS       0      (revised (1,052,749) 100%           H
  subsidy to their electricity                             from
     bill at the social tariff.                        1,600,000)
     RI 4: Number of audit
   reports prepared for the PA 3          S       0           4        (5)      125%         H
    four Emergency Funds
 RI 5: Average VAT refund
                                                                      (60)   60% of the
      payment period for
                                 PA4     MS    30 days       15                targeted     M
    businesses (including -
                                                                       21     reduction
              medical)
                           Objective 2: Promote sustained economic recovery                       *RI 2
        RI 6: Number of                                                (0)                        is
     guarantees to SMEs          PA5     MS       0         100                  34%        M     listed
 granted by the PCG Fund.                                              34                         in the
     RI 7: Average time to                                           (160)      57% of            ICR as
  obtain land titles (number PA 6        MU      160         90                targeted     M     a sub-
              of days)                                                120     reduction
   RI 8: Number of reports
    on the four Emergency
   Funds published on the
                                 PA7     MS       0           6        27       450%         H
   MEF website, including
  the list of firms benefiting
 from the emergency fund.
indicator for the women and female-headed households targeted by PA 1. The PD (para. 4.2.5) also
targeted 10,000 climate-vulnerable households, but the data did not permit separating them, and the ICR
omitted the implicit sub-indicator.

Objective 1: Strengthen the COVID-19 emergency response


                                                                                               Page 7 of 16
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Cote D'Ivoire COVID-19 Emergency DPO (P174110)



RI 1 (number of household beneficiaries from the Solidarity Emergency Fund, including 10,000 female
and climate-vulnerable households) and RI 2 (number of households of women and female-headed
household beneficiaries from the Solidarity Emergency Fund) were adequate to measure the objective of
alleviating the financial impact of the pandemic on poor and vulnerable households, especially women.
However, it did not capture the adequacy of the benefit, and the government could not identify climate-
vulnerable households using the available data. Ratings: RI 1 Moderately Satisfactory; RI 2 Satisfactory.

RI 3 (the number of households temporarily benefiting from a budget subsidy to their electricity bill at the
social tariff) was adequate to measure the objective of relieving poor households from the burden of
paying for electricity for two months (and the additional result of cushioning the financial impact on the
electricity company), although it did not measure the extent to which the value of the subsidy cushioned
the budgets of the poor and was sufficient to contribute to the objective. The initial target was arbitrarily
set “higher than the total number of affected households recorded by the Ministry of Energy at that time,”
and the World Bank revised it to the actual number once this was available (ICR, para. 41). Rating:
Moderately Satisfactory.

RI 4 (number of audit reports prepared for the four Emergency Funds) tracked whether measures under
PA4 were implemented, as a step toward the objective of effective financial management of the
emergency response and hence the objective of strengthening the institutional framework. The target of
one report for each fund was appropriate for the time period of the operation, although it did not capture
budget performance of the adequacy of the content of such reports. Rating: Satisfactory.

RI 5 (average VAT refund payment period for businesses, including medical) was reasonable to measure
the impact of the PA’s exemptions and simplifications for VAT and customs duties on timing, though it did
not capture the extent to which firms’ liquidity improved as a result. This indicator broadly covered all VAT
refunds, although the associated PA focused only on medical and health-related imports. Hence it was
more appropriate to measuring the extent of improvement in firms’ liquidity in support of sustained
recovery than the availability of medical and related equipment, which was the focus of several sub-
actions under PA4. Rating: Moderately Satisfactory.

Objective 2: Promote sustained economic recovery

RI 6 (number of guarantees to SMEs granted by the PCG Fund) was a direct indicator of the
implementation of PA 5 but not of progress toward an intermediate objective of increased access to
finance by SMEs, since issuing a guarantee enables but does not necessarily result in a loan. The target
of 100 was clear, but did not take into account the time frame needed to establish and implement a new
fund (especially by a ministry that lacked experience in this area). Rating: Moderately satisfactory.

RI 7 (average time to obtain land titles) was relevant to implementing PA6 and the objective of sustaining
economic recovery by reducing the cost and time for new investment. Still, the results chain to achieving
the desired result of increased access to finance by enterprises for such investment was lengthy and not
articulated. While the implementation of the IDUF could facilitate faster issuance of land titles, a
complementary indicator could usefully have tracked the extent to which titles led to increased (as well as
faster) lending to enterprises in support of investment for sustained growth. Given the limited time frame,
the indicator did not fully consider “the complexity of the land issue in Côte d’Ivoire” (ICR, para. 41) and
the link to increased finance becoming available. The ICR team reported difficulty verifying the data (ICR,
para. 39). Rating: Moderately unsatisfactory.



                                                                                                      Page 8 of 16
                   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                   Cote D'Ivoire COVID-19 Emergency DPO (P174110)



               RI 8 (number of reports on the four Emergency Funds published on the MEF website, including the list of
               firms benefiting from the emergency fund) was appropriate for effective monitoring and oversight of the
               emergency program. Although directly relevant to the sub-objective stated in the PD (p. 33) of improving
               debt management and transparency, it was thereby only indirectly related to the operation’s objective of
               sustainable economic recovery (presumably on the basis that transparency would help ensure continued
               funding). The PA, and hence the RI, could usefully have specified listing the amounts given as well as the
               names of beneficiary firms. The data was readily available. Rating: Moderately satisfactory.



   Rating

   Moderately Satisfactory

   5. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
EFFICACY_TBL




                OBJECTIVE 1
                Objective
                Strengthen the COVID-19 emergency response

                Rationale
                Four RI targets were relevant and fully achieved or exceeded by the close of the operation, with the
                associated actions satisfactory and considered successful in achieving the objective of targeted short-term
                relief to poor and vulnerable households. One RI target related to the time for VAT refund payments was only
                modestly achieved.

                The direct cash transfer approach proved highly effective in quickly reaching double or more the targeted
                number of both total households (RI 1) and women plus female-headed households (RI 2), although the
                impact on those affected by climate change was not captured. “A significant share of the beneficiaries
                comprised employees who lost their jobs” (ICR, para. 43), who otherwise would likely have fallen into poverty.
                Furthermore, the action supported institution-building to enhance the safety net by establishing “a clear
                mechanism for their identification and accounting in the single social register” (ICR, para. 43).

                The government alleviated budgetary stress on the poorest households through the two-month electricity
                consumption subsidy for the more than one million households already qualified for the social tariff (RI 3).
                This action also helped alleviate financial stress on the electricity company.

                Audits of the four emergency funds that the government had established as part of its Covid-19 emergency
                response plan were successfully carried out and “pinpointed and helped remedy weaknesses in the system
                and the initial operations” (ICR, para.44). Besides the audits carried out by the Inspectorate General of
                Finance, an audit firm selected through a public bidding process did an additional audit, and further audits of
                the 2021 operations were underway as of the ICR.

                The time for a VAT refund payment (RI 5) worsened considerably during 2021 (from 30 to 60 days) due to a
                surge in total requests covering all imports (although imports of medical equipment may have benefited from
                the exemption, the indicator did not separate them). Nevertheless, the government took actions under the



                                                                                                                   Page 9 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Cote D'Ivoire COVID-19 Emergency DPO (P174110)



Sustainable Development Finance Policy to implement an automated mechanism, which helped to achieve
60 percent of the targeted reduction by the time of the ICR in 2022 (ICR, para. 47).



Rating

Satisfactory

OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Promote sustained economic recovery

Rationale
Two RIs were relevant to the objectives, but the land title indicator was moderately unsatisfactory in terms of
relevance. One of the two relevant RIs (the reporting indicator) under Objective 2 made substantial progress
toward their target by the closing date, while the other only made modest progress. The indicators focused on
initial steps to lay the groundwork to facilitate access of enterprises to finance; there were no indicators as to
whether subsequent outcomes on the (implicit) results chain toward economic recovery were being achieved,
and it was difficult to attribute subsequent progress to the DPO.

“The partial guarantee fund for SMEs [RI 6] was not operational in 2021 due to unmet necessary
requirements…[and] the lack of expertise in the management of such a financial instrument by the SME
ministry…as well as banking conditions” and stringent eligibility criteria (ICR, para. 48). Furthermore,
restructuring of the agency stalled disbursement of its capital funds from the Bank and IFC. Although 34
SMEs had received guarantees by the time of the ICR, the ICR presented no evidence as to whether this
contributed to actual financing that would support the objective of investment for sustained economic
recovery.

There was no progress on the time to obtain land titles (RI 7) during the period of the operation “because of
lack of transparency, lack of appropriate governance, poor communication, and coordination” and lack of
financial resources for implementation (ICR, para. 50). Technical support from the IFC helped to yield modest
progress by the time of the ICR, and further implementation is to be supported by the Competitive Value
Chains for Employment and Economic Transformation Project. Nevertheless, how effectively this would
contribute to the objective of sustained economic recovery remains unclear.

The regular publication of reports on the four emergency funds (RI 8) was a positive step toward sustaining
the practice of publishing monthly operational reports “within 45 days of the end of that month since 2020,”
indicating that the government has maintained and institutionalized this transparent aspect of debt
administration.



Rating

Moderately Satisfactory



                                                                                                   Page 10 of 16
                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                    Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                      Cote D'Ivoire COVID-19 Emergency DPO (P174110)



OVERALL EFF TBL OLD




Overall Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
Rationale

Objective 1 is rated Satisfactory, and Objective 2 is Moderately Satisfactory (due to improvement over the
unsatisfactory achievement as of the closing date). Overall achievement is rounded upward to Satisfactory, with
five targets fully met or exceeded and three with modest achievement as of the ICR review.



Overall Efficacy Rating
Satisfactory


      6. Outcome

      Rationale

      The relevance of prior actions and efficacy are both rated Satisfactory.


      a. Rating

      Satisfactory

      7. Risk to Development Outcome

      Slow economic recovery from pandemic shut-downs could undermine the effectiveness of the short-term
      subsidies of the COVID-19 Emergency DPO in preventing people from falling (deeper) into poverty.
      Fortunately, “the Ivorian economy continues to show signs of resilience to the pandemic and a sustained
      recovery in 2021” (IMF Press Release No. 25/22). The cash transfers and electricity subsidies were time-
      bound stop-gap measures, but slow recovery could generate political pressure to extend them in ways that
      could not fiscally be sustained. Maintaining economic recovery, including improving domestic resource
      mobilization, is the focus of ongoing IMF and World Bank support for Côte d’Ivoire.

      Economic shocks represent a continuing threat to sustained economic recovery. These could include rising
      inflation, debt distress, and future pandemics. The COVID-19 Emergency DPO made some important steps
      toward strengthening Côte d’Ivoire’s safety net, but its “social protection architecture lacks a clear strategy
      for providing beneficiaries with a path out of poverty” (ICR, para. 66). Current efforts to implement the single
      social register, national ID and IDUF are steps toward strengthening social safety nets and institutionalizing
      positive steps initiated under the COVID-19 Emergency DPO. Likewise, the Competitive Value Chains for
      Jobs and Economic Transformation Project includes a contingency emergency response component to help
      cope with natural disasters and emergencies. The ICR (para. 65) notes that “continued efforts to improve
      health capacity and crisis management mechanisms, access to universal health coverage, and quality of
      services will be essential.”



                                                                                                           Page 11 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Cote D'Ivoire COVID-19 Emergency DPO (P174110)



Failure to follow through on measures initiated or supported under the emergency response (e.g., single
social register, IDUF) would compromise the effectiveness of the operation in paving the way toward the
resumption of sustained growth. To carry forward the reforms and institution-building, the World Bank is
preparing a new Investment for Growth DPF series, “aiming at (1) strengthening the foundations for private
and public investment; (2) improving the quality of investment in human capital; and (3) promoting
sustainable investment in face of climate change” (ICR, para. 74).


8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Bank Performance – Design

Rationale


The design of the operation explicitly drew on prior experience and lessons, as well as consultations with
key development partners. The PD identified major risks, and the operation itself was an important
mitigating measure.

Lessons from prior experience

The design and selection of reforms explicitly drew on “lessons from the previous DPF series[cw1] ,
including the importance of (i) fostering inclusive growth and better social services delivery; (ii) sound and
transparent fiscal management good practices; and (iii) balancing well the Government’s capacity to
implement key reforms rapidly” (PD, para. 4.1.2). PAs “were designed to leverage the progress achieved in
previous operations” (ibid.). The World Bank designed short-term relief measures along the lines of its
coronavirus (COVID-19) approach paper “Saving Lives, Increasing Impact, and Getting Back on Track”
and other World Bank policy notes relating to the pandemic (ICR, para. 13 and Table 7). Other analytical
underpinnings included IMF technical reports and blog, and the WBG’s extended FY 16-19 CPF, 2020
CPSD and the 2015 Principes applicables aux mécanismes publics de garantie de crédit dédiés aux PME
(ICR, para. 13 and Table 7).

Results chain

The chain (“theory of change”) linking actions to results was generally implicit rather than laid out. For
short-term transfers and subsidies, the result of alleviating financial stress was direct and immediate and
did not require a chain of intermediate steps. But for measures intended to lay the groundwork for
increased access to finance by enterprises, an explicit results chain specifying the further steps needed to
realize the desired outcome would have been useful.

Risk identification and mitigation

The PD (section 6) identified substantial risks in several areas: political, governance, macroeconomic and
social. The Bank intended the COVID-19 emergency program (supported by the DPO) to mitigate these
risks through prompt measures to deal with the pandemic and its effects on the economy and society. The
Bank intended domestic dialogue under the Prime Minister and monitoring in collaboration with



                                                                                                    Page 12 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Cote D'Ivoire COVID-19 Emergency DPO (P174110)



development partners to help mitigate and deal with these risks (PD, para. 6.2). The operation included
measures for transparency and monitoring to help mitigate risks involved in debt management.

Stakeholder consultation and coordination with Development Partners

While the urgent nature of the emergency response forestalled substantial prior consultation on the design
of the operation, the PD (para. 6.4) asserted that “CIV has permanent fully consultative processes with the
public sector, the private sector, civil society, and development partners.” The IFC was directly involved in
the preparation of the operation. The IMF was “involved in continuous discussions throughout the year on
the overall size and structure of the crisis response package” (ICR, para. 61). Furthermore, “the country
developed its health sector response in cooperation with the World Health Organization (WHO) and the
leading development partners in the health sector” (ICR, para. 61).



Rating

Satisfactory

b. Bank Performance – Implementation

Rationale

Monitoring

The RIs were generally adequate to monitor the implementation of this short-term operation. However, there
was no explicit monitoring of whether the institution-building actions led to the intended results (e.g.,
increased access to finance by SMEs).

Adaptation

As a single operation rather than a series, there was little opportunity for observing weaknesses and adapting
accordingly. Nonetheless, there was sufficient response to institutional problems implementing the partial
credit guarantee fund and the unique land identifier that the World Bank addressed the failure to achieve any
progress during the period of the operation in time to realize partial progress by the time of the ICR.

Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

c. Overall Bank Performance

Rationale




                                                                                                    Page 13 of 16
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Cote D'Ivoire COVID-19 Emergency DPO (P174110)



Design is rated Satisfactory and implementation Moderately Satisfactory. The overall rating is weighted toward
the former because the design is the most critical aspect of a one-year operation, and there is little scope for
adjustment during the implementation


Overall Bank Performance Rating

Satisfactory

9. Other Impacts

a. Social and Poverty

It is too early for evidence to be available on anticipated social and poverty impacts.



b. Environmental

Environmental implications were negligible, and it is too early for evidence to be available.



c. Gender

The operation targeted women and female-headed households for emergency cash transfers and substantially
exceeded the target. The project also promoted the implementation of a single social register. Still, the ICR
presented no evidence of whether that is having longer-term positive effects on the inclusion of women in safety
nets.



d. Other

N.a.




10. Quality of ICR

Rationale

The ICR provides a coherent narrative of the operation's context, rationale, design, and results. It reviews Côte
d’Ivoire’s successful pre-pandemic track record, the negative impacts of the crisis, and the government’s
emergency plan to address it as justification for the Bank’s support. In the absence of an explicit results chain, it
attempts to articulate an implicit theory of change in some cases (paras. 43 and 46). Reviewing the PAs and

                                                                                                      Page 14 of 16
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Cote D'Ivoire COVID-19 Emergency DPO (P174110)



RIs indicates where there was scope for improvement (e.g., paras. 32, 37, and 38). The ICR team based the
assessment on a thorough review of the available data, which the ICR team tried to verify (paras. 39-40). It
attempted to draw relevant lessons regarding measures to prepare for and cope with crises (paras. 69-73). The
presentation is clear and conforms to the guidelines.



a. Rating

High

11. Ratings
                                                                               Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                     IEG
                                                                               Disagreement/Comments
                                                                               The ICR weighted non-
                                                                               achievement of two targets as of
                                                                               completion (2021), whereas the
                                                                               ICRR uses subsequent 2022
                                                                               data to yield Modest
                                Moderately
Outcome                                              Satisfactory              achievement for those two
                                Satisfactory
                                                                               targets, and rounds the Efficacy
                                                                               rating upward, with five targets
                                                                               fully met or exceeded and three
                                                                               with modest achievement as of
                                                                               the ICR review.
Bank Performance                Satisfactory         Satisfactory
Relevance of Results
                                ---                  Moderately Satisfactory
Indicators
Quality of ICR                  ---                  High


12. Lessons

Cash transfers and subsidies can be highly effective in preserving gains in poverty reduction by cushioning
the effects of a crisis on the poor and vulnerable. The government reached more than the targeted beneficiaries
with cash transfers and electricity subsidies. However, this requires adequate social safety net mechanisms
before crises. The emergency response's success was largely due to “the development of social safety net
projects and the successful management of the Ebola outbreak before COVID-19” (ICR, para. 69).

Likewise, effective crisis management depends on creating adequate policy space during non-crisis
times (ICR, para. 69). Côte d’Ivoire’s sound macroeconomic and fiscal policies before the pandemic enabled
“significant deployment of fiscal policy during the crisis while preserving the overall sustainability of the
economy,” as well as warranting quick response by development partners to urgent needs for emergency
funding. Prior relationships between the World Bank and certain counterpart agencies may have helped explain
why some actions proved more effective than others [awaiting further information from TTL].


                                                                                                 Page 15 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Cote D'Ivoire COVID-19 Emergency DPO (P174110)



Institution-building measures under an emergency program require a clear results chain laying out
subsequent steps to promote a return to sustained growth effectively. While the DPO appropriately took
advantage of the crisis to support reforms that could lead to longer-term positive impacts, the intended outcome
was too remote from these “inputs” to be able to attribute success in the absence of a clear series of steps to
achieve the results. While RIs for an emergency response operation have to focus on the short-term
implementation of limited policy actions, it would be useful also to suggest indicators that could subsequently be
used to assess whether further intermediate steps and intended results were being achieved.


13. Project Performance Assessment Report (PPAR) Recommended?

No




                                                                                                    Page 16 of 16
