     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Nuton Jibon Livelihood Improv. Project (P149605)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0023123

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P149605                                     Nuton Jibon Livelihood Improv. Project

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Bangladesh                                  Agriculture and Food


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-55940                                   30-Jun-2021                                        192,620,994.54

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 18-Mar-2015                                 30-Jun-2021

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            200,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                             199,998,698.09                                              0.00

 Actual                                         192,620,994.54                                              0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Hassan Wally                Christopher David             Christopher David Nelson       IEGSD (Unit 4)
                             Nelson




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) of the Nuton Jibon Livelihood Improvement Project (NJLIP) as
   articulated in the Financing Agreement (page 5) was identical to the one in the Project Appraisal Document
   (PAD, paragraph 9) and aimed to:

   "improve the livelihoods of the poor and extreme poor in the project areas."



                                                                                                   Page 1 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Nuton Jibon Livelihood Improv. Project (P149605)



   Parsing the PDO. The PDO will be parsed based on one objective:

   Objective 1: To improve the livelihoods of the poor and extreme poor in the project areas.




b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The PDO was supported by the following three components:

   1. Community Institutions and Livelihood Development (appraisal cost: US$173.70 million, actual
   cost: US$169.69 million). This component would mobilize the poor and extreme poor in selected rural
   communities by building and strengthening beneficiary community institutions; provide funding for small
   infrastructure and livelihood support for project beneficiaries; and provide nutrition awareness and
   agricultural production knowledge. It included the following three sub-components:

   1.1. Development and Strengthening of Community Organizations. This sub-component would
   provide the support needed to build institutions of the poor in the selected villages and subsequently
   support the strengthening and operation of these institutions. The project would largely maintain the
   procedures of organization, empowerment, planning and implementation of subprojects as per the
   procedures established under the Social Investment Program Project II (SIPP-II).

   1.2. Financing of Community Plans. Community plans would be financed through a village
   development fund. The village development fund consisted of three sub-funds (i) the Institutional
   Development Fund (IDF) which is largely supporting the establishment and capacity building of the
   community groups; (ii) Community Financing - the Shabolombi Fund (SF) - that operates as a revolving
   fund to provide loans to beneficiaries for livelihood/income generating activities; and (iii) the Community
   Infrastructure Support Fund (CISF) that funds prioritized small community infrastructure in support of
   improved livelihoods. The overall strategy for community financing would comprise two main sets of
   activities: (a) Strengthening the nascent community level financing institutions as they progressively
   become mature; and (b) Strengthening the Village Credit Organization (VCO) Sub-committees in the
   Second-Tier Institutions.

   1.3. Nutrition Awareness and Support. This sub-component would aim to raise awareness, improve
   attitudes and practices that enhance nutritional outcomes for targeted beneficiaries in selected project areas
   and that support beneficiaries in optimizing their livelihood activities. Increased household income was not
   necessarily translating into improved nutritional outcomes and therefore could only partially address the
   under-, and mal-nutrition challenges in Bangladesh. Activities proposed under the project would focus on
   awareness building, behavioral change for personal hygiene, food preparation, food choices and

                                                                                                     Page 2 of 20
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  Nuton Jibon Livelihood Improv. Project (P149605)



mainstreaming nutrition sensitive actions, particularly in selected income generating activities of
beneficiaries.

2. Business Development and Institutional Strengthening (appraisal cost: US$22.00 million, actual
cost: US$21.00 million). This component would aim to increase livelihood opportunities of poor and
extreme poor by facilitating their organization into producer groups, cooperatives and societies and by
improving their market and business orientation and forward and backward linkages in the market systems.
Specifically the component would aim to: (i) build and strengthen producer organizations as market partners
and commercially oriented entities; (ii) facilitate interaction between producers and traders/processors of
products in the down- and up-stream value chains; and (iii) support market/business oriented investment to
solve bottlenecks in the market chains and/or adding value to the products (e.g. poor and extreme poor
capturing a higher share in the value chain). It included the following three sub-components:

2.1. Business Partnership Development and Market Linkages. This sub-component would aim to
increase livelihood opportunities of poor and extreme poor by organizing them in producer groups,
cooperatives or federations and improving their market and business orientation and forward and backward
linkages in the market systems. Various models of joint actions of small-scale individual producers working
as organized producer groups would aim to raise the attractiveness of poor and extreme poor as market
partners, reduce market transaction costs and align their production decisions with business and market
opportunities. The sub-component included four groups of activities: (i) Market Linkage and Partnership
Building; (ii) Product Promotion and Communication; (iii) Producer Group/Nuton Jibon Community Societies
(NJCS) Productive Investment Fund; and (iv) Partner Support.

2.2. Second-tier Institutional Development Support. This sub-component aimed to support the
networking of the village-level community institutions created. These second-tier institutions, called
NJCS would take over the support and development function for their community institutions.

2.3. Employment Generation Support. This sub-component aimed to provide opportunities for youth in
the project villages to gain skills and access employment opportunities. The project would build on the
successful efforts of SIPP-II to link un- and under-employed youth (18 – 35 years) with employment
opportunities. Building on the experience gained, youth festivals (during community mobilization), district,
regional employment fairs and meetings would be continued. It is proposed to contract an agency that
would train SDF staff working on youth employment in counseling approaches and practices and develop
an operational manual for such work.



3. Project Management, Monitoring and Learning (appraisal cost: US$24.30 million, actual cost:
US$21.90 million). This component would support the management of the project, monitoring and
continuous learning throughout the project period. It included the following two sub-components:

3.1. Project Management. The sub-component would cover the operating costs of SDF (national, regional
and district level) including salaries and office operating costs. SDF salaries and operating costs will be
supported by counterpart funds.

3.2. Monitoring and Learning. This sub-component would support the web-based MIS (established
under SIPP-II) which was expected to provide information down to the village level. Also, third party



                                                                                                  Page 3 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Nuton Jibon Livelihood Improv. Project (P149605)



   monitoring would be supported to capture identified key area for follow-up and improvements. A follow-up
   survey would be supported to cover new project areas that were not covered under SIPP-II.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project Cost. The total project cost at appraisal was US$220.00 million. The actual cost according to the
   ICR Data Sheet (page 2) was US$212.62 million.

   Financing. The project was financed through an Investment Project Finance (IPF) under an IDA envelope
   of US$200.00 million provided for a project implementation period of six years. The actual amount
   disbursed according to the ICR Data Sheet (page 2) was US$192.62 million (96% of the appraisal amount).

   Borrower Contribution. The Borrower was expected to contribute US$20.00 million of counterpart funds.
   However, none of these funds were contributed.

   Dates. The project was approved on March 15, 2015 and became effective about five months later on
   August 3, 2015. The Mid-Term Review (MTR) was conducted on September 23, 2018, about three years
   into effectiveness. While the PAD did not specify a date for the MTR, the actual date was reasonable for a
   six year project. The project closed on its expected closing date on June 30, 2021. There were no
   restructurings or additional financing to the project.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Context at Appraisal. In Bangladesh, rural poverty continued to be significantly higher and more extreme
than urban with extreme poverty continuing to be a rural phenomenon. With more than 70% of the
population and the majority of the poor residing in rural areas, agriculture remains important for the rural
economy. To address poverty and extreme poverty, the project aimed to increase rural incomes by linking
pro-poor support to productive employment opportunities, building and expanding on sustainable
community support mechanisms and increased integration into higher value commodity supply chains.

Previous Bank Experience. The Bank had been engaged with Bangladesh for about ten years through the
Social Investment Program (or Nuton Jibon). The program started as a pilot in two districts and 120 villages
in 2003. In 2008, the program was scaled-up under the Social Investment Program Project (SIPP-I), to
cover seven districts and 1,587 villages. A follow-up project (SIPP-II) expanded activities into 16 districts
and around 3,200 villages. NJLIP was a follow-up project that would build on SIPP-II.

Consistency with Bank Strategies. At appraisal the PDO was in line with the Bank's Country Assistance
Strategy (CAS, 2014) for Bangladesh, which had four main objectives: (i) consolidating human development
gains; (ii) accelerating growth (mainly through improving the business environment and expanding energy
and transportation services); (iii) reducing environmental degradation and vulnerability to natural disasters
and climate change; and (iv) strengthening governance. The project would contribute to the CAS Pillar 3



                                                                                                   Page 4 of 20
                       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                       Nuton Jibon Livelihood Improv. Project (P149605)



(vulnerability, adaptation, and inclusion) contributing to outcome 3.1 (agriculture and food security) and
outcome 3.3 (women empowerment).

At completion, the PDO was in line with Bank's Country Partnership Framework (CPF, FY16-FY20) which
emphasized three focus areas: (1) Growth and competitiveness; (2) Social Inclusion; (3) Climate and
Environment Management. The CPF was extended to FY21 after the Program Learning Review (PLR)
reaffirmed the relevance of the three CPF focus areas. The CPF identified the ability to create more and
better jobs that contribute significantly to growth and poverty reduction as a fundamental challenge. The
project would contribute to objectives 1 and 2 through supporting the poor and extreme poor in rural areas
by improving their livelihoods through community mobilization and access to loans, skills development,
employment opportunities, and market linkages. Also, the CPF cited NJLIP as an exemplary project that
could potentially enhance rural income opportunities for the poor through community-based initiatives to
reduce poverty and agribusiness opportunities to enhance farmers’ income.

Consistency with Government Strategies. At appraisal, the PDO was in line with Government's national
development strategy, the Sixth Five Year Plan (2011-2015) and its Vision 2021, which envisaged more
inclusive growth and the eradication of extreme poverty. The strategy emphasized poverty and reducing
inequalities among key focus areas emphasizing access of poor to assets and means of production and
strengthened delivery of human development services to the poor.

At completion, the PDO was in line with the long-term vision of the Government of Bangladesh as laid out in
the Bangladesh Delta Plan 2100 (2017). The plan aimed at achieving long-term water and food security,
economic growth and environmental sustainability while building resilience to climate change and other
challenges. NJLIP strengthens beneficiaries’ resilience through community mobilization and organization.
NJLIP also contributed to the 8th Five-Year Plan (2020-2025), which featured a core theme that called
for promoting prosperity and fostering inclusiveness. The project supported social inclusion and women
empowerment playing a key role in promoting prosperity and fostering inclusiveness.



Summary of Relevance of Objectives. The PDO was in line with Bank strategies and the Government
goals as discussed above. Improving the livelihoods of the poor and extreme poor is expected to remain a
priority for the Government of Bangladesh. The PDO statement was pitched at an adequate level of
ambition given that the project was the third in line under the Bank-funded Social Investment Program.
While the statement of objectives was focused and pitched at an adequate level of ambition, it lacked a
clear definition of the term "livelihoods".

Overall, Relevance of Objectives is rated High.


Rating Relevance TBL




Rating
High


4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)



                                                                                                        Page 5 of 20
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  Nuton Jibon Livelihood Improv. Project (P149605)


EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               To improve the livelihoods of the poor and extreme poor in the project areas.

               Rationale
               Theory of Change (ToC). To achieve the stated objective, the project would support two sets of
               activities: first, to mobilize and strengthen community financing institutions, support community infrastructure
               works through the Community Infrastructure Support Fund (CISF), and provide nutrition and health
               awareness campaigns. These activities would empower beneficiaries and enable beneficiaries' Income
               Generating Activities (IGAs) to generate higher financial returns, generate short term employment for
               beneficiaries, improve access to community infrastructure, and increase adoption of improved nutrition and
               health practices. Second, the project would establish/strengthen second tier institutions, develop business
               partnerships and market institutions, and support employment generation through developing skills and the
               provision of training for youth. These activities would result in effective support of community institutions at
               cluster and district levels by NJCS, Producer Group (PGs) would be strengthened with effective market
               linkages, and skilled youth would participate in the labor market. These activities combined would result in
               two main outcomes: 1. Self-management would be strengthened; 2. Increased household incomes for the
               poor and extreme poor beneficiaries including youths. In turn these outcomes would contribute to improving
               livelihoods for the poor and extreme poor beneficiaries.

               The achievement of the PDO was underpinned by three critical assumptions: 1. Community financing
               institutions would effectively execute their task in providing technical and financial assistance to beneficiaries,
               in a gender inclusive manner enhancing livelihood options, hygiene and nutrition among beneficiaries; 2.
               Second-tier institutions would achieve financial sustainability and continuously support village level
               community institutions and members' livelihood demands; and 3. Producer groups would have strong market
               linkages and generate revenues from their agricultural enterprises.

               Overall, the ToC reflected project activities, outputs, intermediate outcomes and outcomes that were
               connected in a plausible causal chain. The stated assumptions were logical and realistic. That said, it is worth
               noting that the PAD did not include an explicit definition for the term "livelihood," nor did it provide detailed
               information on the graduation aspects for beneficiaries as they move through the various stages of
               development. This could have been better articulated given the many lessons that came out of the previous
               two phases of the project cycle.

               Outputs/Intermediate Outcomes

               (a) Reaching extreme poor and poor beneficiaries in project areas:

               1. 97.5% of female extreme poor and poor beneficiaries in NJLIP areas (476,361 beneficiaries) were
               mobilized into community-level institutions and participated in decision making exceeding the target of 90%.
               2. 2.5% of male beneficiaries in NJLIP areas were mobilized to join and participate in community level
               decision making which did not meet the target of 10%.
               3. 896,074 households benefitted from community infrastructure, by using it and/or obtaining short term
               employment, which exceeded the target of 875,000.




                                                                                                                    Page 6 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Nuton Jibon Livelihood Improv. Project (P149605)



4. 423,861 households were reached with nutrition-intervention and target households use hand washing
stations before food preparation and feeding infants and young children, which exceeded the target of
350,000.
5. 343,249 registered pregnant women and lactating mothers were reached with child nutrition interventions,
which significantly exceeded the target of 100,000.

(b) Increased household income:

1. 235,221 (72.26% exceeding the target of 70%) beneficiaries in NJLP villages took second cycle SF loans
and 64,804 (19.91% no target provided) members took three and above cycle loans for IGAs, which
contributed to household income increases, and provides an important proxy for the effective impact of
increased capital allocations to households.
2. About 97% of beneficiaries had a financial rate of return to their livelihood enterprises and investments of at
least 10%, indicating that IGAs were profitable and could contribute to household income increases,
exceeding the target of 80%.
3. 537 productive investment grants were disbursed to producer organizations, exceeding the target of 240;
thereof, 324 in NJLIP villages and 223 in SIPP-II villages. These grants supported producer organizations,
whose operations could contribute to household income increases.
4. Producer organizations/ NJCS signed and/or established 36 linkages with business partners which will
eventually improve skills and opportunities for income increases. No target was provided.
5. 25,866 youth sustained employment for at least one year exceeding the target of 25,000.

(c) Strengthened self-management:

1. 100% of representatives in community-based decision making and management functions were from
vulnerable and marginalized communities exceeding the target of 90%.
2. 98.5% of representatives in community-based decision making were women exceeding the target of 90%.
3. 97.5% of project beneficiaries participated in community-based decision-making were women exceeding
the target of 90%.
4. 99% percent of villages were graded A or B, indicating that villages organizations were effective and
provided quality services exceeding the target of 80%.
5. 85 NJCS were formed and provided services to member villages which met the target of 85.

Outcomes

Improvements in livelihoods was not explicitly defined in the PAD. The ICR assessed improvement in
livelihoods mainly by measuring the increase in household income (PDO indicator 1). Also, PDO indicator 2
measured the project's outreach, using three sub-indicators: 2.1., Direct project beneficiaries; 2.2., of which
female; and 2.3., share of poor and extreme poor in project villages which took loans from the VCO. Finally,
PDO indicator 3 measured strengthened self-management which reflected beneficiaries’ social capital that
enabled them to organize and manage in community organizations, strengthen decision making power, and
to get actively involved in development operations. Based on this, the following elements are discussed:

1. Project beneficiaries and outreach: The selection of target areas was based on a poverty ranking
(highest percentage of poor according to the Bangladesh Poverty Maps). The selection of beneficiaries
followed a transparent participatory process in the communities, called the Participatory Identification of the
Poor (ICR, paragraph 26). The selection criteria were identified in the Community Operation Manual and


                                                                                                    Page 7 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Nuton Jibon Livelihood Improv. Project (P149605)



captured the multi-faceted dimensions of poverty (e.g., lack of adequate housing, too few meals per day, lack
of winter clothes). The following achievements are highlighted:

      In total, the project reached 982,248 beneficiary households achieving 92.5% of the target of
         1,000,000 households, of these 925,098 households (94.2%) were extreme poor and
         poor households, or about 4.2 million individual beneficiaries. The project supported households were
         in 3,142 villages from SIPP-II and 2,500 villages newly selected for NJLIP (total of 5,642 villages
         compared to a target of 5,700, 98% achievement rate). About 95% of beneficiaries were women,
         exceeding the appraisal target by 6%. While extremely poor and poor beneficiaries received the same
         type of services from the project, extremely poor beneficiaries were prioritized in accessing the
         Shabolombi Fund (a revolving fund for project beneficiaries to obtain loans and initiate livelihood
         enterprises and in participating in building community infrastructure). In total, 325,525 beneficiaries
         benefited from the fund compared to a target of 364,256 (89% reached). According to the ICR,
         paragraph 26) extremely poor beneficiaries in newly identified NJLIP villages, the poorest 5% percent
         received a one-time grant.
         The project also reached 57,150 middle class and rich households who were not part of village-level
         organizations and who benefitted from community infrastructure.
        2,500 extreme poor and poor households in 2,500 NJLIP villages benefitted from community
         institutions, livelihood development, and employment generation for youth. 325,525 beneficiary
         households took loans from the Shabolombi Fund, exceeding the target for PDO indicator 2.3 share of
         poor and extreme poor in project villages which took loans from VCOs by 2%. Of these households,
         33,225 (6.8%) youths participated in Nuton Jibon Groups (NJGs) and 25,866 youths found and
         sustained employment for at least a year, exceeding the target of 25,000 (Intermediate Results
         Indicator/IRI 15) by 3.4%. In addition, 12,126 vulnerable households received one-time grants.
         Also, 8,128 producer groups (PGs) were supported, with 164,039 members. These PGs benefitted
         from 537 productive investment grants exceeding the targets of IRI 14 by 223%.
        423,861 households received hand-washing stations known as tippy tap, exceeding the indicator
         target by 21% (IRI 10). In addition, 343,249 of pregnant women and lactating women registered and
         obtained Behavior Change Communication on nutrition during pregnancy, for children, and ante-natal
         care, significantly exceeding the target (100,000 women) for IRI 11 by 243%.
        Some 896,074 households (exceeding the target of 875,000 households) participated in the project
         and benefitted from 5,803 community infrastructure projects (exceeding the target of 3,700
         projects) by utilizing them and by obtaining paid short-term employment (ICR, paragraph 28).

2. Increasing household income. The project supported the household income increase for beneficiaries in
2,500 NJLIP villages through four main approaches: (i) the shabolombi fund (loans were invested mostly in
agricultural IGAs: 42.5% in livestock enterprises; 13.7% in crop and horticulture; 24% in small trade; 16% in
fisheries; 1.8% in transport and 2% in other areas); (ii) supporting youths: 33,225 youths were mobilized into
NJGs, and 28,639 youths benefitted from skills development training in various trades and 19,371 youths
obtained skills development loans. By project completion, 25,866 youths had maintained their employment for
at least a year; about 48% were involved in self-employment and 52% in wage employment; (iii) Supporting
producer groups: 47,840 beneficiaries from NJLIP villages were part of producer groups and benefitted from
training, improved business linkages and access to productive investment funds to start up their operation;
(iv) Supporting vulnerable groups: 12,126 vulnerable households received one-time grants, of which, 88%
percent joined NJG and started savings, and 48% took an SF loan to start micro-scale IGAs. The ICR
(paragraph 32) noted that short-term labor in constructing community infrastructure also contributed


                                                                                                  Page 8 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Nuton Jibon Livelihood Improv. Project (P149605)



to household income increases. The following achievements are highlighted:


      The project achieved a 78% increase in beneficiaries’ annual household income compared to the
       baseline income. The average annual net household income of beneficiary households increased
       from Bangladeshi Taka (BDT) 101,183 at baseline to BDT 180,090 at closing. According to the ICR
       (paragraph 30) this was based on a representative sample of beneficiary households from 2,500
       NJLIP villages that exhibited a sharp rise during the project period. On the other hand, households in
       the control groups experienced a 12% income increase compared to NJLIP beneficiaries, from
       average BDT 97,532 at baseline to BDT 109,632 at project closing. The target for PDO indicator 1,
       beneficiaries’ incremental income increase compared to a control group-30% increase over baseline,
       was exceeded by 17.7% (ICR, Table 4).
      The ICR (paragraph 33) highlighted that the project beneficiaries’ household income not only
       increased, but also shifted away from insecure and low-paid wage employment towards greater self-
       employment through non-farm enterprises and livestock rearing, creating a pathway out of poverty.
       For example, compared to the control group, the reliance of project beneficiaries’ reliance on wage
       labor was 16% lower than the control group. Also, the share of income from wage labor decreased by
       37.1% for project beneficiaries’ household income compared to the baseline. Beneficiaries’ income
       from livestock and poultry increased by 15%, aquaculture and horticulture by 6.4%, crop production by
       6.1%, and small business and non-agricultural IGAs by 5.2%. On the other hand, the control group
       saw a rise in income from self-employment activities such as businesses, fishing, livestock and
       poultry, and social safety nets remained relatively stable at around 1.2%. The ICR (paragraph 33)
       reported that that 47.9% of the project beneficiaries were above the international poverty line
       compared to 29.8% of households in the control group.

3. Strengthened self-management of beneficiaries. Women’s social capital and empowerment was
measured by the PDO indicator 3: Strengthened self-management of beneficiaries. This was based on an
index with10 indicators detailed in the ICR, Annex 7. The index increased from a baseline value of 5.7 to 8.56
points in 2020, which was close to the end target of 9. Through the project support, women’s decision-making
ability increased compared to the baseline and control group, with 26.4% more women beneficiaries got
involved with an organization or NGO, 21% more took a loan, 24.1% more started income generating
activities and 24.4% more women project beneficiaries were able to decide how to spend savings.

The project also strengthened second-tier Nuton Jibon Community Society (NJCS), the federated structure of
the community institutions at the district and cluster level. These institutions were managed mostly by women
and a key part of women’s social capital and empowerment. In SIPP-II villages, 16 and 124 District and
Cluster NJCS, respectively were supported, and in NJLIP villages 5 and 80 were formed and supported
(achieving 100% of the end target). All 2,500 NJLIP villages (100%) became members of NJCS and
deposited membership fees amounting of BDT 25.00 million. Out of total 3,142 SIPP-II project villages, 3,099
(98.63%) villages were enlisted as members of NJCS and 3,090 (98.35%) villages deposited membership
fees till June 2021. The project also established 36 and 17 partnerships between NJCS in SIPP-II and NJLIP
villages and business conglomerates, respectively. The project also developed 7 informal linkages with
government departments which provided training and consultancy services to 345,214 NJG participants (ICR,
paragraph 35). Finally, the ICR (paragraph 36) noted that beneficiaries confirmed a high level of satisfaction
with NJCS services. A survey on a small sample of 111 beneficiates (BICRR, 2021) showed that 54% of
beneficiaries had a very high level of satisfaction, and 32% a high level of satisfaction with NJCS services.



                                                                                                 Page 9 of 20
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Nuton Jibon Livelihood Improv. Project (P149605)



                            Summary of Efficacy Assessment. Based on the above-mentioned discussion and the evidence provided in
                            the ICR, the project was successful in improving the livelihoods of the poor and extreme poor in the project
                            areas. Targets for two out of three PDO indicators (PDO indicator 2 and 3) were almost fully achieved
                            with PDO indicator 2 showing that the project reached a substantial number of beneficiaries. PDO indicator 3,
                            strengthened self-management, demonstrated the project’s impact on improving poor rural women’s
                            livelihood by empowering them to make decisions about income opportunities and spending. Most
                            importantly, PDO indicator 1, share of beneficiaries with a net household income increase, exceeded the
                            target by 17%. The project also contributed to increasing the average income of beneficiaries compared to
                            the baseline and the control group; and project beneficiaries obtained income from IGAs and reduced their
                            dependency on precarious wage labor compared to the control group. This was expected to improve their
                            livelihoods in the medium- to long term and increase robustness to shocks (ICR, paragraph 37).

                            Therefore, the efficacy with which the stated objective was achieved is rated Substantial.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Overall Efficacy is rated Substantial. The project was successful in improving the livelihoods of the poor and
                            extreme poor in the project areas. The target for PDO indicator 1 was exceeded and targets for PDO indicator
                            2 and 3 were almost fully achieved.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



   5. Efficiency
   Economic and Financial Efficiency

   ex ante

                               The economic and financial analysis (EFA) at appraisal showed that the project had an
                                estimated Internal Rate of Return (EIRR) of 22.3% and an economic net present value (NPV) of BDT 3.7
                                billion under a 12% discount rate. The Financial Internal Rate of Return (FIRR) of the project using
                                market pricing for local labor was 21.4% with a NPV of BDT 3.1 billion under a 12% discount rate.
                               A standard cost benefit calculation method was used, assuming that the activities and the financial and
                                physical input and output data would be of a very similar nature as under SIPP-II, with the scope of


                                                                                                                            Page 10 of 20
         Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
         Nuton Jibon Livelihood Improv. Project (P149605)



       activities adjusted for NJLIP. For the computation of rates of return and net present values constant price
       as of 2015 and a cash flow projection period of twelve years was used.
      Sensitivity Analysis. Two parameters were considered: (i) the proportion of project funds, which would
       be available for the VCO as a start-up capital, and (ii) the value of the VCO portfolio over time. The
       baseline assumption is that about 28% of the project investment would be disbursed as a capital stock to
       the VCO and the VCOs would face a loss of 5% per annum. The analysis showed that the economic
       returns were very sensitive to the amount of money provided to the VCOs and their ability to maintain the
       initial capital stock. For example, a 20% decrease in the initial VCO capital stock would reduce the EIRR
       to 16%, while an increase by 20% resulted in an EIRR of 30%. The analysis emphasized the importance
       of keeping the overall management costs as low as possible and providing as much resources as
       possible to the VCOs (PAD, paragraph 53). Similarly, it would be equally important to avoid any portfolio
       losses during operation of the village loans (e.g. through sufficient yields, and high levels of loan
       recovery).

ex ante

      The aggregated benefits from the project net of all costs, calculated over a 20-year period, at a discount
         rate of 12% offered a financial NPV of BDT 30.7 billion, an economic NPV of BDT 81.7 billion, a Financial
         Internal Rate of Return (FIRR) of 44%, and an EIRR of 48% percent, compared to 22.3% at appraisal.
        The EFA at closing applied a similar methodology as used at appraisal, through using household survey
         data of project achievements and beneficiaries’ household income increase and a Difference-in-
         Difference approach to assess project’s impact. Household income increases were expected to capture
         the impact of several project activities: SF loans, PG involvement, youth employment, utilization of
         community infrastructure, other project services.
        To assess economic benefits of the project, the models were aggregated over projected number of
         beneficiaries, estimates of value added of youth employment and PGs, and cost savings from improved
         transport connectivity. These benefits were compared against total project cost. Also, a financial analysis
         for key livelihood enterprises was conducted based on data collected from representative members in
         the beneficiary group.
        Sensitivity Analysis. The sensitivity analysis showed that the FIRR and EIRR dropped to 29% and 31%,
         respectively, with a two-year delay of project benefits. Also, a 20% increase in project costs combined
         with a 20% decrease in project benefits dropped the FIRR and EIRR to 32% and 24%, respectively.
        The project included indirect benefits or benefit which cannot be easily quantified namely, participation
         and empowering women and the emphasis on nutrition.
        Implementation Efficiency. The project closed on time with no extensions. According to the ICR
         (paragraph 41) key activities closed 6 months prior to the completion date, and with about 97% of project
         budget expended. Project management cost was US$21.9 million which was about 10.3% of the of total
         project cost. This was reasonable in comparison to similar operations (ICR, paragraph 41). The ICR
         noted that the SDF leveraged additional resources (when needed) to complement project budget without
         affecting project achievements. For example, when support to SIPP-II second tier institutions was
         delayed and suffered cost overruns, SDF used interest accrued from the endowment funds to cover
         additional cost, without burdening the project.

Summary of Efficiency Assessment. The ex post EIRR at 44% significantly exceeded the EIRR at appraisal
(22.3%). The project overall benefits to improved livelihoods exceeded the expected results at appraisal.
Further, the project was implemented efficiently with no cost overruns and closed on time as discussed above.



                                                                                                      Page 11 of 20
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Nuton Jibon Livelihood Improv. Project (P149605)



The EFA at completion was robust and included enough details (Annex 4) to justify the project investments.
Therefore, Efficiency is rated High.


Efficiency Rating
High


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                 Rate Available?            Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      100.00
 Appraisal                                                  22.30
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      100.00
 ICR Estimate                                               48.00
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of Objectives was rated High. Overall Efficacy was rated Substantial. The project was successful
in improving the livelihoods of the poor and extreme poor in the project areas. The project contributed to
increasing the average income of beneficiaries compared to the baseline and the control group. The project also
improved poor rural women’s livelihood by empowering them to make decisions about income opportunities and
spending. Efficiency is rated High. The ex post EIRR at 44% significantly exceeded the EIRR at appraisal
(22.3%), and the project was implemented efficiently with no cost overruns and closed on time.

Based on the assigned ratings to the three outcome criteria (Relevance of Objectives, Overall Efficacy, and
Efficiency), outcome is rated Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The following risks were identified by the ICR with potential impacts on the development outcome:

1. Institutional Risk. While the project results demonstrates that second-tier institutions are functioning well;
their sustainability and effectiveness in sustaining development outcomes is considered a risk (ICR,
paragraph 94). The Nuton Jibon Community Societies (NJCS) took over the responsibilities from the Social
Development Foundation (SDF) to provide support to the community. Their work in providing technical and
institutional support, building and maintaining partnerships with private sector service providers and

                                                                                                     Page 12 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Nuton Jibon Livelihood Improv. Project (P149605)



negotiating fees and costs for their members is important for establishing and scaling-up beneficiaries’ IGAs
and improving their livelihoods. The ultimate determinant of success will be whether the project can deliver
effective services to members who would then be willing to pay for services from their own funds. The project
provided support to NJCS of the Social Investment Program Project II (SIPP-II) for at least two years, and
dedicating additional financing, to ensure their capacity is adequately built to support its members. Similarly,
NJCS supported under this project will obtain support from the follow-on Entrepreneurship and Livelihood
Improvement project (RELI) project. However, little systematic, quantitative evidence is known about
successes, failures and lessons learned of NJCS and producer organization in SIPP-II villages in the
medium-run beyond the project. This needs to be carefully assessed to rule out any risks to development
outcomes.

2. Environmental Risk. External shocks, such as COVID-19 or climate-induced events could negatively
impact development outcomes. The COVID-19 pandemic had a negative impact on the income of project
beneficiaries (ICR, paragraph 51). Project beneficiaries were also negatively impacted by climate-induced
natural disasters. In 2020, out of 88 upazilas, 59 were affected by cyclone Amphan and associated floods.
The project beneficiaries reported that the cyclone negatively impacted their socio-economic status and
reduced their income during flood period (ICR, paragraph 95). Future projects supporting agricultural
enterprises need to adopt climate-smart agriculture practices, and climate-resilience need to be reflected in
community infrastructure development.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
        Strategic Relevance and Approach. The project was the third in line to support the the Social
          Investment Program. It sought to build on the success of the Social Investment Program Project
          (SIPP-I) and SIPP-II. The Government requested a follow-up project that would build on SIPP-II
          and be ready to start by around mid-2015 (PAD, paragraph 6). The project objective was in line
          with the Bank Strategies and Government priorities as discussed above under section 3.
         Technical, Financial, and Economic aspects. Project preparation benefited from meetings and
          roundtable discussions with key stakeholders in Bangladesh including NGOs and the private
          sector to help shape the project design and learn from experiences and applied project tools
          (PAD, paragraph 37). The project was built on the two previous projects (SIPP-I & SIPP-II) in
          Bangladesh that were modeled based on international experience, but in particular, based on
          community livelihood projects in India like the Tamil Nadu Empowerment and Poverty Reduction
          Project and the Andhra Pradesh Rural Poverty Reduction Project, and the Sri Lanka Second
          Community Development and Livelihood Project (PAD, paragraph 36). Specifically, the project
          deign focused on the sustainability of community institutions and strengthening second-tier
          institutions; and on stronger partnerships, and opportunities for value addition to further enhance
          beneficiaries’ income (ICR, paragraph 7). However, the project design did not reflect two
          important lessons from SIPP-II: the integration of climate and disaster risk into community
          planning; and convergence with government programs that provide safety nets for the poor (ICR,



                                                                                                    Page 13 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Nuton Jibon Livelihood Improv. Project (P149605)



           paragraph 53).The PAD also included a robust economic and financial analysis that justified the
           project investments.
          Implementation Readiness. The project was declared effective in August 2015 and
           implementation started straight away, indicating strong implementation readiness.
          Poverty, Gender, and Social Development Aspects. The overarching objective was to reduce
           poverty through empowering poor and extremely poor women. The project activities were
           expected to enhance women status through promoting self-management and empowerment.
          Environmental Aspects. The project would support activities to reduce the project's
           environmental footprint including composting, vermicomposting, and biogas production.
          Fiduciary Aspects. Overall, the project fiduciary aspects were adequate given the previous
           experience of the SDF in implementing SIPP-I & SIPP-II projects.
          Adequacy of Risks and Mitigation Measures Identification. The project's overall risk was rated
           Moderate. Eight risks were identified at appraisal classified under three main areas: Stakeholder
           risk, Country risk, and Project risk. The proposed mitigation measures were appropriate (ICR,
           paragraph 90).
          M&E Design. M&E design featured Information and Communication Technology (ICT) based
           tools for monitoring, community based management of its fund portfolio, and capacity
           building. The project’s Results Framework outlined key results indicators, data collection methods
           and a timetable and responsible agency for data collection. However, there were minor
           shortcomings in the definition of indicators including the PDO indicator and disaggregation of
           indicators by beneficiary groups (ICR, paragraph 55). Overall, M&E design was adequate.

  Summary of Quality at Entry (QAE) Assessment. The project was strategically relevant. Design was
  based on the experience of two previous operations. Implementation readiness was strong, and the
  project design adequately addressed poverty, gender and social aspects. Also, environmental aspects
  received good coverage and fiduciary aspects were adequate. The assessment of risks was
  comprehensive and relevant mitigation measures were included. However, design could have benefited
  from reflecting two important lessons from SIPP-II: the integration of climate and disaster risk into
  community planning; and convergence with government programs that provide safety nets for the
  poor. Finally, M&E design was robust, but with minor shortcomings.

  Overall, QAE was robust and is therefore rated Satisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
       The Bank conducted 13 supervision missions between August 2015 and June 2021, with the last
        two missions conducted virtually due to COVID-19 restrictions. Field visits took place during each
        mission. The Bank team provided technical support between missions to help resolve any
        implementation issues.
       The project implementation benefited from a stable team with only one change of TTL and co-TTL
        during the project implementation period. The task team remained in place from preparation
        through closing.

                                                                                                  Page 14 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Nuton Jibon Livelihood Improv. Project (P149605)



       The Bank team supported the SDF to improve procurement performance, and provided technical
        support between missions to help resolve implementation issues.
       A notable shortcoming was overlooking the potential ambiguities about the PDO indicator at
        the time of the MTR. This was later addressed by the Bank team towards the end of the
        implementation period through recommending a detailed household survey to assess household
        income increases. Also, the team could have benefited from the inclusion of a dedicated social
        expert and nutrition specialist on the team (ICR, paragraph 91).

 Summary of Quality of Supervision Assessment. The Bank team successfully guided the
 project implementation and provided the needed support. There were minor shortcomings including
 the lack of dedicated social expert and nutrition specialist on the team and overlooking concerns on the
 PDO indicators at the MTR stage. Overall, Quality of Supervision is rated Satisfactory.

 Based on the assigned ratings for QAE and Quality of Supervision, Bank Performance is rated
 Satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
      The PAD did not include a Theory of Change (ToC) as this was not required by the Bank at the
        time of project appraisal. Nonetheless, the ICR (paragraph 8 & Figure 1) included a detailed ToC
        that reflected the relationship between the project activities, outputs, intermediate outcomes and
        outcomes. The ToC also included the critical assumptions that underpinned the achievement of the
        PDO. The ICR (paragraph 8) noted that the term livelihoods was not explicitly defined in the PAD.
       The PDO was to be measured through: (a) improved livelihoods measured by PDO indicator 1:
        Beneficiary households with an incremental income increase of at least 30%, (b) Project outreach
        and coverage, measured by PDO indicator 2: Direct project beneficiaries, and PDO indicator 2.3:
        Share of poor and extreme poor in project villages, who took loans from the VCO; (c) empowerment
        of women through community-level institutions, measured by PDO indicator 3: Strengthened self-
        management of beneficiaries (index measuring empowerment and gender aspects). These
        indicators were relevant, measurable and overall provided good coverage of different aspects of the
        PDO. However, the indicators could have benefited from disaggregation to reflect the PDO criteria
        with regards to the poor and extreme poor.
       The Results Framework (RF) included 20 intermediate results indicators (IRIs). Overall, the
        included IRIs adequately covered the different project activities and were measurable, and included
        reasonable targets.



                                                                                                  Page 15 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Nuton Jibon Livelihood Improv. Project (P149605)



       In summary, M&E design included a detailed RF to track the achievement of PDO and
        components. However, some indicators lacked a clear description of beneficiaries and associated
        benefits (ICR, paragraph 55). For example, PDO indicator 1 was ambiguous and was interpreted
        differently at project mid-term and closing, or the definition of households benefiting from community
        infrastructure was not clearly defined (ICR, Footnote 38). The ICR (paragraph 67) noted that these
        shortcomings did not impact the assessment of project results.



b. M&E Implementation
       M&E implementation benefited from the experiences of SIPP-II. This included establishing an
         effective web-based management information system (MIS) that provided information to make
         timely and effective monitoring on a regular basis. Also, village level progress was monitored by
         the uniquely designed Village Matrix (input format), which included the core information for each
         village. A web-based Loan Management System (LMS) at village level was managed by project
         beneficiaries and community professionals, allowed a real-time updating of community finance
         transactions and fund management. A youth data base recorded status and achievement of
         youth beneficiaries on a web portal accessible to public. Finally, a Process Monitoring Agency
         (PMA) independently determined how effectively the project was running and complimented the
         quantitative, input-output monitoring of project progress (ICR, paragraph 68).
        According to the ICR (paragraph 69) "the M&E system was robust with systematic data collection,
         analysis, and reporting." M&E implementation was executed by the SDF. While the M&E Director
         was hired with a delay (by February 2018), this did not affect M&E implementation, given the
         team's experiences from SIPP-II project.
        A comprehensive baseline survey, mid-term evaluation, COVID-19 impact evaluation, and impact
         evaluation at closing were conducted. The results of these were included in the ICR (Annex 5),
         and according to the ICR (paragraph 71) the surveys included representative sample sizes and
         treatment and control groups.
        In summary, M&E implementation was effective and project data was adequately collected.
         However, little information was collected on the NJCS performance or impacts (such as
         establishment of business plans, or income obtained). This could have helped monitor progress
         towards achieving sustainability (ICR, paragraph 67).



c. M&E Utilization
       According to the ICR (paragraph 71) appropriate data was collected on indicators, evaluated and
         used towards decision making. Also, progress reports were shared with the respective Ministries
         periodically, and with the Bank on a regular quarterly basis.
        Also, M&E data and results informed the design of the follow-on project (ICR, paragraph 71).
        In summary, Utilization was strong and the project data helped decision making and was
         valuable to the ICR.

  Summary of M&E Quality Assessment. Overall, M&E Quality is rated High. This rating reflects a
  detailed design; effective implementation; and strong utilization. Minor design shortcomings did not



                                                                                                  Page 16 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Nuton Jibon Livelihood Improv. Project (P149605)



  affect the assessment of the project outcomes. Also, M&E implementation managed to record project
  progress and achievements despite COVID-19 restrictions (ICR, paragraph 72).



  M&E Quality Rating
  High

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as an Environmental Category B. It triggered the following four safeguard
   policies: Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01), Natural Habitats (OP/BP4.04), Pest Management (OP
   4.09), and Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP4.10). The project might have some minor impacts from small-scale
   local
   infrastructures, agriculture based livelihoods, and market facilitation. Environmental impacts were likely to
   be very minor, site specific with no irreversible impacts. Also, it was highly unlikely that any natural habitats
   formed largely by native plant and animal species would undergo transformation of use or would be affected
   or modified by project activities. Project beneficiaries might use pesticides on a small scale. The project
   would likely work in areas where indigenous people live and would engage with them for the improvement
   of their livelihoods. The implementing agency (SDF) updated the Environmental and Social Management
   Framework (ESMF) prepared for the SIPP-II. The updated ESMF would ensure environmental management
   of newly incorporated interventions as well as compliance with Bank's Safeguard policies. The ESMF also
   included a Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) that was easily understandable and accessible at local
   levels (PAD, paragraph 181).

   The ICR (paragraph 76) reported that "overall safeguard compliance was satisfactory during
   implementation." However, having adequate and competent safeguard officers was a limitation during the
   project implementation.

   Compliance on Environmental Safeguards. Since this was a CDD project, beneficiaries performed all the
   activities including small civil constructions and no contractor was engaged (ICR, paragraph 75).
   Beneficiaries screened the activities to identify environmental and social impacts and prepared their own
   Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs) to manage environmental and social issues.

   Compliance on Social Safeguards. The project included 424 Indigenous People (IP) households as
   beneficiaries, of whom 58 persons were currently holding leadership positions in project groups and
   communities. SDF ensured that social screening was systematically done on the IP Framework,
   and interventions that were appropriate to cultural traditions to the IP communities (ICR, paragraph 77).
   The GRM received 458 grievances, which according to the ICR (paragraph 79) were "duly recorded in the
   grievance redress register, and resolved, most of them at the cluster/community level."




b. Fiduciary Compliance


                                                                                                     Page 17 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Nuton Jibon Livelihood Improv. Project (P149605)



   Financial Management (FM). SDF had adequate oversight in community financing and loan
   management system and an automated accounting software was used for accounting information and
   generation of financial reports. Throughout the project implementation period, Interim Unaudited Financial
   Reports (IUFRs) and audit reports were submitted to the Bank with acceptable quality, except for a few
   minor exceptions. However, there were delays in conducting internal audits as suggested in the FM
   arrangement of the project (ICR, paragraph 88). Also, the ICR did not report on the status of the final audit
   report.

   Procurement. According to the ICR (paragraph 83) the project followed the Bank's procurement and
   consultants procurement guidelines. Procurement represented a small part of the project (about 10%)
   since most funds were for cash grants to the beneficiaries and operating costs. Procurement activities
   benefited from the Bank's support through various trainings in home and abroad. This improved SDF
   procurement capacity as implementation progressed. In 2016, SDF started using the Bank-developed
   Systematic Tracking of Exchanges to plan, record and track all the procurement transactions. SDF also
   implemented electronic Government Procurement (e- GP) at the middle of project implementation.
   Procurement activities experienced delays during the COVID-19 restrictions due to supply chain disruption,
   restriction on physical movement, closing of public offices, among others (ICR, paragraph 87). The ICR
   (paragraph 87) noted that despite the delays, SDF managed to "complete all the contracts within the
   project period."




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None.



d. Other
   None.



11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                    IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                          Satisfactory           Satisfactory

Bank Performance                 Satisfactory           Satisfactory
                                                                                  Robust M&E design, effective
Quality of M&E                   Substantial            High                      implementation and strong
                                                                                  utilization.
Quality of ICR                   ---                    Substantial


12. Lessons


                                                                                                    Page 18 of 20
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Nuton Jibon Livelihood Improv. Project (P149605)



The ICR included eight lessons. The following three are emphasized with some adaptation of
language:

1. The inclusion of climate resilience building practices can help mitigate the impacts of
climate-induced events. The project area suffered from climate-induced events, which are
expected to repeat and aggravate communities in the future. Future projects need to place a
stronger emphasis on innovative and tested climate-smart and nutrition-smart agriculture practices
and technologies. A climate and disaster risk assessment must be considered for all IGAs, and
the mandatory inclusion of risk mitigation and resilience building measures should be adopted.
Beneficiaries can also benefit from trainings for strengthening awareness of climate change, its
impact on their livelihoods, and above all strategies (provided by the project and other relevant
actors) to reduce the risks.

2. Supporting non-farm enterprises can enable beneficiaries to shift their household income
away from insecure and low-paid wage employment towards greater self-employment,
creating a pathway out of poverty. The project's experience emphasized that beneficiaries
managed to shift from wage employment, such as casual day labor in both agriculture and non-
agriculture sectors, to self-employment, through non-farm enterprises and livestock rearing, which
constitutes an important pathway out of poverty. Household income did not only increase but was
also made more robust.

3. Developing and strengthening community institutions is key for empowerment of rural
women. A remarkably high share of women participated in project activities. The project mobilized
a high share of women beneficiaries into community groups. This was achieved by targeting both
men and women in mobilization campaigns. Since men usually work outside while women stay at
home for household chores, eventually men encouraged women to participate in community-level
project activities. Poor and extreme poor community members were involved in planning, managing
and implementing village-level activities and decision making. Savings kept by the community were
used as internal lending funds among the beneficiaries and as a safety net. The revolving fund and
loan provision of the project is the prime source for the beneficiaries to obtain loans and initiate
livelihood enterprises.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

Quality of Evidence. The ICR benefited from the implementation of a well-designed M&E system that was
adequately implemented. The M&E system combined with the impact evaluations generated enough data and
evidence to assess the achievement of the PDO. Overall, the Quality of evidence was adequate.




                                                                                                 Page 19 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Nuton Jibon Livelihood Improv. Project (P149605)



Quality of Analysis. The ICR provided clear linking between evidence and findings and used the evidence base
to serve the arguments under the different sections. The economic analysis was robust and provided good
justification of the project investments.

Lessons. Lessons reflected the project experience and were based on evidence and analysis.

Results Orientation. The ICR discussed the achievement of the PDO based on the available data to the extent
possible. However, the discussion was slightly skewed towards the achievement of outcome indicators at the
expense of what the project actually achieved on the ground.

Consistency with guidelines. The ICR used the available data to the extent possible to justify most of the
assigned ratings. Discussion of outcomes was logical and included plausible connections between the project
activities, intermediate results and outcomes.

Conciseness. The ICR provided comprehensive coverage of the implementation experience and
candidly reported on shortcomings. However, the key outputs summary reported in Annex 1 lacked targets.

Summary of ICR Quality Assessment. Overall the Quality of the ICR is rated Substantial with minor
shortcomings. The ICR is well written, provided candid coverage on project shortcomings, and adequately used
the project data to justify the assigned ratings. The status of the final audit report for the project was not
included in the discussion on financial management. Finally, the ICR lacked an explicit statement on the
compliance of the project with the triggered safeguard policies.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                Page 20 of 20
