     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     VN-Enhancing Teacher Education (P150060)



                                                                                Report Number : ICRR0023338

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Program Name
 P150060                                   VN-Enhancing Teacher Education

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Vietnam                                   Education


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)             Total Program Cost (USD)
 IDA-58780                                 30-Jun-2022                                         48,040,291.24

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 29-Jun-2016                               30-Jun-2022

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            95,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                             47,647,015.16                                              0.00

 Actual                                         48,040,291.24                                              0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Denise A. Vaillancourt     Judyth L. Twigg              Eduardo Fernandez              IEGHC (Unit 2)
                                                         Maldonado




2. Program Context and Development Objectives

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   As stated in the February 6, 2017 Financing Agreement between the Socialist Republic of Vietnam and IDA
   (Schedule 1, p. 5), “The objective of the Program is to strengthen teacher training institutions to enhance
   teacher and principal effectiveness through improved continuous professional development.” The design
   document presented the same statement (PAD, pp. 18, 47 and 52).

   The PDO did not change throughout the project’s life. Two PDO-level targets were revised downward to a
   less ambitious level because of implementation delays, but a split evaluation methodology is not

                                                                                                  Page 1 of 27
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     VN-Enhancing Teacher Education (P150060)



   warranted. First, one of the PDO indicators does not fully capture the intended, multi-pronged capacity
   strengthening outcomes. Other measures of achievement reported in the ICR provide ample evidence that
   capacity strengthening was indeed substantially achieved and that the project scope was not
   substantially changed (Section 4). Second, both the original and revised targets set for the other PDO
   indicator were exceeded by the project’s end.



b. Were the program objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during
   implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  27-Apr-2021

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Original Components:

   In 2013 the Government of Vietnam’s 11th Party Congress adopted the Fundamental and Comprehensive
   Education Reform (FCER), whose priority was general education (grades K-12) reform, under which
   learning approaches were to become less content-based and more competency- and quality-based. The
   intention was for all Vietnamese students to obtain higher cognitive and behavioral skills, enabling
   improvements in their critical and creative thinking, problem solving, teamwork, and effective
   communication. Because reform success depended heavily on the preparedness of teachers to master the
   new pedagogical paradigm, and on their enhanced professional competencies and continuous support, in
   2016 the government approved the Ministry of Education and Training’s (MoET’s) National Teacher
   Education Program (NTEP), focused on six solution areas: (i) strengthening teacher education management
   planning; (ii) renovating pre-service teacher education; (iii) establishing and delivering continuous
   professional development (CPD) programs for teachers and school managers; (iv) building capacity of key
   lecturers and managerial staff of teacher training institutions; (v) enhancing the physical environment and
   facilities/equipment of teacher training institutions; and (vi) promoting socialization and international
   cooperation in teacher education.

   Of NETP’s six elements, the government and the World Bank agreed that this operation, the Enhancing
   Teacher Education Program (ETEP), would focus primarily on the third element – establishment and
   delivery of CPD – through a Program for Results (PforR) approach. The enhanced CPD system was to
   provide more, higher quality, relevant, and timely training and support directly to teachers and principals at
   the school level, based on the revised curriculum emanating from the broad-based reform.

   The ETEP aimed to strengthen the provision of CPD through two main vehicles:



                                                                                                     Page 2 of 27
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  VN-Enhancing Teacher Education (P150060)



      core teachers and principal advisors, who would be assigned to schools and school clusters to
       provide face-to-face peer support; and
      an online platform that could provide needs-based, interactive training and support directly to
       teachers and principals.

Eight Lead Teacher Training Universities (LTTUs) (corresponding approximately to regions) were selected
to train and provide support to core teachers and principal advisors, develop the online services and
applications, and help develop the needs assessment systems. They were envisaged to provide technical
leadership and guidance for the school-based CPD system. The project design also provided for the
mobilization of world-class expertise to help develop and operationalize strategies for improving school-
based CPD for teachers and principals. This technical assistance was meant to support MoET and LTTUs
to: (i) prepare and operationalize policies and directives; (ii) inform and improve the technical quality of the
expected results; and (iii) reinforce the Program’s implementation, monitoring, and evaluation capacity.

In keeping with its PforR design, ETEP had four Results Areas, which were drawn from the NTEP and
constituted the principal strategies for establishing an effective and well-functioning CPD system capable of
providing school-based training for teachers and principals. These Program results and associated
disbursement-linked indicators (DLIs) were as follows:

Results Area 1: Improved teacher capacity of LTTUs and central teacher management units to enhance
teachers’ and principals’ effectiveness

      DLI 1: Institutional capacity of LTTUs to support the new CPD system for teachers and principals
       enhanced (Initial DLI Allocation: $27 million or 28 percent of project funds)

Results Area 2: Development of teacher and principal training needs assessments to inform CPD program
development

      DLI 2: Systems are in place to: (i) measure whether teachers and principals meet new professional
       standards; (ii) track and record evaluations of CPD programs; and (iii) record assessments of CPD
       needs of teachers and principals (Initial DLI Allocation: $18 million or 19 percent of project
       funds)

Results Area 3: School-based and continuous professional development for teachers and principals

      DLI 3: Number of core teachers and principal advisors selected and trained to provide systematic
       face-to-face school-based CPD to teachers and principals (Initial DLI Allocation: $22 million or 23
       percent of project funds)
      DLI 4: Number of core teachers and principal advisors providing school-based CPD to teachers and
       principals (Initial DLI Allocation: $14 million or 15 percent of project funds)

Results Area 4: Teachers and principals have access to CPD programs and resources through an
information and communications technology (ICT)-based system

      DLI 5: Number of teachers and principals who are satisfied with ICT-based interactive CPD
       services provided under the program (Initial DLI Allocation: $14 million or 15 percent of project
       funds)


                                                                                                    Page 3 of 27
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    VN-Enhancing Teacher Education (P150060)



  The DLIs each had one or more disbursement-linked results (DLRs) that would trigger periodic
  disbursements, as expected incremental progress over the life of the project would be achieved. The
  original DLI disbursement periods were defined as: (i) period 1 – the period from the signing of the
  Financing Agreement to December 31, 2017; (ii) period 2 – calendar year 2018; (iii) period 3 – calendar
  year 2019; (iv) period 4 – calendar year 2020; and (v) period 5 – calendar year 2021.



  Revisions to Components

  Project restructuring, finalized on April 27, 2021, maintained the original PDO statement and Results Areas,
  but it introduced revisions to PDO and DLI targets. While all eight of the original LTTUs would still
  implement their performance agreements, cosigned with MoET, and benefit from the project’s wide array of
  institutional strengthening and infrastructure support, it was decided to focus teacher educational
  development index (TEIDI) capacity development resources on the six highest performing LTTUs for the
  project’s remaining 14 months. In light of low achievement of their performance agreement targets and
  implementation delays, the two LTTUs that would no longer directly receive TEIDI capacity development
  support would instead receive capacity development and training from the higher performing LTTUs. This
  arrangement allowed MoET to focus its stretched capacity on the supervision of the six highest performing
  LTTUs. The scope of the project did not change, as the two other LTTUs continued: (i) the upgrading of
  their facility and ICT infrastructure as laid out in their performance agreements; (ii) participation in program-
  organized and –supported workshops related to CPD delivery; and (iii) teacher training related to
  CPD. Moreover, the restructuring did not impact activities undertaken by all eight LTTUs: (i) the nationwide
  rollout of the CPD; (ii) the training of core teachers and principal advisors to provide face-to-face school-
  based CPD to teachers and principals; or (iii) the interaction with all 63 provinces and departments of
  education and training. The restructuring did modify (i) the DLI 1 target for the project’s last two years
  (reducing from eight to six the number of LTTUs conducting an annual TEIDI self assessment, with results
  published) and (ii) a PDO target, reducing from eight to six the number of LTTUs achieving a Level 5 TEIDI
  performance rating, since the remaining two would no longer conduct an annual TEIDI assessment. These
  were not the only, or even the most salient, measures of capacity strengthening achievements, as
  discussed in Section 4 (Achievement of Objectives).

  Implementation delays prompted two other changes: cancellation of a portion of credit funds to be
  disbursed against each of the DLIs; and a modification of the remaining period dates, as follows: (i) period
  4 was modified from calendar year 2020 to January 1, 2020 – March 31, 2021; and period 5 was modified
  from calendar year 2021 to April 1, 2021 – December 31, 2021.

  The April 2021 restructuring also reduced a PDO target (number of teachers and principals satisfied with
  school-based CPD) from 480,000 to 320,000 because of implementation delays in the development of ICT-
  based CPD programs.

  A second restructuring, approved on April 13, 2022, requested by the government, cancelled an additional
  portion of IDA funding, and introduced a second modification of the period 5 disbursement time frame to
  compensate for COVID-19-related disruptions.



e. Comments on Program Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates

                                                                                                      Page 4 of 27
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     VN-Enhancing Teacher Education (P150060)



   Project Cost. Originally estimated at $100 million, the actual cost of the project was $54 million
   equivalent. The difference in planned versus actual cost is attributable to the cancellation of about half of
   the IDA Credit ($47 million equivalent) due to implementation delays.

   Financing and Borrower Contribution. Of the total actual project cost of $54.0 million equivalent, $48.0
   million was financed by IDA, $2.54 million was financed by the government (about half of its original
   commitment of $5.0 million), and $3.42 million was financed by LTTUs (unanticipated at appraisal). In terms
   of SDRs, the original IDA credit of 67.8 million SDRs was 50 percent disbursed, with a total of 33.7 million
   SDRs cancelled during the 2021 and 2022 restructurings and 34.1 million SDRs disbursed.

   Key Dates. The project was approved on June 29, 2016, became effective one year later on June 5, 2017,
   and closed, as scheduled, on June 30, 2022. On April 27, 2021 (1.5 years after the mid-term review) the
   project was restructured, including: a change in the results framework, a cancellation of part of the IDA
   financing, and changes to the time frames for DLIs, due to implementation delays. One year later, on April
   13, 2022, another restructuring cancelled an additional portion of IDA funding and extended the end of the
   final time frame for disbursing against DLIs from December 31, 2021 to March 31, 2022. This compensated
   for COVID-19-related lockdowns and social distancing between May and October 2021, which delayed the
   development of e-courses for teacher training.




3. Relevance   TBL




a. Relevance of Objectives    New




  Rationale
  The PDO is highly relevant to current country conditions. The project has made a substantial
  contribution to the ongoing implementation of the FCER, which seeks to evolve general education learning
  approaches to be less content-based and more competency- and quality-based to meet the needs and
  demands of Vietnam's socialist-oriented market economy and international integration. The preparedness
  and professionalism of teachers continue to be at the center of the reform process. The success of currently
  practicing teachers and principals in responding to different and constantly changing contexts and challenges
  will continue to depend heavily on the delivery of a quality CPD program, composed of training, support,
  greater interaction between professionals, reciprocity, mentorship, coaching, and on-time advice. Continued
  support, implementation, monitoring and evaluation, adaptation, and quality assurance of the CPD will
  therefore be critical in the years ahead.

  The PDO is highly relevant to the current development priorities of the country. The
  government's 2010-2020 Socio-Economic Development Strategy (SEDS) sought to transition the
  Vietnamese economy to a market economy with a workforce better suited to the new economy’s needs. The
  new SEDS (2021-2030) continues this vision, seeking to develop an integrated, efficient, and sustainable
  economy. In continued support of the SEDS’ priorities, the ongoing FCER also aims for education to meet
  the requirements of industrialization and modernization in the socialist-oriented market economy and
  international integration. Indeed, the FCER prioritizes general education (grades K-12), where learning




                                                                                                      Page 5 of 27
                              Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                              VN-Enhancing Teacher Education (P150060)



                       approaches are continually being revised to become less content-based and more competency- and quality-
                       based, with teachers and CPD as core to this effort.

                       The PDO is highly relevant to the Bank’s Country Partnership Framework (CPF) 2018-2022. The
                       project remains consistent with the CPF’s focus on the twin goals of eliminating extreme poverty and
                       promoting shared prosperity by investing in people and building the human capital base in
                       Vietnam. Specifically, the CPF provides continued support for activities that promote inclusive growth in order
                       to generate more and better economic opportunities for households, and invest in human capital to increase
                       household endowments. The project falls within the CPF’s “Focus Area 2: Investing in People in Knowledge,”
                       and its “Objective 8: strengthening the relevance and quality of tertiary education and labor market
                       institutions.” LTTUs supported under the project are tertiary institutions.

                       The Bank’s previous experience in Vietnam rendered it well equipped to undertake the project. First,
                       the Bank had accumulated considerable experience in supporting Vietnam’s education sector. At the time of
                       project design, the Bank’s engagement in Vietnam was increasingly focused on higher order skills and
                       competencies, while privileging the needs of disadvantaged students. Its portfolio of general (K-12)
                       education operations consisted of: School Readiness Promotion (P117393); Integrated Deaf Education
                       Outreach (P125581); School Education Quality Assurance (P091747); Vietnam Global Partnership for
                       Education (P120867); and Reform of General Education (P150058). All of these projects included teacher
                       training as an integral and important component. However, a system-wide teacher education system to
                       support teachers and principals more effectively was considered to be a needed complement to ensure the
                       establishment of a systematic and comprehensive approach to teacher training.

                       Second, at the time of project design, the Bank had both prior and ongoing experience in Vietnam with PforR
                       operations. These operations proved Vietnam’s capacity and preference to deliver large reform programs
                       without additional controls typical of investment projects. PforR experience in Vietnam showed how simplified
                       disbursement, financial management, and procurement provided the government the advantage of allowing
                       more time and attention to benefit from the Bank's technical expertise, with lower transaction costs and fewer
                       implementation issues (PAD, pp. 7-9).


       Rating Relevance TBL




                       Rating
                       High


b. Relevance of DLIs                          New




DLI RELEVANCE TBL




                DLI 1
                DLI
                Institutional capacity of LTTUs to support the new Continuous Professional Development system for teachers
                and principals enhanced

                Rationale
                This DLI was critical to the achievement of the project's objective to strengthen teacher training institutions'
                capacity. The TEIDI baseline assessment and signed Performance Agreements with MoET for all eight


                                                                                                                        Page 6 of 27
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      VN-Enhancing Teacher Education (P150060)



LTTUs provided them with the tools for strategic management, including: target-setting vis-a-vis their
baselines and TEIDI standards, planning, programming, budgeting, monitoring and evaluation, and
improvement of approaches and results. The performance agreements also served as a tool for accountability
and coordinating with MoET.



Rating
High

DLI 2
DLI
Systems are in place to: (i) measure whether teachers/principals meet new professional standards; (ii) track
and record evaluations of CPD programs; and (iii) record assessments of the CPD needs of teachers and
principals

Rationale
The establishment of a baseline assessment of teachers and principals' standards against new professional
standards was an important input for ensuring the quality, relevance, and focus of the CPD training design
and delivery. The annual tracking of the extent to which teachers and principals meet the new professional
standards under the reform was important for evaluating the effectiveness of CPD training delivered and for
its finetuning to address shortcomings in the full achievement of professional standards and to ensure its
alignment with the requirements of FCER. The publication of annual results on professional standards
achieved and on CPD needs of teachers and principals supported transparency and accountability and
encourages improvements in future CPD training.



Rating
High

DLI 3
DLI
Number of core teachers and principal advisors selected and trained to provide systematic face-to-face school-
based CPD to teachers and principals

Rationale
The selection of an adequate number of core teachers and principal advisors was the most critical component
to the delivery of in-person school-based training and follow-up coaching and mentoring.



Rating
High

DLI 4
DLI

                                                                                                 Page 7 of 27
                            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                            VN-Enhancing Teacher Education (P150060)



            Number of core teachers and principal advisors providing school-based continuous professional development
            to teachers and principals

            Rationale
            Having a core of trained school-based specialists that provide systematic face-to-face school-based CPD to
            teachers and principals was at the crux of the delivery of the program, and key for achieving enhanced
            teacher and principal effectiveness.



            Rating
            High

            DLI 5
            DLI
            Number of teachers and principals who are satisfied with ICT-based interactive CPD services provided under
            the program

            Rationale
            Teacher and principal satisfaction with ICT-based interactive services provided an indication of access,
            quality, convenience, relevance, and ease of use, all important for contributing to enhanced teacher and
            principal effectiveness through improved continuous professional development.



            Rating
            High


OVERALL RELEVANCE DLI TBL




            OVERALL RELEVANCE RATING
            Rationale
            The DLIs and associated DLRs were well articulated, each with a clear definition and protocol to evaluate
            achievement. They were reasonable in terms of expected achievement during implementation, with well
            distributed timing in terms of incentivizing and recognizing results as needed to put in place policies and
            procedures supporting program implementation. The DLI matrix was closely aligned with the Results
            Framework, including DLIs/DLRs that represented systems, procedures, or processes required for progress
            to be made towards other DLIs/DLRs. They provided strong incentives to institutionalize the systems and
            procedures needed to solidify and maintain the Program. The amounts allocated to DLRs were
            commensurate with their importance towards achieving other DLRs. The DLI matrix maintained its relevance
            throughout implementation. The April 2021 restructuring adjusted the DLI matrix to accommodate the two-
            year implementation delays to ensure targets were achievable, but it did not alter the goal of strengthening
            LTTUs or the medium-term outcome of enhancing teacher and principal effectiveness through the rollout and
            use of CPD. The achievement of DLRs led directly to the achievement of the PDO. Moreover, the DLIs
            provided continued incentives during COVID-19 to support virtual learning for CPD activities that had
            previously been conducted in person.


                                                                                                             Page 8 of 27
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  VN-Enhancing Teacher Education (P150060)




               Rating
               High



   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               Strengthen teacher training institutions to enhance teacher and principal effectiveness through improved
               continuous professional development

               Rationale
               As laid out in the ICR’s Figure 1 (p. 7), presenting the PAD’s theory of change, the project sought to
               strengthen the capacity of teacher education institutions and central teacher management units to deliver
               CPD to enhance the effectiveness of teacher and principal education. Under Results Area 1 (improved
               teacher capacity of LTTUs and central teaching management units to enhance teachers' and principals’
               effectiveness) and in keeping with the PforR design, DLIs supported and encouraged the following
               activities: undertaking by LTTUs of a TEIDI baseline assessment and the preparation of performance
               agreements and their co-signature with MoET; and undertaking by LTTUs of annual TEIDI self-assessments
               and the publication of TEIDI scores by MoET on its website. Performance agreements and TEIDI baselines
               and updates were envisaged as tools for improving LTTUs’ capacities in strategic management (goal setting,
               planning, programming, budgeting, monitoring, evaluation, and fine-tuning) to help guide, track, and achieve
               their capacity strengthening goals and to help MoET oversee their progress and hold them to account.

               The April 27, 2021 restructuring did not change the scope of the project, which still aimed to strengthen the
               capacities of all eight originally targeted LTTUs. However, some elements of implementation were modified to
               accommodate implementation delays, the heavy burden on MoET to deliver and oversee capacity building of
               all eight LTTUs, and the sheer magnitude of the project, which was nationwide in its focus. Specifically, the
               restructuring modified MoET's oversight and support of LTTUs' capacity building to focus more (but not
               exclusively) on the six highest-performing LTTUs, which, in turn, would provide capacity building support to
               the two other LTTUs. Although capable and strong performers in the delivery of teacher training, these two
               LTTUs had experienced delays in the implementation of their performance agreements co-signed with
               MoET. The restructuring allowed these two LTTUs continuous and full access to all capacity strengthening
               interventions supported under the project. While all eight would continue to undertake strategic management
               of their performance agreements (target setting, annual reviews and refinements), only the performance of
               the six strongest LTTUs would continue to be tracked using the TEIDI to measure their achievement of Level
               5 status. This was one measure of capacity strengthening, which was articulated as a PDO indicator, but not
               at all the sole measure of LTTUs' capacity gains under the project.

               The project sought to enhance teacher and principal effectiveness through the support of three Results
               Areas, seeking to (i) assess training needs; (ii) establish capacity to deliver in-school, face-to-face training,
               coaching, and mentoring; and (iii) develop and deliver electronic training resource material and


                                                                                                                     Page 9 of 27
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   VN-Enhancing Teacher Education (P150060)



support. Results Area 2 (development of teacher and principal training needs assessments to inform CPD
program development) was to be supported through DLI 2, which enabled disbursements against the
production of Teacher Education Management Information System (TEMIS)-generated annual reports on
CPD needs by provincial Departments of Education and Training (DoETs). Results Area 3 (school-based
and continuous professional development for teachers and principals) was to be supported through: DLI 3,
which enabled disbursements against the number of core teachers and principal advisors selected and
trained by LTTUs to provide systematic face-to-face school-based CPD to teachers and principals; and DLI 4,
which enabled disbursements against the number of core teachers and principal advisors providing school-
based continuous professional development to teachers and principals, in line with their individual annual
plans. Results Area 4 (teachers and principals have access to CPD programs and resources through an
information and communications technology-based system) was to be supported through DLI 5, which
enabled disbursements against the number of teachers and principals who are satisfied with ICT-based
interactive CPD services provided under the program.



Outputs and intermediate results



Results Area 1: Improved teacher capacity of LTTUs and central teacher management units to enhance
teachers’ and principals’ effectiveness

With project support, the LTTUs supported under the Program improved their capacity on the following fronts:

      University governance and leadership: The development and implementation of LTTUs'
       performance agreements have enhanced their strategic planning. Modified for use by Vietnamese
       LTTUs, the TEIDI instrument, including its framework and guidelines, guided and facilitated strategic
       management. All eight of the original LTTUs underwent a baseline TEIDI assessment providing the
       basis for their performance agreements, which included their mission, vision, development strategies,
       and short-, medium- and long-term goals. Annual performance agreement implementation plans
       included specific performance indicators and budget requirements and were publicly posted on
       LTTUs’ websites. The LTTUs also used the PDCA (Plan, Do, Check, Act) cycle, key performance
       indicators, a stakeholder feedback system, and digital technology for continuous improvement in
       governance, teaching, and learning. The ETEP was a pilot on the use of performance agreements for
       strategic planning and budgeting, and the government is moving toward establishing this practice to
       other higher education institutions.
      LTTUs established Teacher-Learner Communities (between LTTU faculty and core teachers) and
       communities of practice (COPs) in competency-based teacher education (among faculty
       members of all LTTUs). The COPs enhanced faculty insights into classroom and school contexts,
       thus enhancing their practices in pre-service and in-service teacher education for all eight LTTUs. All
       LTTUs strengthened partnerships with provincial governments in continuous assessment of CPD
       needs and school-based professional development support for teachers and principals.
      Capacity strengthening in research, development, and innovation was achieved through the
       establishment of six cross-LTTU research groups on six educational science research topics, which
       were presented internationally. LTTU research was used to create a more demand-driven teacher
       education curriculum, online courses and blended programs, and deployed methodologies to enhance
       graduate employability skills and deliver a large-scale CPD program in coordination with

                                                                                               Page 10 of 27
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
VN-Enhancing Teacher Education (P150060)



     stakeholders. Moreover, LTTUs developed and implemented policies and plans on scientific research,
     development, and innovation, along with new research regulations, aligned with their visions,
     missions, strategies, and budgets. Between 2017 and 2022, all eight LTTUs substantially increased
     their international publications (detailed in the ICR, p. 17).
    Encompassing a broad range of training and continuous hands-on support and learning, capacity
     development for teacher training lecturers has helped LTTU faculty apply both theory and hands-
     on practical experience. Training and workshops were provided to teams in all eight original LTTUs,
     including core teacher training lecturers and core management lecturers. All eight participated in
     capacity building activities supported by education experts from the United Kingdom, Hong Kong,
     China, Taiwan, China, and Australia, as well as local experts recruited by ETEP. Between 2018 and
     2022, the share of all lecturers in LTTUs with PhDs increased substantially in seven of the eight
     LTTUs, with the eighth (with an already high baseline) remaining stable (detailed in the ICR, p. 18).
    The TEIDI included a set of standards for quality assurance and accreditation of Vietnam’s higher
     education institutions. The standards referenced are those of the Association of Southeast Asian
     Nations University Network Quality Assurance. Annual TEIDI assessments – undertaken initially in all
     eight LTTUs during the first three years and in six during the last two years – evaluated all quality
     assurance activities, based on these standards.
    Capacity strengthening in curriculum development and pedagogical renovation:
           o With project support, LTTUs developed 51 CPD modules (24 for general education teachers
              and 27 for general education managers) for primary, lower secondary, and upper secondary
              levels.
           o Of the 51 modules, nine were compulsory CPD training modules, developed by seven LTTUs
              (the six retained for TEIDI analysis, plus one of the two dropped from TEIDI analysis: National
              Academy of Education Management) for the national-scale rollout of the CPD to all 63
              provinces.
           o All CPD modules were aligned with government Circulars on the establishment of the CPD
              program and with Circulars and Decisions related to the rollout of the new curriculum (New
              Competency-Based Curriculum 2018).
           o The quality and relevance of the CPD program were ensured through: (i) a highly participatory
              design process including a wide range of actors and stakeholders; (ii) the involvement of
              curriculum experts, ensuring strong alignment between pedagogical approaches, curriculum,
              and learning assessment; (iii) a rigorous quality assurance process that drew on state-of-the-
              art teaching and assessment knowledge and modern school governance practices; (iv) the
              independent verification agency (IVA)’s review and confirmation of a satisfactory process and
              program; and (v) the rollout of the program in conjunction with the new K-12 competency-
              based education program supported by the broader education reform (FCER) implementation.
           o The LTTUs also developed CPD e-learning courses consisting of 18 training modules for two
              target groups: core and general education teachers and managers at three levels, primary
              (grades 1-5), secondary (grades 6-9), and high school (grades 10-12). These became
              increasingly important during COVID-19, mitigating some of its negative impacts on the
              delivery of the CPD program.
           o ETEP created an effective CPD model for general education school teachers, which moved
              from a centralized professional development model to a continuing, onsite, blended model
              (using in-person and online training through learning management system [LMS] support),
              which is continuously delivered by all eight teacher training universities.
    Upgrading of infrastructure: All eight original LTTUs completed the upgrading of their facilities as
     well as their ICT projects, in line with their signed performance agreements. ICT infrastructure

                                                                                               Page 11 of 27
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   VN-Enhancing Teacher Education (P150060)



      included upgraded core software for training, upgraded network transmission systems, Wi-Fi access,
      new servers, internet connections, library software, learning materials, production equipment,
      installation of learning materials production studios, and installation and upgrading of functional
      modules in the LMS system. This equipment also facilitated LTTUs’ establishment of an online training
      research institute.
           o The completion of these activities improved the procurement capacity and infrastructure
               management capacity of LTTUs. More importantly, these acquisitions contributed to unlocking
               LTTUs’ potential to reach regional and international levels; maximizing LTTUs’ efficiency in
               carrying out their functions (teaching, research, learning support, CPD, and networking, among
               others); enhancing collaboration and sharing of data among LTTUs; and mitigating the impacts
               on learning imposed by the COVID-19 pandemic restrictions.



Results Area 2: Development of teacher and principal training needs assessments to inform CPD program
development (DLI2)

Outputs:

     MoET outsourced the provision of the TEMIS system to a corporation, which signed an agreement to
      provide TEMIS services for free until June 2026.
     The LMS, operated by the same company, was connected to the TEMIS to facilitate their
      interfaces. The TMES now houses teacher and principal self-assessment data and reports with
      supporting evidence, peer reviews, and management appraisal and is the first repository of its kind in
      Vietnam.
     The annual TEMIS reporting process moved the yearly performance assessment from paper-based to
      online, making teacher education information available at national, provincial, and district levels. This
      has increased the accountability of teachers, school principals, and local authorities in conducting
      honest assessments.
     MoET has also institutionalized user roles and processes through official guidelines and user training
      provided for all 63 provinces. This has resulted in the availability of reliable information on CPD needs
      and programs, which supports evidence-based planning, budgeting, and implementation.
            o IRI 1: The number of TEMIS-generated annual reports on CPD needs by provincial DoETs
              increased from a baseline of 0 in 2016 to 45 in 2022, fully achieving the target of 45. It is
              important to note that the TEMIS uses the new set of teacher and principal professional
              standards developed and adopted under the project to align with the new curriculum.
            o TEMIS was deployed in all 63 provincial DoETs, which are capable of extracting reports on
              teacher performance and CPD for teachers and principals, with 45 of the 63 meeting
              established quality standards.
            o The associated DLI 2 (systems are in place in at least 45 DOETs to (i) measure whether
              teachers and principals meet new professional standards; (ii) track and record evaluations of
              CPD programs; and (iii) record assessment of CPD needs of teachers and principals) was
              fully achieved, given the 45 TEMIS reports generated.
            o The new teacher professional standards under Results Area 2 included a requirement for the
              mastery of ethnic minority languages, and TEMIS provides gender- and minority-disaggregated
              data so that DoETs could focus on the CPD needs of women and ethnic minorities.



                                                                                                Page 12 of 27
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   VN-Enhancing Teacher Education (P150060)




Results Area 3: School-based and continuous professional development for teachers and principals

     IRI 2: The number of deployed core teachers and/or principal advisors having completed different
        priority training module sets for the year increased from the 2016 baseline of 0 to 30,134 (of which
        26,319 were core teachers and 3,815 were principal advisors), all completing six modules
        cumulatively by 2022, exceeding the target of 28,600 completing six modules cumulatively.
       Thirty-six modules were delivered to the 30,134 core teachers and principal advisors at primary, lower
        secondary, and upper secondary levels in 63 provinces through in-person training and the LMS
        (blended model). The CPD blended model was essential in expanding equal access to CPD
        opportunities for teachers and principals all over the country. The online learning with onsite support
        has radically shifted the CPD paradigm for teachers and principals. Of the 36 modules that were
        delivered to more than 30,000 core teachers and principal advisors, 30 were compulsory, delivered by
        911 core faculties from the LTTUs to over 600,000 teachers and principals supported by the trained
        core teachers and principal advisors.
       The online learning was advantageous during the COVID-19 pandemic, when in-person delivery was
        impossible in most provinces over six months in 2021. It also helped strengthen the instructional
        design of core faculty and the ICT skills of teachers and principals and ensured knowledge was not
        diluted through the cascading training module. The blended delivery model also allowed learners to
        learn at their own pace and at a time that would not disrupt classes.
       The core teachers and principal advisors’ selection processes, as well as their roles and
        responsibilities, were institutionalized by the MoET to provide continuous school-based support for
        teachers across the country. This policy decision has contributed to the sustainability of ETEP.
       MoET’s Official Note 3587 strongly encouraged DoETs to select ethnic minority teachers and
        principals to become core teachers and principal advisors and also encouraged gender balance.
       Both DLIs associated with this Results Area were substantially achieved.
              o DLI 3 (number of core teachers and principal advisors selected and trained to provide
                 systematic face-to-face school-based CPD to teachers and principals) was fully achieved by
                 the project’s end, with basic training provided to 25,000 core teachers and 3,600 principal
                 advisors, fully achieving the targets of 25,000 and 3,600, respectively, for a total of 28,600
                 trained.
              o DLI 4 (number of core teachers and principal advisors providing school-based continuous
                 professional development to teachers and principals) was substantially achieved by the
                 project’s end: 25,000 core teachers and 3,288 principal advisors provided school-based CPD
                 to teachers and principals, in line with their individual annual plans. This represented the full
                 achievement of the 25,000 target for core teachers, and a 91 percent achievement of the 3,600
                 target for principal advisors.
              o Women made up 60 percent of the core teachers and principal advisors throughout
                 implementation, and ethnic minorities comprised approximately 10 percent of the core teachers
                 and principal advisors.
              o About 29 percent of the core teachers and principal advisors came from disadvantaged areas.




                                                                                                   Page 13 of 27
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   VN-Enhancing Teacher Education (P150060)



Results Area 4: Teachers and principals have access to CPD programs and resources through an
information and communications technology-based system

      IRI 3: The number of teachers and school principals having completed different mandatory online
         modules of the CPD program set for the year through the LMS increased from the 2016 baseline of 0
         to 527,532 (five modules cumulatively) by 2022, exceeding the target of 480,000 (five modules).
              o Of the total number of CPD participants each year, one quarter were from disadvantaged
                 areas.
        The associated DLI 5 (number of teachers and principals who are satisfied with ICT-based interactive
         CPD services provided under the program) reached 320,000 in period 5 (the project’s last year), fully
         achieving the target of 320,000.
        In addition to the web-based LMS, social media capacity enabled rapid support by the LTTU faculty
         and core teachers to ensure quality and consistency of CPD at provincial levels.
        MoET also issued guidelines on: (i) CPD planning and monitoring at provincial and LTTU levels; (ii)
         online pre-learning activities; (iii) peer support; and (iv) monitoring and reporting.
        The development of the CPD mechanism was timely in that it prepared general education teachers
         and principals for the new national competency-based curriculum implementation in grades 1, 2, 3, 6,
         7, and 10.
        In 2021-22, a survey to determine satisfaction levels of teachers and principals with the CPD online
         programs in five areas, all recorded on TEMIS, indicated that the project-supported CPD programs
         were relevant, useful, and practical. Almost all teachers and principals agreed or strongly agreed that
         the online CPD program was: relevant to the needs of continuing professional development (97
         percent of teachers; 97 percent of principals), useful to apply to the learning curriculum (97 percent of
         teachers; 97 percent of principals), and a contribution to improvements in students’ learning
         performance (97 percent of teachers; 97 percent of principals).
        Comments centered around the appreciation of respondents of: the availability of online CPD
         programs, which allowed for self-paced learning; and the importance of online interactive support,
         allowing learners to quickly and easily contact core teacher training lecturers to discuss professional
         issues and participate in regular discussions with colleagues through several channels of social
         networks such as Facebook, Zalo, email, messengers, and others.



Outcomes

The project was successful in strengthening the management and technical capacities of all eight teacher
education institutions supported under the operation.

      All eight originally selected institutions were substantially strengthened under the project to deliver the
         CPD program nationwide to 63 provinces.
            o The undertaking of their baseline TEIDI assessments, coupled with the preparation of
               performance agreements and their co-signature with the government, strengthened their
               capacities – and their practice – with regard to strategic management: planning, programming,
               vision- and target-setting, implementation, monitoring, and evaluation.
            o Their participation in Teacher-Learner Communities and Communities of Practice enhanced
               their exposure to new ideas, professional exchanges with colleagues, and the real challenges
               faced at the classroom level, and strengthened partnerships with the provinces they served.

                                                                                                    Page 14 of 27
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   VN-Enhancing Teacher Education (P150060)



            o Stepped up research, development, and innovation enhanced the quality and evidence base of
               the CPD and substantially increased the international publications of all eight LTTUs.
            o Training, workshops, and technical assistance enhanced the capacities of teacher trainer
                lecturers, exposing them both to classroom realities in Vietnam and to international best
                practices, along with new pedagogical approaches to delivering training and coaching.
             o More attention to quality assurance and accreditation under the TEIDI assessments, which all
                eight LTTUs initially underwent, introduced an enhanced focus on quality standards in their
                development plans and in plan implementation.
             o Both through the provision of international technical expertise and through applied work, the
                capacities of LTTUs to design and deliver CPD modules aligned with the new curriculum and
                reform was enhanced.
             o The upgrading of the eight LTTUs' physical facilities and their ICT capacity and equipment
                contributed to improvements in the quality and reach of training and training materials.
      Six LTTIs improved their performance to provide CPD as measured by the TEIDI. Between the
       baseline year of 2017 and 2022 (project’s closing), all six achieved an increase in their TEIDI scores
       achieving level five (defined as a score of >4.43), fully achieving the target of achieving level five,
       set at the time of the April 2021 restructuring. The baseline and endline data for each of the six
       institutions (verified by IVA) are as follows:
             o Hanoi National University of Education: from 3.47 to 5.00 (level 5)
             o Thai Nguyen University of Education: from 3.30 to 4.72 (level 5)
             o University of Education – Vinh University: from 4.22 to 4.86 (level 5)
             o Hue University of Education-University of Hue: from 3.55 to 4.95 (level 5)
             o Da Nang University of Education-University of Da Nang: from 3.34 to 4.88 (level 5)
             o Ho Chi Minh University of Education: from 3.10 to 4.91 (level 5).

The revised target actually set the bar much higher than the original target (a 15 percent increase over the
baseline score), which was exceeded.

      All eight LTTUs included in the original project design signed performance agreements with MoET and
       conducted baseline TEIDI assessments, the DLI 1 for periods 1, 2, and 3 (eight LTTUs conducted an
       annual TEIDI assessment and published the TEIDI scores on their website), enabling the full
       disbursement against this DLI for those initial three years. The absence of TEIDI endline data for the
       remaining two LTTUs is a result of project restructuring/simplification and not an indication of their
       performance.

The project contributed to improved effectiveness of teachers through its transparent collection, monitoring,
and use of teacher training needs assessments to design, tailor, and improve the delivery of CPD,
encompassing school-based training, coaching and mentoring, virtual support, and electronically accessible
resource materials. The results framework categorized improved teacher effectiveness as a “medium-term”
outcome,” in recognition that it would start accruing during the later years of the project, when LTTUs would
have been strengthened, training needs assessments would have been undertaken and monitored, and the
new CPD approach would have been designed and launched. Early indications reveal improvements in
teachers' and principals’ effectiveness.

      Supervisors’ assessments of teachers' and principals’ effectiveness, based on the MoET professional
       standards and recorded in the new TEMIS, reveal improvements in performance assessment results
       between the 2019-2020 and 2020-2021 school years. TEMIS data show that:


                                                                                                 Page 15 of 27
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   VN-Enhancing Teacher Education (P150060)



              o The share of principals assessed as “distinguished” (out of a four-scale ranking of unmet,
                threshold, competent, and distinguished) increased for all 18 criteria set out in the professional
                standards. Ninety-eight percent of all principals assessed were rated either “competent” or
                “distinguished” for both school years, but there was an increase of 11 percentage points (from
                51.6 to 62.6 percent) in the share of those assessed as “distinguished.”
             o The share of teachers assessed as “distinguished” increased for 14 out of the 15 criteria set
                out in the professional standards. Ninety-six percent of all teachers assessed were rated either
                “competent” or “distinguished” for both school years, but there was an increase of 10
                percentage points (from 44.7 to 54.5 percent) in the share of those assessed as
                “distinguished.”
             o Moreover, all teachers assessed as “distinguished” showed improvements against criteria 2
                (teachers’ working style), 4 (development of teaching and instructional plans for student
                development in personal qualities and competencies), 5 (use of teaching and educational
                methods to develop students’ personal qualities and competencies development), and 7
                (student counseling and support). This is important, because one aspect required within the
                above-cited criteria is that students of these teachers demonstrate substantial learning
                progress or exceed the set targets towards the end of the academic year. An increase in the
                share of teachers assessed as “distinguished” among all teachers implies substantial progress
                of their students in academic results.
      The number of teachers and principals satisfied with school-based continuous professional
       development increased from the baseline of 0 in 2016 to 637,279, exceeding the original target of
       480,000 and almost achieving a doubling of the revised target of 320,000 established in 2021.
       Satisfaction was measured by a composite index taking into account: (i) interactive support provided;
       and (ii) quality of ICT-based interactive CPD services, including availability, relevance to new teacher
       and principal standards, usefulness in the classroom, and contribution to improved student
       outcomes. Satisfied teachers and principals were those with an average score of 3 and above (on a
       scale of 1 to 4/totally satisfied), with no scores below 2.5. The ICR attributes these scores to the
       introduction of the TEMIS and LMS systems, which, although delayed, ultimately allowed access to
       this survey and to the CPD training materials and teacher self-assessments.
             o TEMIS data showed that 96.7 percent of all female teachers were satisfied with the new
                school-based CPD and that 97.1 percent of the female ethnic minority teachers were
                satisfied. These are important gender and ethnic minority participation-related
                accomplishments for the sector.
             o A 2021 survey of teachers and principals from disadvantaged areas showed that 96.9 percent
                of teachers and 96.6 percent of principals were satisfied with the new school-based CPD.



Rating
Substantial




OVERALL EFFICACY
Rationale


                                                                                                   Page 16 of 27
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     VN-Enhancing Teacher Education (P150060)



 First, the project strengthened MoET’s capacity in strategic management and enabled the successful
 institutionalization of school-based CPD for teachers and principals through key MoET actions including: the
 development and implementation of teacher professional development policies and regulations;
 establishment and monitoring of new professional standards for teachers and principals; assessing demand
 for school-based CPD; assessing the effectiveness and ensuring the quality of CPD interventions; and using
 evaluation results for learning and adjusting. Second, the project strengthened LTTUs’ capacities in:
 strategic management, including M&E; research; the delivery of a more demand-driven and blended
 (combining in-person and online) teacher education curriculum; and substantial upgrades in IT facilitating
 continuation of service delivery during COVID, the development and use of integrated management
 information systems, and blended learning platforms. The Teacher-Learning Community (between LTTU
 faculty and core teachers) and communities of practice (among faculty members of all LTTUs) have
 strengthened partnerships and collaboration providing for continuous, evidence-based improvements. Third,
 teachers and principals who benefited from the CPD training program interventions have been assessed by
 their supervisors as having improved their effectiveness. Fourth, the DLIs were achieved and the
 mechanisms and monitoring tools that they put into place have been used at scale to train hundreds of
 thousands teachers a year, all leading to systemic change and a paradigm shift for teacher training and
 continuous professional development

 Attribution. During her March 29, 2023 meeting with IEG the TTL provided the following
 assessment. Project attribution is strong. This operation was the first-ever investment of its kind in GoV's
 education sector. GoV's original request to the Bank in 2013 was for investment in the infrastructure of seven
 teacher training universities. Given GoV's launch at that time of wide-reaching curriculum reform (from
 general knowledge-based to competency-based), the Bank convinced GoV to link the proposed project to this
 reform, providing needed support to enhance the capacity of Vietnam's teachers to deliver on this major
 reform. No other development partner was involved in this dialogue or support.

 Counterfactual. The TTL also conveyed to IEG during their March 29, 2023 meeting her assessment of the
 counterfactual. The success of Vietnam's education reform was highly contingent on the development of
 teachers' competencies and skills to deliver the new curriculum. Without this project, teachers would most
 likely not have acquired the skills to deliver the reformed curriculum. Moreover, had the PforR design not
 been the chosen instrument, the achievement of capacities and systems strengthening would likely have
 been considerably more modest. At the time of design, education projects in Vietnam were exclusively input-
 based. The PforR approach of disbursing against the delivery of results supported and nurtured the very
 capable LTTUs to assume accountability and responsibility for implementing their plans, achieving their goals,
 and enhancing their partnerships and collaborations with the 63 provincial education offices in the delivery
 and ongoing refinement of CPD.



 Rating
 Substantial


5. Outcome

The relevance of the PDO is rated high as the project was responsive to country conditions and issues faced by
Vietnam’s education sector today, and remains tightly aligned with the government's ongoing reform (FCER),
whose success depends heavily on quality CPD for practicing teachers and principals. Strengthened capacity of

                                                                                                 Page 17 of 27
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      VN-Enhancing Teacher Education (P150060)



teacher education institutions to deliver improved continuous professional development was substantially
achieved. All eight targeted institutions improved their capacities in: strategic management, including M&E;
research; the delivery of a more demand-driven and blended (in-person and online) teacher education
curriculum; and substantial upgrades in physical facilities and ICT, the latter facilitating continuation of service
delivery during COVID. Moreover, enhanced teacher and principal effectiveness through continuous
professional development was substantially achieved. Based on MoET’s professional standards, supervisors’
assessments of in-service teachers and principals’ effectiveness revealed substantial improvements in the
share assessed as “distinguished” (the highest rating of a four-point scale) increasing, respectively, by 11 and
10 percentage points. An increase in the share of teachers assessed as “distinguished” among all teachers
implies substantial progress of their students in academic results.


    Outcome Rating
    Satisfactory


6. Risk to Development Outcome

The risk that the development outcome will not be sustained is low. First, the design and implementation
were technically sound. The complete CPD mechanism, including the LMS, demonstrated that it can deliver
online and face-to-face training, and contributed to systemic change and a paradigm shift in how CPD is
conducted for teachers and principals. Core teachers and principals now provide teachers with coaching and
mentorship at the school level to help improve their teaching. Second, this system, now delivering training
at a national scale, has earned the high satisfaction of participants, all creating an expectation among
beneficiaries and other stakeholders that it will continue to be the core teacher training system. Third, the
LTTUs showed enhanced capacity and a strong commitment on the part of their leadership and middle
management in their success in achieving a level 5 TEIDI score. Fourth, the deliverables under this
operation have been institutionalized within MoET’s Department of Teachers and Education Managers
(DTEM), which has issued guidelines for 2022 TEMIS reporting and teacher training with the CPD model and
is committed to annual guidance in future years. This includes using the CPD material development quality
assurance process, coordinating with the LTTUs in developing materials for new training modules, and
amending Circular 19 (on teacher CPD) accordingly. Fifth, the DTEM and ICT department have agreed to
ensure the interface between TEMIS and the education sector database and to continue the ETEP’s CPD
blended delivery model. Sixth, the TEMIS will be maintained until 2026 by the current provider, after which
MoET has committed to developing an in-house TEMIS, specified in the ministry’s information technology
Master Plan. Seventh, government commitment is assessed as strong, given that the success of its ongoing
education sector reform (FCER) depends heavily on continued delivery, quality assurance, and improvement
of the CPD program. Finally, the following comments of the TTL shared with IEG during their meeting of
March 29, 2023, shed light on financial sustainability of the CPD. At project closing, MoET and the Ministry
of Finance issued a Circular providing the legal basis for the financing of CPD for teachers. The Circular
authorized the establishment of budget lines at the provincial level for CPD and guides how this financing
can be used to support associated expenses of e-learning, training, workshops, coaching, and mentoring. In
short, it institutionalized the mechanisms for CPD financing. Budget amounts are not currently sufficient to
meet all needs, but there is a law establishing all teachers' rights to access 120 hours of CPD annually and
assigning provincial education offices the responsibility for covering 75 percent of this need. The provinces
are satisfied with the LTTUs' capacity to deliver CPD and continue to engage them.



                                                                                                      Page 18 of 27
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     VN-Enhancing Teacher Education (P150060)




7. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project design was fully embedded in, and supportive of, Vietnam’s sector-wide education reform
  (FCER), which aimed to prepare for greater integration in the global economy by providing students with
  new skills and competencies. Vietnam’s NTEP was a key component of the FCER, and the project
  supported the catalytic component of the NTEP: teacher continuous professional development. The PDO
  was relevant to the country's needs and priorities. The results areas, along with the DLIs/DLRs, were
  directly linked to – and supportive of – the PDO. DLIs and associated DLRs were clearly defined, and
  protocols to evaluate their achievement were clear, reasonable, and measurable. There were
  shortcomings in the coherence between the theory of change (results chain) (ICR, Figure 1, p. 7) and the
  PDO statement (see Section 8 for details). The PforR financing instrument was an appropriate choice for
  supporting the reform of the teacher professional development system. The Bank team deserves
  recognition for its success in negotiating an evolution in the government's initial (2013) request for
  investment in the upgrading of teacher training universities' infrastructure to an operation that would also
  develop the capacities of these institutions to support the sector-wide reform through the design and
  delivery of CPD for teachers to facilitate reform implementation in the classroom.

  The program’s technical design drew from globally recognized approaches to improving teacher
  education through training, coaching, and mentorship at the school level, culminating in the appropriate
  focus on the four Results Areas. Implementation arrangements, including the M&E design, both used and
  further strengthened the capacities of MoET and LTTUs. Implementation arrangements for the Program
  were embedded within the formal sector structure, ensuring that capacity would be nurtured and
  developed at all levels. MoET was responsible for the strategic management, strengthening, and
  institutionalization of the CPD program, along with: (i) operating the M&E system; (ii) overseeing the
  implementation of LTTU performance agreements; (iii) creating a Project Management Unit (PMU) for
  tracking reporting on DLIs and sending disbursement requests to the Bank; and (iv) hiring the
  IVA. Provincial DoETs were responsible for overall quality control of the CPD process at the provincial
  level through: (i) administrative oversight of the core teachers and principals; (ii) ensuring that CPD was
  implemented at the local level; (iii) tracking needs assessments and associated training based on
  assessments; and (iv) overseeing the evaluation of teacher standards. LTTUs were responsible for
  implementing CPD improvements through training, research, online services, and support to core
  teachers and principals.

  Risk assessment was sound, and mitigation activities were effectively reflected in a sound design,
  including: technical assistance; capacity development activities; performance agreements between MoET
  and LTUUs to ensure timely provision of resources to LTTUs and financial management capacity
  development for LTTUs; criteria within performance agreements for promoting collaboration with other
  LTTUs and DoETs; utilization of the TEIDI tool to measure the effectiveness of needs-based CPD; and
  an IVA to ensure that DLIs were achieved as designed. The design also sought to ensure that female
  teachers and principals had equal access to regular and CPD training opportunities and that training was
  relevant to the cultural needs of ethnic minorities, through consultation workshops with women and ethnic
  minorities on the development and implementation of CPD programs.



                                                                                                    Page 19 of 27
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     VN-Enhancing Teacher Education (P150060)




  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Consistent supervision by the Bank team in-country provided the needed technical expertise to support the
 nationwide implementation of the new CPD program and was key to the project’s achievements. In total, 12
 World Bank review and implementation support missions, including a mid-term review, were undertaken,
 averaging over two per year. As a complement to these missions, the in-country Bank team worked with
 the Program teams to solve implementation challenges that arose, actively supporting the government in
 project implementation. The supervision teams consistently reported on safeguards, financial
 management, and procurement progress and worked with the PMU to build capacity in these areas. They
 also systematically documented project progress in aide-memoires, back-to-office reports, and
 Implementation Status and Results Reports, keeping Bank management apprised of progress and
 providing the foundation for the ICR's analysis. The Bank had a solid and ongoing relationship with MoET,
 enabling good collaboration and coordination, and contributing to the success achieved under the
 project. The Bank also included technical and area-specific experts as needed on supervision
 missions. The Bank’s positive response to the government’s request for the two restructurings was
 important, leading to the achievements made under this operation and the systemic changes within teacher
 education and CPD.

 A full-year delay in program effectiveness was due to two conditions of effectiveness not being met,
 including the completion of the program operational manual. The Bank provided considerable support
 through the Korea-World Bank Partnership Facility to build capacity to prepare this manual. In addition,
 delays in the Medium-Term Investment Plan and in the program financing regime led to delays in signing
 LTTU performance agreements, all of these disrupting the process of preparing, allocating, and approving
 the annual budgets of the PMU and LTTUs. By the November 2019 mid-term review, MoET had made
 significant progress in: (i) giving LTTUs autonomy in planning and budgeting of project activities directly
 linked to DLI outcomes; (ii) clearly articulating institutional arrangements for project implementation; and
 (iii) finalizing agreements on the implementation and management of the LMS and TEMIS through existing
 systems. The Bank accommodated the government’s request for the April 2021 restructuring after which
 disbursements doubled and there was a strong turnaround in implementation, and development objectives
 were achieved. The PforR design facilitated a continuous dialogue with the government. Delays in updating
 the curriculum at the teacher training institutions and the COVID-19 outbreak contributed to implementation
 delays. COVID-19 also played a role in accelerating the implementation of online self-paced CPD training,
 appreciated by beneficiaries.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


                                                                                                  Page 20 of 27
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     VN-Enhancing Teacher Education (P150060)




8. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The PforR’s results areas, and the corresponding DLIs, were fully supportive of the PDO “…to strengthen
 teacher training institutions to enhance teacher and principal effectiveness through improved continuous
 professional development.” However, the theory of change (results chain) (ICR, Figure 1, p. 7) and the
 PDO statement were not fully coherent with one another. The theory of change categorized three
 successive goals: (i) “improved capacity of LTTUs and central teacher management units to enhance
 teacher and principal education effectiveness” as an output; (ii) “the meeting of teacher training and
 support needs through the delivery of onsite and on-line CPD services” as a short-term outcome; and (iii)
 “enhanced teacher effectiveness” as a medium-term outcome. All three of these, however, are included as
 outcomes in the PDO statement. Indeed, as the project was designed and implemented, the strengthening
 of LTTUs and the design and delivery of a reformed CPD are outcomes. Because these two project
 outcomes, once achieved, were expected, in turn, to have an impact on teacher effectiveness, end-of-
 project data may provide only preliminary indication of improved teacher effectiveness, given that it is
 contingent on the achievement of the two previous outcomes.

 The choice of one outcome indicator -- improved performance of the eight lead teacher training universities
 (LTTUs) (selected for support under this project) to provide CPD, as measured by the Teacher Educational
 Development Index (TEIDI) – was a good choice for assessing strengthened institutional capacity. On the
 other hand, the other outcome indicator -- number of teachers and principals satisfied with school-based
 continuous professional development – was not a sufficiently objective or rigorous indicator for assessing
 teachers' and principals’ effectiveness. In addition, the PAD’s theory of change specified that capacity
 strengthening was intended not only for LTTUs, but also for central teacher management units of MoET,
 but there was no indicator to assess strengthened MoET capacity. The ICR and this ICRR do assess this
 strengthened capacity as an outcome.

 Other than the above-cited shortcomings, PDO-level indicators, intermediate outcome indicators, and
 DLIs/DLRs were clearly defined at appraisal, consistent, and mutually reinforcing. The stated results areas
 and indicators helped establish and implement the needed governance structure and frameworks to ensure
 systematic change within the teacher and principal CPD program. The M&E design enabled routine
 monitoring and reporting on progress in meeting the intermediate outcome and PDO targets in the results
 framework. M&E was also facilitated by the LTTUs’ performance agreements, which were a new and
 innovative design feature for donor-supported activities in the education sector, and by use of the TEIDI
 instrument for greater transparency and ease of tracking results. The online platform (TEMIS) enabled
 DoETs in all 63 provinces to track teacher and principal training needs and activities, along with their
 performance assessments. The design also included the development of the LMS for the delivery of online
 training. As a vehicle for confirming the achievement of DLIs/DLRs to authorize disbursements, the design
 included the hiring of an IVA, in this case the higher education quality unit of the Vietnam National
 University, Hanoi, which also provided capacity development for LTTUs in quality assurance during the
 verification process. M&E design and arrangements for this operation used -- and further strengthened --
  M&E capacities of MoET and the LTTUs.




                                                                                                 Page 21 of 27
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     VN-Enhancing Teacher Education (P150060)



b. M&E Implementation
  The collection and reporting of data for the results framework indicators was carried out, as planned,
  throughout implementation. Performance indicators were tracked regularly, and the results
  framework was updated in a timely manner for supervision missions and the mid-term review. MoET’s
  signed contract with the IVA enabled the independent assessments of DLI/DLR achievements, which
  were used to authorize disbursements, as well as the provision of training in quality assurance to all
  LTTUs. All eight LTTUs developed performance agreements based on the TEIDI instrument; and the
  online LMS and TEMIS were developed. The PMU developed and promulgated a quality assurance
  mechanism for CPD material development, training of core teachers and principal advisors, and training
  of teachers and principals, which provided the basis for LTTUs to strengthen their supervision and quality
  assurance capacity. Capacity building included the development of M&E regulations, guidelines, and
  reporting forms between MoET and the LTTUs, as well as the establishment of M&E departments within
  the universities, responsible for performance agreement implementation; agreements related to DLIs and
  outcome indicators, and submission of evaluation reports based on PMU guidance. LTTU M&E
  departments also monitored the quality of CPD material development and other program activities
  following quality assurance processes introduced by the PMU, with support from MoET’s quality
  assurance department and other key technical departments. In retrospect, it may have been helpful, as a
  part of the April 2021 restructuring, to have either replaced the PDO assessing capacities of LTTUs as
  measured by the TEIDI, or added additional capacity outcome indicators, to document that, even though
  the target for this PDO indicator was reduced from eight to six LTTUs, neither the scope of the project nor
  its capacity achievements fell short of the original target of all eight LTTUs.



c. M&E Utilization
  Data were made available regularly for the results framework and were used to: (i) analyze project
  progress towards reaching the PDOs and suggest remedial actions when risk to their achievement was
  identified; (ii) inform the two project restructurings; and (iii) inform the ICR analysis and findings. The IVA
  reports were used to validate DLI/DLR reports and disburse IDA resources. The TEIDI assessments
  were used to develop LTTU performance agreements, and performance agreement reports were
  used by MoET to allocate resources to the LTTUs to support agreed activities and actions. The LTTU
  M&E departments ensured the quality of the CPD materials, which were ultimately rolled out to all 63
  provinces in Vietnam through the LMS. Provinces generated TEMIS reports on teacher assessments
  against professional standards. These reports helped to determine needs for teacher professional
  development, encompassing online training and face-to-face training and support. The multi-pronged
  quality assurance process established for CPD under the project has now been institutionalized
  throughout the system.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

9. Other Issues

a. Safeguards


                                                                                                       Page 22 of 27
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    VN-Enhancing Teacher Education (P150060)



  The TTL confirmed, during the March 29, 2023 exchange with IEG, that this operation was classified as
  Category B. An Environmental and Social Systems Assessment (ESSA) determined that the project was
  not expected to have negative environmental impacts, although some generation of noise, dust, solid waste
  and wastewater, and health and safety risks might be caused by some of the LTTU upgrading
  activities. The potential negative environmental impact of these works was assessed to be minor,
  temporary, and localized. Any negative environmental impacts were to be mitigated by applying the
  Environmental Codes of Practice and Worker’s Codes of Conduct, and by implementing communication
  activities in construction contracts to manage issues at construction sites. The ESSA was disclosed in the
  World Bank InfoShop on June 8, 2016 and in Vietnam on April 12, 2016. Safeguards performance was
  monitored and supervised regularly by the PMU, relevant consultants, and LTTU authorities, and rated
  satisfactory in the Bank’s internal reporting, with the exception of one six-month period in January 2021,
  when safeguards were rated moderately satisfactory. The downgrade was made because: (i) not all the
  LTTUs’ bidding and contractual documents covered environmental provisions as required in the Operations
  Manual, nor the Bank’s guidance on COVID-19 control and prevention; and (ii) the LTTUs had not provided
  a sound management plan to avoid dumping of expired ICT equipment and infrastructure. By August 2021,
  these issues were resolved, and the rating was restored to satisfactory.

  A Grievance Redress Mechanism was established for the program, consisting of: (i) a website containing a
  link for the public to provide complaints and comments; (ii) a feedback survey mechanism for core teachers
  and principals who participated in LTTU training; (iii) software provided by MoET to house complaints within
  the system, including project-related complaints; (iv) LTTU hotlines; and (v) People’s Inspectorates, already
  established within each LTTU. The program operations manual and the project’s Official Note 85 (on
  information disclosure and handling of complaints and denunciations) provided this information.

  Social safeguards were continuously rated as satisfactory. The project supported the development of
  detailed guidelines to facilitate meaningful consultations with vulnerable groups and a detailed
  communications plan, fully implemented by the PMU and LTTUs. The LTTUs: (i) integrated the “Bias
  Avoidance Framework” in the development of the CPD training materials; (ii) ensured inclusion of regional
  differences and ethnic minority and gender issues in training materials; (iii) disaggregated teacher feedback
  by ethnicity, gender, and disadvantaged areas in their reports; and (iv) extended the e-learning time for core
  teachers and principals in ethnic minority and remote areas because of connection difficulties. Consultations
  and surveys were undertaken to gain feedback from teachers who are female, of an ethnic minority, and/or
  from disadvantaged areas in order to improve tailoring and delivery of activities to these groups.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management. During project design, the Bank’s Fiduciary System Assessment found that the
  project’s financial management arrangements provided reasonable assurance that financing proceeds
  would be used for the intended purposes. As recommended by this assessment, the Ministry of Finance
  established and maintained a separate account for project funding to ensure the monitoring of related
  activities. In addition, an IVA was contracted in accordance with the Financing Agreement. Disbursements
  were approved against IVA validation of all DLI/DLR achievements. Qualified financial
  management specialists were maintained throughout implementation and, when needed, capacity
  development workshops were conducted by Bank financial management specialists for PMU and LTTU
  financial management staff to help adhere to requirements. The required audits were submitted to the
  Bank in accordance with the Financing Agreement. Auditors’ opinions were unqualified (clean) throughout

                                                                                                  Page 23 of 27
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     VN-Enhancing Teacher Education (P150060)



   the Program period. During the March 29, 2023 exchange with IEG, the TTL confirmed that the final audit
   report, due on December 31, 2022, was submitted to the Bank on time and with an unqualified (clean)
   opinion.

   Financial management performance was rated satisfactory or moderately satisfactory during
   implementation, except for the year between December 2018 and December 2019, when it was rated
   moderately unsatisfactory. This was largely due to inefficient ETEP budgeting and planning, specifically
   for: (i) 2018 financial plans for LTTUs, which were approved late; and (ii) prolonged delays in the
   confirmation and allocation of the Medium-Term Investment Plan budget for the project, leading to delays
   in capital expenditure allocations for the LTTUs. By December 2019, the financial
   management performance rating returned to moderately satisfactory and remained so until project
   closing. Of the original IDA financing amount of $95 million equivalent, an amount of $46,959,709
   equivalent was cancelled under two restructurings. The total Program disbursements amounted to
   $48 million equivalent.

   Procurement was to follow national procurement laws and regulations. The Bank’s assessment of
   procurement arrangements undertaken during appraisal found that the system in place was generally
   sound, and the gaps in the government’s procurement systems were not major. Procurement under the
   proposed Program was modest in size and complexity, mainly including civil works of small and medium
   sized lecture halls and small upgrading construction; goods (furniture, ICT equipment) for small and
   medium sized laboratories, libraries, and classrooms; and consulting services.

   The procurement performance rating was satisfactory or moderately satisfactory throughout
   implementation except for the year between December 2018 and December 2019, when it was rated
   moderately unsatisfactory. The downgrade was due to slow progress in the procurement of packages
   related to contracting the IVA and the development of the LMS-TEMIS, and to the delay in the Medium-
   Term Investment Plan, noted above in the financial management discussion. Delays in the LMS-TEMIS
   were rooted in MoET’s indecision on how the system would be developed and maintained. By December
   2019, these issues were resolved and ratings returned to satisfactory and moderately satisfactory until
   project closing. Procurement was implemented in compliance with the Procurement Action Plans, with all
   activities included in these plans ultimately completed. During implementation, Bank procurement staff
   provided training to the PMU and LTTUs to ensure compliance with guidelines. Procurement plans were
   updated and submitted to the Bank regularly and were always of good quality.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None reported.



d. Other
   None



10. Ratings

                                                                                                Page 24 of 27
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     VN-Enhancing Teacher Education (P150060)



                                                                                   Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                     IEG
                                                                                   Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Satisfactory           Satisfactory

Bank Performance                Satisfactory           Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                  Substantial            Substantial

Quality of ICR                  ---                    Substantial


11. Lessons

The following lessons, slightly reworded by IEG, are a subset of the six relevant and insightful
lessons presented in the ICR:

      The PforR design can provide education sector authorities with an opportunity to
       think through comprehensive reform and alignment of the system. The project,
       together with the Bank-financed Renovation of General Education Project, aligned the new
       general education competency-based curriculum with the teacher and principal CPD and
       training. This involved: (i) moving from a centralized model to a continuing, online and
       blended model (combining in-person and online training); building LTTUs’ capacity to
       participate effectively in the reform; (iii) preparing training modules and recording of
       participation and linking it to incentives; (iv) creating a cadre of core teachers and principal
       advisors to support and coach teachers and principals on the job; and (v) linking financing to
       program results. The project has shown that results-based financing can indeed lead to
       enhanced accountability, systemic change, and a paradigm shift in service delivery and
       serves as a model, influencing the government's gradual transition to a performance-based
       state budget allocation.
      The creation of communities of practices (COPs) linking LTTUs with schools, other
       stakeholders, and the provincial and district levels can create an important feedback
       loop throughout the system, which is well poised to improve teacher training
       relevance and effectiveness. Teacher-learner communities and COPs provided LTTUs
       with important links to teachers and principals at the school level and critical insights into the
       classroom, which served to enhance LTTUs’ in-service and pre-service teacher
       education. These connections were strengthened during project implementation and
       institutionalized. This feedback mechanism has helped both in-service and pre-service
       providers gain a better understanding of the challenges that teachers face in the classroom,
       which is essential for improving the quality of the system.
      Inclusion of specific gender and ethnic minority criteria for participation can enhance
       equality of access to Program benefits. The project focused specifically on the
       participation of women and ethnic minorities in disadvantaged areas. Consultation
       workshops organized with women and ethnic minorities on the development and
       implementation of the CPD program and an awareness-raising communications strategy
       targeting women and ethnic minorities led to active participation of women and minorities as
       core teachers and principal advisors and to the fuller participation of these groups in all
       aspects of the CPD program. As a result, women made up to 60 percent and ethnic
       minorities comprised approximately 10 percent of the core teachers and principal

                                                                                                      Page 25 of 27
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       VN-Enhancing Teacher Education (P150060)



         advisors. TEMIS reports also provide gender- and minority-disaggregated data so that
         provincial DoETs can continue to track and address the CPD needs of women and ethnic
         minorities.
        Appropriate institutional implementation arrangements and coordination across
         institutions are critical for ensuring the implementation of a broad reform
         agenda. Given that this operation was supporting part of a broader reform, having MoET
         fully manage the activities was an appropriate design element, essential for smooth
         implementation. At the project’s outset, institutional implementation arrangements were weak
         and fragmented, with roles and responsibilities ill-defined for LTTUs and provincial
         DoETs. Once MoET clearly defined the roles of the implementation units, performance
         agreements specified accountabilities and partnerships between LTTUs and MoET, and ICT
         capacities facilitated communication and collaboration with all 63 provinces, there was
         considerable improvement in implementation. In addition, MoET, PMU, and LTTUs began to
         use technical assistance in strategic areas that brought in the needed expertise to support
         international best practices for the CPD modules. MoET's undertaking of the substantive
         educational work enabled the relevant connections to the broader reform as well as strong
         system-wide capacity development.



12. Assessment Recommended?

  No

13. Comments on Quality of ICR

Quality of Evidence was strong, thanks to good M&E design and implementation and verification of data and
findings by an Independent Verification Agency. The data was systematically presented and properly cited in
the ICR.

Quality of Analysis was also sound. The analysis drew on available data and quantitative evidence and, while
it systematically reported on all indicators (PDO, intermediate outcomes, and outputs) and DLIs, it was not
limited to a simple tally of achievements and shortcomings vis-à-vis targets. It also infused an interesting and
relevant analysis of the qualitative evidence that shows how the project strengthened capacities,
accountabilities, coordination, and collaboration of the multiple institutions and agencies involved in the reform,
all supporting and nurturing system-wide reform. Both quantitative and qualitative evidence was clearly linked to
findings.

Quality of Lessons presented in the ICR was high, providing insight and guidance, grounded in this project’s
experience, that would be relevant to other countries and Bank teams contemplating support for education (and
other sector) reform through a PforR instrument.

Results Orientation of this ICR was strong, with its careful assessment of the PDO, organized around and
drawing on the outcome and intermediate outcome indicators, results areas, DLIs, and DLRs to explain how the
entire results chain led to the outcomes, both quantitative and qualitative.



                                                                                                    Page 26 of 27
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     VN-Enhancing Teacher Education (P150060)



Internal Consistency/adherence to guidelines: The ICR was internally consistent and adhered to
guidelines. It would have been helpful to have the final disbursement amounts presented in terms of SDR for a
true indication of the disbursement rate.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                Page 27 of 27
