     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Yunnan Highway Asset Management Project (P132621)



                                                                                Report Number: ICRR0023347

1. Project Data



 Project ID                              Project Name
 P132621                                 Yunnan Highway Asset Management Project

 Country                                 Practice Area(Lead)
 China                                   Transport


 L/C/TF Number(s)                        Closing Date (Original)                 Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-84850                              31-Dec-2020                                          141,990,431.01

 Bank Approval Date                      Closing Date (Actual)
 31-Mar-2015                             30-Jun-2022

                                         IBRD/IDA (USD)                                       Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                        150,000,000.00                                                0.00

 Revised Commitment                         141,990,431.01                                                0.00

 Actual                                     141,990,431.01                                                0.00




 Prepared by               Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Ranga Rajan               Peter Nigel Freeman           Kavita Mathur                  IEGSD (Unit 4)
 Krishnamani




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) as stated in the Loan Agreement (Schedule 1, page 6) and in the
   Project Appraisal Document (PAD , page 5) is: " to improve the efficiency and cost-effectiveness of
   highway asset management in Yunnan Province".

   For the purpose of this Implementation and Completion Results Report (ICRR) Review, the PDO is unpacked
   as follows:


                                                                                                 Page 1 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Yunnan Highway Asset Management Project (P132621)



   PDO 1. To improve the efficiency of highway asset management in Yunnan Province.

   PDO 2. To improve the cost-effectiveness of highway asset management in Yunnan Province.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   There were four components (PAD, pages 5 -7).

   1. Highway Asset Management Improvement. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$58.28 million.
   The actual cost was US$36.71 million. This component aimed to improve highway management in Yunnan
   by establishing an integrated asset management system. There were three sub-components: (i)
   establishing and operating an integrated management information system (a data management center, data
   exchange platform, road asset management system, monitoring and emergency response center,
   integrating existing database and business systems and improving Information Technology (IT)
   infrastructure); (ii) supporting data collection of the management system (data collection instruments,
   vehicles, software on paving condition, traffic recording and maintenance inspection); and (iii) technical
   assistance (TA) to Yunnan Highway Bureau (YHB) for adopting the asset management approach and
   operating the management system, applying asset principles to business processes and using the system
   outputs for decision-making and performance evaluation. Some adjustments were made in this component
   to reflect local reality and for meeting the requirements of new national on government vehicles through the
   project restructuring (discussed below).

   2. Maintenance and Emergency Response Capacities Enhancement. The estimated cost at appraisal
   was US$161.69 million (of which US$46.81 was through Bank financing). The actual cost was US$133.86
   million (of which US$51.50 million was through Bank financing). There were two sub-components: (i) TA to
   YHB to improve performance management and objectively measure efficiency and effectiveness of
   maintenance service delivery through management strategies and facilities, update YHB's evaluation
   system and indicators, performance monitoring and feedback mechanism to increase accountability; and (ii)
   equipment and facilities to maintenance stations and emergency centers. Some activities in this component
   were modified during implementation to reflect local reality and the central government's requirements on
   government vehicles.

   3. Pilot of Cost-Effective Maintenance Technologies. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$25.38
   million. The actual cost was US$39.74 million. This component planned to finance activities aimed at
   reducing life-cycle maintenance costs by piloting cost-effective maintenance techniques (such as, through
   cold recycling of asphalt pavement for base course, modified asphalt, chip seals and micro-surfacing at
   seven road segments with a total length of 290 kilometers (km).

   4. Strengthening Institutional Capacities. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$8.13 million. The
   actual cost was US$5.14 million. This component planned to enhance YHB's management
   capacities. There were four sub-components: (i) TA for developing a highway asset valuation manual and

                                                                                                  Page 2 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Yunnan Highway Asset Management Project (P132621)



   accounting guidelines for evaluating highway assets; (ii) developing a highway maintenance manual tailored
   to specific Yunnan's geographic and highway conditions; (iii) studying the road safety condition of the trunk
   highways and providing recommendations on road safety policy improvements; and (iv) training and
   overseas study tours to YHB staff to adapt to the new asset management approach and business
   systems. The activity of overseas study tours was replaced with inviting international experts to Yunnan,
   due to government policy constraints.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project cost. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$280.83 million. The actual cost was US$224.35
   million.

   Project financing. The project was financed by an IBRD loan of US$150.00 million. The amount disbursed
   was US$141.99 million. Savings of US$8.01 million were realized due to a combination of factors such as:
   (i) actual contract prices lower than estimated due to competitive bidding; (ii) changes in some project
   activities during implementation; and (iii) depreciation of the Renminbi relative to the US$ during
   implementation. The team clarified that the Bank loan of US$8.01 million was cancelled on October 30,
   2022.

   Borrower contribution. The borrower contribution was planned at US$130.83 million at appraisal. The
   actual contribution was significantly less than planned at US$82.35 million.

   Dates. The project was approved on March 31, 2015, became effective on August 19, 2015, and scheduled
   to close on December 31, 2020. However, the project closed eighteen months behind schedule on June 30,
   2022.

   Other changes. The Bank supported the following changes through a Level 2 restructuring on September
   2, 2020.

           As discussed above, some component one and two activities were modified.
           The Bank loan was reallocated among disbursement categories.
           An intermediate indicator regarding public engagement was added.
           The closing date was extended to June 30, 2022, for completing the ongoing activities which had
            been subject to delays in the initial years.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country context. Rapid, albeit uneven economic growth in the three decades before appraisal had
resulted in large economic disparities in China. The gains of economic development accrued mainly to
coastal areas, while inland areas in the western region lagged behind. Reducing economic disparities was
an important part of the national development strategy. Yunnan Province, located in southwest China, was
one of the least developed provinces in terms of Gross Domestic Product (GDP) per capita (with a GDP per

                                                                                                   Page 3 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Yunnan Highway Asset Management Project (P132621)



capita of US$3,530, 58% of the national average). Yunnan's weak state of economic development was
partially due to its less developed transport infrastructure that was costly to build and maintain, especially
as 94% of Yunnan's territory is mountainous and vulnerable to landslides, floods and earthquakes.

Sector context. As a result of the strong need to expand the highway network, subnational governments in
China like in Yunnan province had used a large share of the collected road maintenance fees for road
construction in the years prior to appraisal. This led to resources for highway maintenance lagging behind
highway development. Yunnan's highway system expanded from 42,000 kilometers (km) in 1978 to
222,940 km in 2013, reaching a density of 56.6 km per 100 square km. Comparing with the average of 101
km per 100 square km in the Eastern region, Yunnan had a strong demand to develop new highways. In
addition, a large share of Yunnan's trunk highways (national and provincial highways) was in poor condition.
Only 50% of the trunk highways were in good or fair conditions, 59% of them were below Class II highway
standards and about 1,400 km were unpaved. Therefore, the PDO of improving road maintenance through
road asset management reform was important to the YHB.

The key issues facing YHB included: (i) a lack of an asset management system for analyzing maintenance
demands and optimizing maintenance strategies; (ii) an inadequate road network monitoring and
emergency command system for dealing with the frequent natural disasters; (iii) lack of an integrated
database and management system; (iv) inadequate equipment for the frontline staff to carry out
maintenance works; (v) although YHB had piloted cost-effective maintenance technologies such as asphalt
pavement recycling and chip seal in recent years, these technologies had to be adapted to improve quality
of maintenance services, and lastly (vi) inadequate capacity of the YHB staff in using new technologies.

Government strategy. The PDOs were aligned with the Government strategy. The Government's priorities
in the 12th Five-Year Plan (FYP, 2011 - 2015) were: (i) supporting economic development in the lagging
western and central regions; (ii) providing more assistance to poor regions and regions with ethnic
minorities; (iii) promoting green and low carbon development; (iv) enhancing capacity for resilience to
natural disasters; and (iv) encouraging innovations in governance. China's 14th FYP for 2021 - 2025 aimed
to achieve high-quality development by promoting green transportation, digitalization of transportation, and
developing an efficient and economical modern integrated transportation system. The PDO was relevant to
the Ministry of Finance's (MoF) new Government Accounting standards issued in April 2017, that set
standards for general requirements on public infrastructure accounting.

Bank strategy. The PDO was well-aligned with the Bank strategy for China. At appraisal, the strategic
theme two of the Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for 2013 - 2016 highlighted the need for "improving
transport connectivity". The PDO was well-aligned with two of the three pillars of the Bank's current
Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for 2020 - 2025. The first pillar of the CPF articulated the need for
fiscal reform by introducing road asset valuation and accounting and improving public sector efficiency. The
second pillar articulated the need for promoting green growth by utilizing asphalt materials.

Previous Bank experience. The Bank has financed several road projects in China. However, the asset
management approach was relatively new in China, and this was the first Bank-financed project in Yunnan
to introduce such an approach. The ambitious approach aimed to transition from conventional road
maintenance to road asset management through life-cycle management and using engineering and
economic principles for data-based decision making.

This project had a comprehensive Information and Communication technology (ICT) component and
institutional strengthening activities aimed at improving YHB's highway asset management relating to policy


                                                                                                      Page 4 of 15
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Yunnan Highway Asset Management Project (P132621)



               goals, data collection, planning and budgeting, emergency response and maintenance technologies and
               performance evaluation and monitoring. The results framework was clear and as discussed in the following
               section, the causal links between project outputs were likely to aid in realizing the outcomes of improving
               the efficiency and cost-effectiveness of managing highways in Yunnan. Therefore, the relevance of the
               PDO is rated as high.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             PDO 1. To improve the efficiency of highway asset management in Yunnan Province.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of change. The outputs such as an integrated highway road asset management system (RAMS),
                             instruments for data collection, improving the performance evaluation system, providing facilities to
                             maintenance stations and emergency centers, were likely to help in improving the efficiency of highway asset
                             management. The outputs were likely to aid in the long-term outcome of sustaining highways in Yunnan
                             Province. The causal links between the activities, outputs and outcomes were logical and the intended
                             outcomes were monitorable.

                             Outputs (ICR, pages 10 - 12).

                             These activities were completed as targeted.

                                        An integrated RAMS was developed. A road assets valuation manual and accounting guidelines were
                                         developed. Highway asset data collection guidelines were developed to enable the application of
                                         RAMS.

                                        YHB developed an annual asset management report for the first time. This report presented the profile
                                         of YHB's asset management in 2021, including the highways lengths, their value, their
                                         depreciation, the share of different assets by value, the maintenance works costs, and demand
                                         forecasts. This report also made recommendations about funding allocation options to road segments.

                                        YHB's highway assets were inventoried, and the assets were annually surveyed for making
                                         investment decisions. The YHB completed an initial valuation in December 2018 and carried out
                                         follow-ups in 2019, 2020 and 2021 respectively.




                                                                                                                                 Page 5 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Yunnan Highway Asset Management Project (P132621)




      The project aided in developing a road maintenance manual for improving maintenance
       decisions, enhancing the quality of maintenance and standardizing routine maintenance operations.

      225 maintenance stations, 63 emergency response centers at county level and 15 emergency
       response centers at prefecture level were provided with facilities to deliver maintenance works and
       quickly respond to emergency events. YHB set up hotlines at the emergency centers to address public
       concerns. The time to respond to class 111 emergency events was reduced from four hours at the
       baseline in December 2013 to three hours in March 2022.

      The project provided 85 different training courses. Some 9,414 person-time training were provided to
       staff. This included 3,063 to female staff. The survey conducted at closure indicated that 92% of the
       participating staff were satisfied with the training.

      During implementation, contractors employed 3,316 local laborers, including 869 female laborers (470
       of them ethnic minorities).

      The ICR (para 32) observed that with this project, Yunnan which was one of the least developed
       province in China, became a pioneer in adopting the road assets management approach. The ICR
       noted that the Ministry of Transport (MoT) organized a trunk highway inspection every five year and
       ranked provinces based on the inspection results. Of the 32 provinces/municipalities directly under the
       Central Government, Yunnan was at the bottom of the ranking at 28th place in 2013, After the project,
       Yunnan advanced to 19th place.

Outcomes (ICR, page 10).

The outputs described above were expected to have two outcomes: (i) an increase the percentage of national
and provincial roads in Yunnan in good/fair condition; and (ii) equipment provided under the project to replace
labor work and training for operation was expected to enhance the capacity of workers to maintain longer
road segments using the same equipment.

      At the baseline in December 2013, 50% of the national and provincial highways in Yunnan were
       reported to be in good/fair condition. At project closure in March 2022, 81.95% of the national
       highways and 80.96% of the provincial highways were in good/fair condition, exceeding the target of
       60.25% and 60% respectively. About 22,900 carbon dioxide emission was reduced due to the
       improvement of the road condition in Yunnan Province in 2021. According to the clarifications
       provided by the team, road transport which accounted for 90.9% and 90.6% of total passenger and
       freight transport respectively in 2019, was a major contributor of greenhouse gas emission (CHG) in
       the transport sector.

      By the end of the project, each worker could perform routine maintenance of 5.14 kilometers (km) on
       average, as compared to 3.70 km at the baseline and exceeding the target of 4.80 km.

Given that the outcomes were exceeded, the efficacy of this PDO is rated as high.



Rating

                                                                                                 Page 6 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Yunnan Highway Asset Management Project (P132621)



High


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
PDO 2. To improve the cost-effectiveness of highway asset management in Yunnan Province.

Rationale
Theory of change. The outputs of activities described above together with the outputs of activities such as
pilots of cost effective maintenance technologies were aimed at reducing highway maintenance costs. These
activities were likely to help in the cost-effectiveness of highway asset management. The causal links
between the project activities, outputs and outcomes were logical and the intended outcomes were
monitorable.

Outputs (ICR, pages 13 - 14).

In addition to the outputs discussed above which were also relevant to this objective, the following activities
were completed.

        The pilot technologies on 290 km of roads were completed as targeted for reducing maintenance
         costs. This included 50 km of recycling asphalt pavement for base course on roads, 80 km of modified
         asphalt chip roads and 80 km of micro-surfacing. In 2021, the YHB had recycled 98% and 80% of
         disposed asphalt pavement of national and provincial highways. According to the YHB, the lifecycle
         savings gained from preventive maintenance was about US$50.15 million per km for the highway with
         12m pavement width.
        The YHB started including preventive maintenance in annual maintenance plans in 2018 and scaled
         up preventive maintenance to 1,488 km, 1,500 km and 1,307 km of highways in 2019, 2020 and 2021
         respectively.

        The YHB introduced risk-based safety management system and approved three new regulations,
         revised 21 regulations and integrated road safety with the RAMS.
        With the road assessment and performance evaluation study conducted under the project, the YHB
         developed the Highway Assets Management and the Highway Assets Management Performance
         Evaluation Policy.
        The project completed the reconstruction, expansion and development of 303 maintenance facilities
         and procured 747 units of maintenance instruments. In 2020 alone, natural disasters in Yunnan
         affected 11.3 million people in 128 counties. The YHB effectively responded to and successfully dealt
         with the major emergencies, such as the Mojiang earthquake and the Baige barrier lake of the Jinsha
         river.

        During implementation, contractors of the project employed a total of 3,316 local laborers, including
         869 female laborers, accounting for 26.20% of the total laborers employed. Of the 869 female
         laborers, 470 persons were minorities.




                                                                                                    Page 7 of 15
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Yunnan Highway Asset Management Project (P132621)




                                    The project trained 358 persons from the project-affected households. Of which, about 44% were
                                     females. The training activities were aimed at improving their skills related to cultivation of cash crops,
                                     breeding of livestock, electrotechnics and welding.

                            Outcomes.

                            The outputs described above were expected to increase the funds allocated for road maintenance based on
                            the recommendations of the RAMS.

                                    Based on the recommendations of the RAMS, the percentage of funds allocated for roads increased
                                     to 100% as compared to the baseline. This exceeded the target of 75%. The ICR noted that although
                                     Yunnan was a less developed province in China and government revenue was impacted by the
                                     COVID - 19 pandemic, the province provided more road maintenance funds than targeted.

                            Given that the intended outcome was surpassed, efficacy of this PDO is rated as high.



                            Rating
                            High


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Overall, efficacy is rated as high, given that all the intended outcomes (including targets of training people on
                            road maintenance activities), were exceeded. The project outputs such as integrated highway road asset
                            management system (RAMS), improvements in data collection, increased facilities for maintenance, and
                            piloting of cost- effective technologies are likely to help in improving the efficiency and cost-effectiveness of
                            highway asset management in Yunnan Province.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            High



    5. Efficiency
   Economic analysis. At completion, an economic analysis was conducted for the four project components using
   the same appraisal methodology. The analyses focused on the economic impacts (through traditional cost-
   benefit analysis). The Road Asset Management System (RAMS) was expected to integrate most of the
   information equipment resources for road administration and maintenance in YHB and the following quantitative
   benefits were expected from the project activities: (i) reduction in duplicating system development costs; (ii)
   reduction in duplicating data collection costs: (iii) reduction in vehicle operating cost (VOC); (iv) passenger time


                                                                                                                                  Page 8 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Yunnan Highway Asset Management Project (P132621)



savings: (v) reduction in accident costs; (vi) reduction in maintenance costs and (vii) reduction in fuel
consumption.

The Net Present Value (NPV) at 12% discount rate at project completion was Renminbi Yuan (RMB) 1,640
million, as compared to the NPV RMB 727 million at appraisal. The ex-post Economic Internal Rate of Return
(EIRR) was 27.7% as compared to the ex-ante EIRR of 18.5%. The higher EIRR and NPV were due to the
reduction in investment costs (from RMB 1,657 million at appraisal to RMB 1,442 at completion) and an increase
in traffic volume (from 3,000 vehicle per day at appraisal to 4,555 vehicles at completion). (ICR, para 40).

The other benefits that were not factored into the quantitative analysis were: (i) shortened response time to
emergency events would help in reducing losses of lives and properties due to extreme events (since Yunnan is
vulnerable to natural disasters and 94% of its territory is mountainous); (ii) better maintained national and
provincial highways would help in increasing their resilience to climate change: and (iii) the promotion of
inclusive development (given that 33.12% of Yunnan's population are ethnic minorities and most of them lived in
remote areas only accessible by road transport). (ICR, para 41)

Savings. Savings of US$8.01 million were realized due to factors such as: (i) actual contract prices were lower
than estimated due to competitive bidding; (ii) changes in some project activities; and (iii) depreciation of the
Renminbi relative to the US$ during implementation.

Administrative and operational issues. All the project activities were completed, although with an eighteen-
month extension of the originally scheduled closing date.

In sum, the efficiency with which the project was implemented is rated as substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?              Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                       100.00
 Appraisal                                                   18.50
                                                                                        Not Applicable
                                                                                       100.00
 ICR Estimate                                                27.70
                                                                                        Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of the PDO to the Government strategy and the current Bank strategy for China is high. Efficacy is
rated as high, given that the targets were exceeded. Efficiency is rated as substantial. There were no significant


                                                                                                        Page 9 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Yunnan Highway Asset Management Project (P132621)



shortcomings in the project's achievement of its objectives, in its efficiency or in its relevance. Overall outcome
is therefore rated as highly satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Highly Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Institutional risk. The ICR (para 83) notes that the Yunnan Highway Bureau (YHB) has officially put the
integrated information management system and the road asset management system (RAMS) into routine
operation and set up a mechanism to monitor the operation of the system. With support of the Yunnan
Highway Science and Technology Research Institute, the Chief Engineer Office of the YHB coordinated the
operation of the RAMS and set up six special teams for data collection, input and verification, monitoring
road condition, data processing, decision-making analysis and recommendation, model and parameters
review as well as updating. The YHB had also mainstreamed expenditures of operating the system in the
annual budget plans. Given all this, the institutional risk to sustainability of the development outcome is rated
as low.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The Bank prepared this project based on the experiences from the road maintenance and asset
  management projects financed by the Bank globally. Lessons incorporated at design included: (i) the use
  of "commercial-off-the-shelf" software for the asset management system, to reduce operational risk; and
  (ii) the inclusion of the operational costs of the system in YHB's annual budget, since the availability of
  funds was critical for collecting data and implementing the system (PAD, paragraphs 30 - 32).

  This project was prepared alongside an Asian Development Project (ADB) (Sustainable Road
  Maintenance Project in Yunnan province, 2013). The ADB financed project supported rehabilitation of
  890 km of the trunk road network, performance-based road maintenance pilot, Highway Development
  Management - 4 based road asset management system, and institutional capacity strengthening. To add
  value and complement the ADB-financed project, this project did not support road rehabilitation or other
  maintenance works except piloting selected innovative maintenance technologies. The project design
  included special attention to training and included a key outcome indicator for monitoring staff training
  programs.

  The implementation arrangements were appropriate. These included: (i) YHB overall in charge of
  coordination: (ii) the Department of Highways (DoT) responsible for coordinating with the provincial
  government: (iii) a project management office (PMO) established in YHB was responsible for
  implementation: and (iv) Project Implementation Units (PIUs) were to be set up at each of YHB's



                                                                                                      Page 10 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Yunnan Highway Asset Management Project (P132621)



  prefecture level units to implement the civil works under their jurisdiction (PAD, paragraphs 33, 35 and
  36).

  The Bank identified several risks at appraisal including substantial risks associated with design and weak
  implementation capacity, given that project entailed activities at a large number of small and dispersed
  sites and the Yunnan DoT and YHB had no experience with Bank projects. Mitigation measures
  included: training programs for DoT and YHB staff; and engaging experienced consultants to supervise
  construction. Even with mitigation measures, the overall implementation risk was rated as substantial at
  appraisal (PAD, page 11). The arrangements made at appraisal for M&E and safeguards and fiduciary
  compliance were appropriate (discussed in sections 9 and 10).



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Highly Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The Bank's twice-a-year supervision missions, aided in facilitating communication with the YHB and
 ensuring continuity. Field supervision missions conducted by the Bank team aided in ensuring compliance
 with environmental safeguards and fiduciary compliance (discussed in section 10). According to the
 information provided by the team, the continuity of leadership was maintained, with two task team leaders
 during the project lifetime. The Bank supervision mission helped YHB helped in utilizing the loan savings
 realized during implementation. Despite the challenges in the wake of the COVID - 19 pandemic, the
 supervision team kept close contact with YHB through phone calls, emails and virtual meetings. These
 factors helped in completing all the project activities, albeit with an eighteen-month extension of the project
 closing date. The Borrower's ICR provided in Annex 5 (page 44) noted that the continuous commitment of
 the Bank team from approach to completion played an important and crucial role in successfully achieving
 the project PDO as well as to promote the transformation of the highway asset management system in
 YHB.

 In sum, overall Bank performance is rated as satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The PDO and the M&E were clearly defined at appraisal. The key outcome indicators discussed in section
 four, were appropriate for monitoring project performance. The indicators were measurable. The PMO was

                                                                                                     Page 11 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Yunnan Highway Asset Management Project (P132621)



 responsible for collecting data for monitoring performance. The baseline data and end-of-project targets
 were clearly specified at appraisal (PAD, paragraph 38).



b. M&E Implementation
  There was no change in M&E during implementation, with the exception of changing the dates of
  achieving the final target (to reflect the revised closing date) and adding an intermediate indicator on
  public engagement to reflect the change in government policy. The ICR (para 63) observed that the M&E
  mechanism functioned well during implementation. With support from the project management
  consultants, the YHB monitored implementation results, annually collected data and shared the results
  with the Bank and the relevant government agencies.



c. M&E Utilization
  Overall, the M&E was utilized to monitor the project implementation progress, outputs and outcomes of
  the project.

  In sum, the quality of M&E is rated as substantial considering the appropriateness of design,
  implementation and utilization of the M&E.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as a Category B (partial assessment) project under the World Bank safeguard
   policies. Four safeguard policies were triggered at appraisal: Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01);
   Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04); Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10); and Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP
   4.12) (PAD, page viii).

   Environmental Assessment and Natural Habitats. At appraisal, the potential environmental impacts were
   expected from construction activities (dust and noise and material processing). During implementation,
   environmental impacts were expected from waste management and processing of the maintenance
   materials. An Environmental Management Plan (EMP) was prepared and publicly-disclosed to address the
   environmental impacts (PAD, para 66). The safeguards on Natural Habitats was triggered, as the project
   entailed constructing 13 emergency centers and management stations in environmentally-sensitive
   areas. The EMP included mitigation measures to avoid the potential adverse impacts on sensitive areas.

   The project's environmental performance was rated as highly satisfactory (ICR, para 66). There were no
   environmental issues or issues with natural habitats. Field supervision missions conducted by the Bank
   team constantly assessed the environmental performance on the project sites. External environmental



                                                                                                  Page 12 of 15
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Yunnan Highway Asset Management Project (P132621)



  monitoring reports submitted on a six-month basis confirmed compliance of environmental safeguards
  throughout implementation.

  Indigenous Peoples. A social assessment of the project area was conducted at appraisal and an Ethnic
  Minority Development Plan (EMDP) was prepared to address issues pertaining to indigenous peoples
  (PAD, para 59). There were no issues with indigenous peoples (ICR, para 67).

  Involuntary Resettlement. Permanent land acquisition was not envisaged at appraisal, as land currently
  owned by the road authorities were to be used. A Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) was prepared and
  publicly disclosed to address land acquisition and resettlement issues (PAD, para 61). Based on the RPF,
  the YHB developed a resettlement plan during implementation (ICR, para 67). The ICR observed that the
  PMO and the YHBs affiliated units fully compensated the project-affected households, and that
  implementation of resettlement was monitored by an independent monitoring institute twice a year.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial management. The Bank conducted an assessment of YHB's financial management
  arrangements at appraisal. The assessment identified the following risks: (i) lack of experience of YHB
  staff with Bank operations; and (ii) uncertainty of counterpart funds, as counterpart funds were to be from
  the sectoral budget allocated to YHB on an annual basis. Mitigation measures incorporated at design
  included, training YHB's financial management staff, close Bank supervision, and stipulating that
  alternative measures to be worked out by YHB if the funds are not committed in the sectoral budget (PAD,
  para 53).

  The project's financial management was rated as satisfactory (ICR, para 73). The YHB maintained a sound
  financial management system during implementation to ensure that the project funds were used for the
  intended purposes. The required interim reports and annual audit reports were submitted in a timely
  manner. The ICR noted that no significant financial management issues were noted either by external
  auditors or during the Bank's supervision missions. According to the information provided by the team, the
  Project Management Office (PMO) submitted six unqualified financial audit reports during implementation
  as required (including a final audit report).

  Procurement. The Bank conducted a procurement assessment of the PMO at appraisal. The assessment
  identified the following risks: (i) the potential large workload of the PMO, and (ii) PMO's limited experience
  with the Bank's procurement procedures. The mitigation measures incorporated included, training the PMO
  staff and hiring a qualified procurement agent with experience in procurement of Information
  Communication Technology (ICT) equipment.

  The ICR (paragraph 71) noted that there were procurement delays in the initial years due to the lack of
  procurement capacity. The contracts had an average 25% savings due to appropriate and sufficient pre-bid
  market surveys. However, there were frequent complaints about the bidding qualification criteria and key
  technical specification, including one Integrity Vice Presidency (INT) case. The ICR noted that the cases
  were investigated diligently and appropriately settled in a timely manner. The ICR does not report of any
  case of mis-procurement.



                                                                                                   Page 13 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Yunnan Highway Asset Management Project (P132621)




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   The ICR (para 51) observed that the Road Routine Maintenance Manual and the Road Assets Collection
   Standard were upgraded to provincial technical standards, which benefitted the entire road sector in
   Yunnan Province.



d. Other
   According to the ICR (para 46) the YHB effectively responded to and successfully dealt with the major
   emergencies, such as the Mojiang earthquake and the Baige barrier lake of the Jinsha Tiver,



11. Ratings
                                                                               Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                    IEG
                                                                               Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                        Highly Satisfactory   Highly Satisfactory

Bank Performance               Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                 Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                 ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The review draws the following lessons from the ICR, with some adaptation of language.

1. Management commitment help in successfully implementing the project. In this project, the
Yunnan Highway Bureau (YHB) maintained a stable project management team during
implementation and YHB's top management provided dedicated support in developing and operating
the integrated management system, the Road Asset Management System (RAMS), the asset
valuation manual and accounting guidelines. With this support, the consultants completed several
rounds of large-scale consultation to identify business needs and procedures and carried out trial
operations prior to roll-out.

2. Packaging contracts and conducting market surveys can help in managing procurement.
This project packaged goods contracts in big size, which attracted large suppliers and aided in
intensifying competition. The final prices of the contracts were much lower than the estimated costs.
The lesson is that carrying out a market survey before preparing bidding contracts, can help in
providing a solid base for setting technical and qualification requirements.

3, Comprehensive interventions may be required to achieve efficiency of road assets
management. This project introduced the road assets management approach and included
activities to strengthen YHB's weaknesses in service delivery. This approach incorporated value

                                                                                                  Page 14 of 15
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Yunnan Highway Asset Management Project (P132621)



management into YHB's asset management, the data collection instrument, monitoring value,
demand analysis and fund allocation and training YHB staff on road maintenance. Given that this
project was prepared alongside an ADB financed project, the Bank preparation team sought to add
value by focusing on road asset management approach, rather than supporting road rehabilitation or
other maintenance works excepts piloting selected innovative maintenance technologies. These
interventions together improved the overall efficiency of the YHB's asset management.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is well-written. The theory of change articulated in the text shows clear and logical causal links
between the project activities, outputs and the intended outcomes. The ICR provides adequate evidence and
analysis to assess the outcomes. The photographs provided in the text enables the reader to visualize the
changes made by the project. The Borrower's ICR provided in Annex Five provides useful information. The ICR
for the most part adheres to the recommended page length. Overall, the quality of the ICR is substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                              Page 15 of 15
