     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Cities Investment Program (P160619)



                                                                                   Report Number: ICRR0023316

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P160619                                     Cities Investment Program

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Afghanistan                                 Urban, Resilience and Land


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                 Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-D4140,TF-A9089                         30-Jun-2024                                             8,093,755.83

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 19-Dec-2018                                30-Jun-2024

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                       Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                             50,000,000.00                                    25,000,000.00

 Revised Commitment                              22,447,290.19                                      4,947,561.92

 Actual                                           8,093,755.83                                      4,046,877.92




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator           Group
 Cynthia Nunez-Ollero        Christopher David            Kavita Mathur                    IEGSD (Unit 4)
                             Nelson




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Financing Agreement (FA, p. 5) and the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, paragraph 17)
   the Project Development Objective (PDO) was "to introduce sustainable municipal finance and management
   systems in nine participating provincial capital cities (PCCs) and rehabilitate municipal infrastructure in five
   participating PCCs."




                                                                                                     Page 1 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Cities Investment Program (P160619)



   This was to be the first of two in a Series of Projects (SOP) under the umbrella Cities Improvement Program
   (CIP). Three objectives comprised the program (PAD, paragraphs 16,17, and 18):

          The Program Development Objective (PRDO) was to improve the sustainability and livability of nine
           regionally balanced provincial capital cities (PCCs).
          The PDO for SOP I was to introduce sustainable municipal finance and management systems in nine
           participating PCCs and rehabilitate municipal infrastructure in five participating PCCs.
          The PDO for SOP II was to rollout sustainable municipal finance and management systems and
           expand municipal infrastructure and service coverage in the same nine participating PCCs from SOP I
           (PAD, Annex 2, Table 1).

   The first restructuring (see Dates below) introduced a third objective to this SOP I project and reduced the
   target PCCs from nine to five. This review will assess these three original objectives:

          To introduce sustainable municipal finance and management systems in nine PCCs
          To rehabilitate municipal infrastructure in five PCCs
          To support COVID-19 recovery efforts in five PCCs



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   1: Rehabilitate Municipal Infrastructure: (US$30.0 million at appraisal, reduced to US$25.0 million at
   restructuring, US5.01 million actual). This component was to finance the rehabilitation of basic municipal
   infrastructure in five participating PCCs (Herat, Jalalabad, Kandahar, Khost, and Mazar-e-Sharif). The
   formula to allocate financing to the 5 PCCs was to be based on development needs, using the official
   municipal classification and population size as proxies. PCCs were to target women and disadvantaged
   groups for inclusion in the consultations and in the selection of project processes. At least one investment
   project in each PCC was to target women.

   2: Strengthen the Municipal Finance Framework: (US$2.0 million at appraisal, revised to US$1.5 million
   at restructuring, US$0 million actual). This component was to finance systems development, training, and
   technical assistance to assist the 9 PCCs (the five above and four PCCs added at
   implementation) to improve its allocation system, following the Municipal Law. The Independent Directorate
   for Local Governance (IDLG) was to implement this component.

   3: Improve the Municipal Management Framework (US$14.0 million at appraisal, reduced to US$4.5
   million at restructuring, US$0.012 million actual) This component was to finance training and technical


                                                                                                    Page 2 of 21
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Cities Investment Program (P160619)



  assistance activities to strengthen the capacity of nine PCCs in municipal planning and management under
  the following four sub-components:

        Municipal capacity building. This sub-component was to finance consultant services, training, and
         equipment to customize capacity building at the municipal level that would integrate climate change
         and natural disaster considerations. These were to include an Asset Inventory and Management
         Plan (AIMP), a Unified Municipal Chart of Accounts and a municipal-level automated Afghanistan
         Financial Management Information System (AFMIS-M) compatible with the national
         AFMIS, and municipal budget planning, execution, and reporting tools.

        Strategic development frameworks (SDFs). This sub-component was to finance the preparation of
         SDFs of four additional PCCs to be determined during implementation and update the SDFs of the
         first five PCCs. The SDF was to inform the preparation of Municipal Strategic Plans as required by
         the Municipal Law. The SDFs were to help cities develop opportunities and urban growth
         trajectories; and plan and prioritize benchmark improvements and approve multiyear Capital
         Investment Plans (CIPs).

        Catalytic investment projects. This sub-component was to finance consultant services to help each
         PCC prepare feasibility and design studies for the investments identified in the multiyear CIP. SOP II
         was expected to finance viable and tender-ready capital investment projects.

        Urban policy reforms. This sub-component was to finance consultant services and train the staff of
         the Ministry of Urban Development and Housing (MUDH) to prepare two documents - an affordable
         housing action plan to identify market gaps and recommend reforms; and an urban planning
         framework to implement the new legal framework.

  4: Project Implementation Management: (US$4.0 million at appraisal, US$1.1 million actual) This
  component was to finance implementation management including an independent verification
  consultant to monitor municipal performance improvements. Existing staffing arrangements were to
  simultaneously implement another Bank-financed project, the Eshteghal-Zaiee Karmondena (EZ-Kar)
  project with non-staff incremental operating expenditures separately charged to each project.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost: The original total project cost was US$50.0 million. This project covered the first of two of
  what was to be the Series of Projects (SOP) under the Cities Investment Program (CIP). The actual project
  cost was US$8.1 million.

  The CIP divided the program into a series of Projects (SOP): SOP I (US$50 million) to finance institutional
  improvements in nine PCCs and priority investments in the first five PCCs - Herat, Jalalabad, Kandahar,
  Khost, and Mazar-e-Sharif. The project would add four more PCCs during implementation. SOP II (US$ 150
  million) to build on the institutional improvements and support catalytic investments in all nine cities.

  Financing: Two sources of grants financed SOP I: (i) the International Development Association (IDA) with
  the equivalent of US$25 million; and (ii) the Afghanistan Reconstruction Trust Fund (ARTF) administered by
  the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) for another US$25 million. The project
  disbursed US$8.1 million. The project cancelled US$15.0 million at restructuring (see Dates below) to fund

                                                                                                  Page 3 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Cities Investment Program (P160619)



   the government's response to the COVID-19 pandemic, bringing the revised total project cost to
   US$22.5 million. The project cancelled the ARTF balance of US$12.5 million through an Omnibus Notice of
   Cancellation.

   Borrower Contribution: None.

   Dates: The Board approved this project on December 19, 2018 and became effective on February 6,
   2019. The project was to close on June 30, 2024. The Bank suspended the project after the fall of the
   government in mid-August 2021 and closed the project on August 15, 2022 (ICR, paragraph 30). Following
   are significant dates of the operation:

         On August 17, 2020, a level 2 restructuring revised the PDO and added an objective to respond to
          COVID-19. The PDO now read: “... to introduce improved municipal finance and management
          systems, rehabilitate municipal infrastructure, and support COVID-19 recovery efforts in the five
          participating PCCs.” The project cancelled SDR5.45 million in IDA and US$7.5 million from the
          ARTF grant or a total of US$15 million equivalent and transferred to finance the Relief Effort for
          Afghan Communities and Households Project (REACH, P177230), a World Bank supported COVID-
          19 response project (ICR, paragraph 30). The project updated the target values and indicators in
          the results framework, costs and components, financial and procurement systems accordingly.

         In mid-August 2021, the World Bank suspended operations when the Taliban took over the
          government.

         On March 1, 2022, the World Bank Board approved Approach Paper 2.0. Donors agreed to finance
          investments, analytical work, and coordination/convening activities. These funds were to protect the
          vulnerable, help preserve human capital and key economic and social institutions, reduce the need
          for future humanitarian assistance, and improve gender equality outcomes. United Nations agencies
          and international and national non-governmental organizations would implement recipient executed
          grants. These grants were outside of the interim Taliban administration (ITA).

   Split Rating: The project added a new PDO to respond to the COVID-19 pandemic as part of a portfolio
   wide adjustment to respond to the pandemic. This restructuring effectively financed two projects, reduced
   the ambition and key outcome targets of the original but expanded its original scope designed to improve
   project outcomes. The government fell in mid-August 2021. The project closed prematurely before
   completing the project. A split rating captures the outcome of the project before and after the fall of the
   government.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Context: Afghanistan has 154 municipalities, including 34 Provincial Capital Cities (PCCs). These PCCs
were underfinanced and were unable to keep pace with infrastructure investment needs. Institutions for
urban development and municipal management were weak. The government was addressing its legal
framework, an Urban Development Law passed in 2017. This law established a hierarchy for urban


                                                                                                    Page 4 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Cities Investment Program (P160619)



planning and clarified institutional roles. A Municipal Law was issued in 2018. This law allocated
responsibilities to local governments, required a performance-based municipal finance allocation
mechanism, and rationalized and streamlined functional responsibilities (ICR, paragraph 9). Improvements
in institutional arrangements for urban development and municipal management were in
progress before the Taliban took over the government in mid-August 2021.

Country Plans: In October 2016, the government issued the Afghanistan National Peace and Development
Framework (ANPDF) for the period 2017-2021. This framework acknowledged the significant role of
cities as engines of economic growth and hosts to migrants. The government also had an Urban National
Priority Program (U-NPP). The PDOs of the CIP program in general and this first SOP I, was highly relevant
instruments to boost these national priorities. This project was to build strong and accountable institutions
with adequate financial and municipal management capacity to deliver services (ICR, paragraph 10).

World Bank Group Country Partnership Framework (CPF) The Bank extended to 2022 the World Bank
Group Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for Afghanistan for the period FY2017-2020 following the
2019 Performance and Learning Review (PLR). The PDOs were relevant to the three pillars of the CPF:
building strong and accountable institutions, supporting inclusive growth, and expanding and deepening
social inclusion. The SOP I was to significantly contribute to achieving the objectives of the CPF by
strengthening the capacity of national and local institutions in efficiently mobilizing financing, planning city
investments, and delivering critical municipal infrastructure services to improve city livability for residents
and businesses. The project was to promote inclusive development by targeting nine PCCs. The project
was also to lay the foundation for a performance-based financing system to PCCs to improve municipal
performance in budget planning and execution, resource mobilization, expenditure management, and
service delivery. Good practices in establishing municipal management standards, municipal capital
investment and budgetary planning practices were to foster fiscal discipline.

World Bank Experience in the Country and in the Sector: The Bank initiated a structured engagement in
the urban sector following the government's Urban National Priority Program (U-NPP). These included
the Kabul Municipal Development Project (KMDP P125597), which provided urban upgrading support to
address informality and urban poverty (2014– 2021). The project increased access to municipal services in
selected residential areas and redesigned the municipality’s fiscal management system to support better
service delivery. The Urban Development Support Project (UDSP) built capacity of national regulatory
agencies, updated key urban policies, and initiated local strategic development planning in a structured and
consultative manner (2017-2020). The UDSP initiated a programmatic urban sector approach. These urban
projects were to inform the country's decentralization policy debate. The Citizen’s Charter Afghanistan
Project (CCAP); was a multi-phase, country-wide program that financed small-scale development projects
in both rural and urban areas to promote citizen engagement at the community and district level. The
Eshteghal-Zaiee Karmondena (EZ Kar) project or Improving Economic Opportunities in Hosting Cities
Project supported Afghan cities, towns, and villages that hosted refugees by financing small-scale
investments and job creation schemes. The EZ-Kar investments complemented those under this project by
focusing on urgent, district-level projects to create economic opportunities. The Cities Investment Program
(CIP) was to achieve geographical balance by using performance-based financing to implement priority and
catalytic investments in nine cities, outside of Kabul.

Overall, the relevance of objectives is rated High. The PDOs were relevant to the objectives of the Bank
and the country in the urban development sector. The project had clearly structured components and had a
clear operational logic. The project pitched the PDOs at a level recognizing existing capacity.



                                                                                                       Page 5 of 21
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Cities Investment Program (P160619)




               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To introduce sustainable municipal finance and management systems in nine PCCs.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change (ToC): The overall CIP design covered a series of actions to address institutional
                             development challenges faced by nine participating provincial capitals (PPCs). The ToC called for introducing
                             reforms in municipal finance and municipal management incrementally. The ToC would establish
                             performance standards and systems to sustain these reforms over time. Inputs were to involve training and
                             capacity building activities under two components (Components 2 and 3). A critical assumption was that the
                             financial resources (embodied in component 3 and forming objective 2 below) were sufficient to
                             improve municipal services. Outputs were to be the design and application of rules and performance-based
                             resource allocation systems, tools and plans to enhance Own Source Revenue (OSR) generation, the
                             implementation of an Asset Inventory and Management Plan (AIMP), adopting a unified Chart of Accounts to
                             automate a functional fiscal management system, and implement budgets within prescribed
                             timeframes. Outcomes were to be executed planned budgetary improvements for PCCs. While the gender
                             disaggregated beneficiaries formed part of the corporate scorecard, the outcome indicators were at the output
                             or intermediate outcome levels at most. The project was to conduct beneficiary surveys at midterm and at
                             closing to extract evidence to support the outcome indicator associated with improvements in the lives and
                             livelihoods of residents. A trend in OSRs generated, efficiencies in budgetary allocations reached, or
                             performance scorecards might have been useful outcome indicators. Assumptions The ToC identified the
                             following three assumptions to increase the likelihood of achieving the outcomes: (i) sufficient industry
                             capacity to absorb and implement the project contracts; (ii) government officials effectively coordinate policy
                             actions with the PCCs; and (iii) the target PCCs would not become contested territory.

                             OUTPUTS: The participating PCCs did not achieve the original targets of the following outputs:

                                        The project completed the necessary Terms of Reference (TORs) to procure and design reporting
                                          tools, templates, and guidelines to improve municipal budget planning, execution, and reporting but
                                          did not hire any firms.

                                        The ICR claimed that municipalities were on track to improve their OSRs because they completed the
                                          TORs for establishing OSRs as planned. The project presented these outputs to the IDLG for policy
                                          dialogues. The project also drafted legislation for improved governance structure as planned. The
                                          project was negotiating a consultancy to develop OSR enhancement strategies but did not hire a firm.



                                                                                                                                  Page 6 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Cities Investment Program (P160619)




      The project did not design a performance based municipal finance allocation mechanism. However,
       the ICR claimed that the project was on track to establish a performance-based municipal finance
       allocation mechanism because the project presented a Municipal Incentive Fund (MIF) options paper
       and an action plan to the Independent Directorate for Local Governance (IDLG) for policy dialogue.
       The plan identified timebound actions and responsible entities. The project drafted regulations for the
       MIF’s governance structure, completed the MIF Task Force TORs, which assessed legal and
       technical issues and facilitated inter-institutional coordination. The PCCs did not adopt either Asset
       Inventory and Management Plans (AIMPs) or the Strategic Development Frameworks (SDFs). The
       project did not indicate any progress against these outputs because of other priority activities (see
       Objective 2 below). The project later dropped these outputs (see below).

OUTCOMES: The participating PCCs did not achieve the targets of the three outcome indicators.

      The project did not conduct any survey, although a TOR for the survey was completed.
       No beneficiaries reported improvements in municipal services. The original target was 70 percent.

      The ICR reported that 162,292 urban residents benefited from the project against an original mid-term
       target of 400,000 and end target of 800,000.

      None of the PCCs met their OSR targets. The original target was 4 PCCs.

Overall, the efficacy of the project to achieve this objective is rated Negligible. The project did not achieve
any of the target outputs or outcome indicators.



Rating
Negligible


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
To introduce sustainable municipal finance and management systems in five PCCs.

Revised Rationale
This PDO was not revised but the number of target PCCs was reduced from nine to five. Changes were made
to the target values of the outcome indicators to accommodate this change.

Revised Theory of Change (ToC): The project reduced the target PCCs from nine to five and revised target
values of the outcome indicators accordingly. The ToC dropped one outcome indicator but maintained the
long-term urban development agenda by keeping the elements of the institutional support to the
municipalities. Revised outputs: The ToC dropped the following outputs: (i) capacity building packages;
(ii) strategic development frameworks, (iii) urban policy reforms embodied in an affordable housing action
plan and an urban planning framework; and (iv) feasibility and design studies for catalytic investment projects.
The ToC would revisit the feasibility and design studies after the Mid Term Review (MTR), but the project did
not undertake a MTR and later dropped this output. Revised outcome: The ToC dropped an outcome
indicator because the project did not implement precedent activities. The ToC reduced the target value of an


                                                                                                    Page 7 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Cities Investment Program (P160619)



original outcome indicator because of reduced resources. The original assumptions remained valid. The Bank
suspended the project after the mid-August 2021 government collapse and then closed by August 2022. Both
periods reflected the same outputs and outcomes.

REVISED OUTPUTS:

      The project did not provide the PCCs with an improved MIS. Afghanistan used two MIS: (i) the
       Afghanistan Financial Management Information System (AFMIS) used by The Ministry of Finance
       (MOF) and Kabul Municipality; and (ii) the Integrated Financial Management Information System
       (IFMIS) used by several municipalities. A consultant started but did not complete an AFMIS baseline
       assessment. The assessment evaluated needs, compared the systems, recommended which system
       was better suited to the municipalities, and prepared a municipal implementation plan. The project
       drafted an Afghanistan Financial Management Information System (AFMIS) Memorandum of
       Understanding (MOU) for signature by the Ministry of Finance. Each city hired financial advisors in
       anticipation of the system’s rollout. However, the government refocused its priority on a performance-
       based municipal finance allocation mechanism. IDLG did not extend the consultant's contract. There
       were no final deliverables.
      The project dropped the following outputs:
            o capacity building packages
            o strategic development frameworks
            o an affordable housing action plan and an urban planning framework
            o feasibility and design studies for catalytic investment projects

REVISED OUTCOMES: The participating PCCs did not achieve the revised targets of the following
outcomes:

      209,050 urban residents benefited from the project. The revised midterm target was 300,000 and the
       revised end target was 650,000 urban residents.
      The ToC dropped the outcome indicator - PCCs met their OSR targets (ICR, paragraph 26).

Overall, the outcome of the project to achieve this revised objective is rated Negligible. The project did not
achieve the revised target values of the outcome indicator.



Revised Rating
Negligible


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To rehabilitate municipal infrastructure in five participating PCCs.

Rationale
Theory of Change (ToC): The PCCs were to consult with their communities to identify priority projects that
would improve service delivery and livability. Inputs were to include the consultative processes, training, and
technical assistance designed to identify, screen, and finance priority project that met the eligibility criteria.


                                                                                                     Page 8 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Cities Investment Program (P160619)



Communities were to participate in evaluation committees to select contractors, monitor contractor
performance, and authorize payments for completed works. Outputs were to include prioritized small-scale
interventions. The ToC expressed the Outcomes as the number of residents who benefit from improved
livability because of improved services delivered. A beneficiary survey to be conducted at closing would
provide the evidence. As noted above, the number of gender-disaggregated beneficiaries form part of the
corporate scorecard. This indicator was insufficient to reflect the outcome of the interventions. The same
assumptions in Objective 1 applied here.

OUTPUTS: The participating PCCs exceeded or achieved the targets of the following outputs:

      Communities chose priority projects. Residents discussed draft designs. Various stakeholders
       conducted and documented consultations as part of sub-project screening and scoping studies,
       and during the preparation of Environmental and Social Management Plans. The local community and
       beneficiaries shared 100 percent of the design for priority municipal infrastructure projects, as
       targeted.

      The project developed a list of catalytic investments, as targeted and presented this list to the
       IDLG. The PCCs shortlisted the projects to develop designs. The ICR claimed that the PCCs were on
       track to complete detailed designs for catalytic investments.

      The project resolved all 29 or 100 percent of registered grievances within the stipulated timeframes of
       the Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM). These grievances were related to the duration of
       construction activities, dust, and the lack of diversionary routes. The original target was 70 percent of
       registered grievances.

The participating PCCs did not achieve the targets of the following outputs:

      The project completed 52.3 km of roads, consisting of 28.3 km from PCCs, and was procuring another
       five new priority projects or 24 km of emergency projects. The original target was 100 km.

      The PCCs were partially on track to implement gender-focused investments and was in the process of
       procuring one 'women-only park' before the project closed. The project was evaluating bids. The
       project also lined up two similar projects in the procurement pipeline. The original target was 4
       women-focused investments. The project did not complete any.

OUTCOMES: The participating PCCs did not achieve the targets of the following outcomes:

      209,050 urban residents benefited from the project. The project did not report gender-disaggregated
       data. The original target was 800,000. This was the same outcome indicator used for the first
       objective.

      The project did not conduct any beneficiary surveys.

      The project did not complete planned municipal service improvements. The project closed before its
       scheduled completion date (see Section 2 (e) Dates above).




                                                                                                   Page 9 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Cities Investment Program (P160619)



Overall, the outcome of the project to achieve this objective is rated Modest. The project achieved planned
consultations. Communities agreed on priority catalytic projects to be implemented. The PCCs were on track
to complete detailed designs for these priority investments. As a result of the suspension, the project did not
achieve its target outcome indicators.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 2 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
To rehabilitate municipal infrastructure in five participating PCCs.

Revised Rationale
The objective was not changed. The target outcome indicators were changed,

Revised Theory of Change (ToC): The project did not revise the ToC but reduced the target values of the
outputs and outcome indicators because of reduced resources that were reallocated to Objective 3 (see
below). The project revised outputs by reducing the target value of one and dropping another indicator
altogether. The project was to finalize the feasibility and design studies for catalytic investment projects by the
time of the MTR. The project did not undertake the MTR. The Bank suspended the project after the mid-
August 2021 government collapse and closed in August 2022. The ToC revised outcomes by reducing
the target value of an outcome indicator. The ToC did not change any assumptions.

REVISED OUTPUTS:

      The project completed 24 kilometers of emergency project roads as part of the completed 52.3 km of
       roads. The project revised the target to 100 km with a midterm target of 20 km. The project did not
       achieve the target.

      The project dropped the following output - feasibility and design studies for catalytic investment
       projects. This project first put this output on hold until after the Mid-Term Review (MTR) but because
       the team did not conduct an MTR, the project dropped this output. The Bank suspended the project
       after the mid-August 2021 government collapse and then closed by August 2022.

REVISED OUTCOMES: The following targets of the outcome indicators were not achieved:

      The project benefited 209,050 urban residents but did not report gender-disaggregated data. The
       project revised the target to 650,000 residents.

      The ICR reported that the PCCs were partially on track to implement gender-focused investments.
       The project did not complete any.

Overall, the efficacy of the project to achieve this revised objective is rated Negligible. The project was
closed before it could achieve its reduced outcome targets.


                                                                                                    Page 10 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Cities Investment Program (P160619)




Revised Rating
Negligible


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
To support COVID-19 recovery efforts in the five participating PCCs.

Rationale
Theory of Change (ToC): The project added this objective to assist the government in its response to
COVID-19 but limited to the five target PCCs. The project added US$15 million (SDR 5.45 million and US$7.5
million from ARTF) to the Relief Effort for Afghan Communities and Households Project (REACH, P177230),
a separate World Bank-financed COVID-19 response project. The ToC causally linked inputs and outputs to
the outcome. Outputs were to be the emergency projects to support COVID-19 pandemic recovery efforts.
Outcomes were to be the person-days of short-term employment (4-12 months) generated by labor-intensive
emergency projects and medium-term employment (12-36 months) generated by the priority projects. The
ToC provided the following assumptions to increase the likelihood that outcomes were achieved, and
accelerate implementation: adopting flexible procurement arrangements, removing entry conditions, and
using fixed allocations for each PCC. The ToC added another assumption that cities would recognize
conditions as incentives to improve their performance, strengthen their capacity, and enhance ownership.

OUTPUTS:

      The project awarded or was implementing contracts for 76 emergency projects;
       advertised nine projects; designed and submitted for Bank procurement approval another 64. The
       project expected that a target of 270 emergency projects would be rolled out. Four of the five cities
       hired procurement specialists to roll out the work. The project targeted five.

OUTCOMES:

      The PCCs implemented projects that created an estimated 67,112 person-days of temporary
       employment. 11 completed and six partially completed emergency projects generated these
       estimates. The project originally targeted one million person-days with a midterm target of 200,000
       person-days. The project did not reach either target. The project reported the number of person-days
       of temporary employment only after a sub-project was completed. The last Quarterly Report (dated
       March 30, 2021) reported 45,500 person-days for 10 completed emergency projects. The project
       applied the average number of labor days generated by completed sub-projects to each unfinished
       sub-projects' progress to estimate additional labor days generated. Hence, the project estimated that
       one other completed and the six partially completed emergency projects generated 21,612 additional
       person-days.

Overall, the efficacy of the project to achieve this objective is rated Negligible. The project did not reach the
overly ambitious target value of the output. The project was closed before the project could be completed as
designed.



                                                                                                    Page 11 of 21
                                 Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                 Cities Investment Program (P160619)




                              Rating
                              Negligible


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The efficacy of the project to achieve the original objectives is rated Negligible. The efficacy of the project to
                            achieve the original first objective is rated Negligible because no outcomes were achieved. The efficacy of the
                            project to achieve the original second objective is rated Modest because some outputs were achieved and
                            approached a certain level of outcome, although the target was unmet. Additional projects were underway but
                            could not be completed before the Taliban takeover of the government. The overall efficacy of the project to
                            achieve its original objectives is rated Negligible.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating                                   Primary Reason
                            Negligible                                                External shock
                  OBJR1_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
                            The efficacy of the project to achieve the revised objectives is rated Negligible. The efficacy of the project to
                            achieve the revised first objective is rated Negligible because no outcomes were achieved. The efficacy of the
                            project to achieve the revised second objective is rated Negligible because although some outputs were
                            achieved and approached a certain level of outcome, the reduced target outcome indicators were unmet. The
                            efficacy of the project to achieve the added third objective is rated Negligible. The project did not achieve the
                            targets for the estimated person days of short- and medium-term labor created. The overall efficacy of the
                            project to achieve its revised objectives is rated Negligible. The Bank closed the project prematurely because
                            of the Taliban takeover of the government in mid-August 2021.



                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating                        Primary Reason
                            Negligible                                                External shock


    5. Efficiency
   Economic and Financial Efficiency: The project selected sub-projects and prepared feasibility and cost
   effectiveness studies. The results framework monitored quantifiable positive externalities (PAD, paragraph 45).
   However, monetizing benefit streams in an informal market with limited access to verifiable data proved difficult.
   The Urban Development Support Project (UDSP) was to design and prepare feasibility studies for the pipeline of
   priority projects. IDLG designed the initial 18 sub-projects.




                                                                                                                               Page 12 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Cities Investment Program (P160619)



The project did not conduct economic and financial analyses of the sub-projects at closing. Limited access to
verifiable data. and the collapse of the government in mid-August 2021 precluded data collection. The project
did not compare economic and financial efficiencies at appraisal and at closing.

Administrative and Operational Efficiency: The project hired a full time Project Director 9 months after the
grant became effective. Local communities participated in public consultations to prioritize the investment sub-
projects. IDLG identified the initial 18 sub-projects for UDSP to design. UDSP approved the detailed designs of
these priority sub-projects two years late because of implementation and procurement delays (see Section 10
Other Issues, Procurement below). The project did not conduct a Mid Term Review. The project completed civil
works of a number of priority projects (see Section 4 Efficacy above) and started key institutional improvements
with several works and consulting services under procurement. Then, the government fell in mid-August
2021. The Bank suspended the operation and closed the project.in August 2022. Donors approved Approach
Paper 1.0 to transfer uncommitted ARTF funds to finance humanitarian activities of the World Food Programme
(WFP) and the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) (see Dates above). Shortly thereafter, the donors
approved Approach Paper 2.0 to finance investments, analytical work, and convening activities to protect the
vulnerable, help preserve human capital and key economic and social institutions, reduce the need for future
humanitarian assistance, and improve gender equality outcomes. United Nations agencies and international and
national non-governmental organizations implemented recipient executed grants, off budget, and outside of the
interim Taliban administration (ITA). At closing, the project used 16 percent of the original commitment or 23
percent of reduced available resources. The political and security conditions in the country worsened, priorities
revised, incentives for project progress reduced, state institutional capacity weakened. High staff turnover, the
lack of clear and time-bound institutional processes, and limited intra-institutional coordination persisted and
slowed implementation.

The efficiency of the project was Negligible.


Efficiency Rating
Negligible


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                    0
 Appraisal                                                 0
                                                                                     Not Applicable
                                                                                    0
 ICR Estimate                                              0
                                                                                     Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

A split rating of the outcome is presented below.


                                                                                                   Page 13 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Cities Investment Program (P160619)



Factors                                            Original      Restructuring 1           Aug 2021
Relevance of Objective                                                       High
Efficacy
PDO 1 - to introduce sustainable municipal finance
                                                   Negligible
and management systems in nine PCCs.
Revised PDO 1 - to introduce sustainable
municipal finance and management systems in                      Negligible                Negligible
five PCCs.
PDO 2 -To rehabilitate municipal infrastructure in
                                                   Modest
five participating PCCs.
Revised PDO 2 - Not revised but outcome
                                                                 Negligible                Negligible
indicator revised.
PDO 3 - Added - Covid-19 response                  ---           Negligible                Negligible
Efficiency                                                                 Negligible
Overall Efficacy                                   Negligible    Negligible                Negligible
Outcome                                            U             U                         U
Numerical Value of Outcome                         2             2                         2
Disbursement (cumulative in US$ million)           2.6           5.5                       8.1
Disbursement (per period covered)                  2.6           2.9                       2.6
Share of Disbursement (in percent)                 32.1          35.8                      32.1
Numerical value of outcome x share of
                                                   0.642         0.716                     0.642
disbursement
Weighted Value of Outcome                          0.642         0.716                     0.642
Final Outcome                                      2.0 = U




a. Outcome Rating
   Unsatisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The fragile and conflict affected (FCV) environment in Afghanistan means the following elevated risks for the
limited project outcomes.

      Institutional risks. This is a substantial risk. There is uncertainty what institutions the new
       government would install. Plans and urban strategies in the pipeline that were to have
       fostered institutional reform would depend on whether the new government would adopt these or
       devise new ones. The international community responded to the fall of the government by directly
       working with development partners to deliver humanitarian services while the interim Taliban
       stabilizes its government.



                                                                                                    Page 14 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Cities Investment Program (P160619)



     Political risk. This is also a substantial risk. The political situation remained uncertain about the
      prospect of following through with the reforms initiated under the project. The state and municipal
      agencies are expected to weaken because of the uncertain political structure to be adopted
      and reduced engagement by the international donor community.

     Security risk. This is also a substantial risk. There remains uncertainty on how the interim Taliban
      government would address security and access to donor financed activities. According to the ICR, the
      project passed the design of emergency projects to the Bank-financed Community Resilience and
      Livelihood Project (CRLP, P178760) to be implemented by the United Nations Office of Project
      Services between 2022 and 2024.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The Bank team designed the project considering its strategic relevance to both the Bank's priorities
  and the country's own urbanization plans. In addition, the Bank team used the lessons from other similar
  operations in fragile and conflict affected (FCV) environments and IEG's evaluation of the Bank's urban
  portfolio to design the project. These lessons included: (i) a simplified design, limited components,
  and minimizing demands on weak or under-staffed implementing agencies; (ii) limited number of initial
  participating municipalities; (iii) including high margins for contingency costs in allocating financing due to
  market uncertainties; (iv) adopting realistic implementation period in the face of ongoing conflict; (v)
  establishing strong PIUs with adequate autonomy and budgets, outsourcing monitoring functions with
  performance incentives payments; (vi) continuous inter-agency consultation and consensus-building in
  decision making; and (vii) fortifying the Bank team in the field (PAD, paragraph 35).

  The Bank team assessed the adequacy of the Independent Directorate for Local Governance (IDLG), a
  national agency created by a 2007 presidential decree, to implement the project. IDLG was
  simultaneously implementing six ongoing donor-financed programs, including a component of the
  Citizen's Charter Afghanistan Program (CCAP), another Bank-financed project. This was to maintain
  continuity, reinforce implementation support with real-time monitoring of procurement, contract
  management, and improve the quality and timeliness in the delivery of civil works infrastructure. An
  independent Third-Party Monitoring Agent (TPMA) would provide project monitoring. The Bank team also
  assessed the technical, economic, and financial aspects, and the applicable environmental and social
  safeguards of the project (see Section 10 Other Issues below). The team emphasized community
  participation in setting priorities and monitoring investments. The team highlighted gender inclusiveness
  by committing targets in the results framework. The Bank team conducted a fiduciary assessment,
  identified financial and procurement weaknesses. The Bank team mitigated these and procurement risks
  with time bound capacity strengthening measures, and by financing dedicated procurement positions.

  The Bank team designed the project to ensure a level playing field to PCCs. The team identified
  and used incentives to improve performance. Predictable resources were allocated to PCCs to
  rehabilitate their infrastructure. The formula used the government’s official municipal classification and
  population size. Design guaranteed lower capacity municipalities access to funding. Design also



                                                                                                      Page 15 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Cities Investment Program (P160619)



  expected local governments to plan for larger investments after they gain capacity. The project would
  then finance future municipal infrastructure investments after PCCs met specific performance criteria.

  However, the design was overly ambitious, covered too wide a range of scope and the performance
  incentives were a mismatch with the capacity of various levels of government (see Supervision below).
  The identified mitigation measures were not sufficient to overcome the implementation risks brought by a
  weak state institutional capacity, limited local fiduciary capacity, political uncertainty, growing insurgency,
  and political violence. Taking the initiative in engaging with the political leadership, enhanced
  monitoring, financing relevant staff positions, and trainings to build capacity, proved insufficient to
  address these risks (see Supervision below).

  Overall, the Bank performance at entry is rated Moderately Satisfactory. Project design was based on
  lessons learned. The project proved not ready to be implemented because of inadequate implementation
  risk assessment and insufficient mitigating measures.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The Bank team conducted three Implementation Support Missions, a fourth planned for the end of August
 2021, and the last two virtually conducted due to COVID-19. The Task Team Leader was based in Dubai
 and conducted site visits to Kabul every other week to address implementation challenges. High staff
 turnover, understaffed, and delayed key operational and procurement decisions characterized the PIU. The
 Task Team shared weekly ‘Pending Action’ reports with the PIU.

 The complex project design slowed implementation. Afghanistan had weak institutions. Design
 included fixed allocations that proved to be an insufficient incentive for larger cities. Preconditions for
 financing that were to serve as incentives for improved performance proved onerous. Weak institutions
 were unable to implement actions in the prescribed time. The project had limited funds for infrastructure
 projects. UDSP did not deliver detailed designs on time. This delay slowed the rehabilitation of municipal
 infrastructure. In another example, municipal staff procured emergency projects at certain threshold
 levels. However, four of the five PCCs had no mayors for extended periods. The municipalities could not
 roll our sub-projects as planned. In the end, the project did not implement designs for emergency projects
 and passed them on to the Afghanistan Community Resilience and Livelihoods Project (CRLP, P178760)
 for implementation. The CRLP was an emergency operation launched after the Taliban takeover.

 The Bank team closely monitored financial management processes, and organized workshops for the PIU.
 Additional implementation risks were mitigated by a Geo-Enabling method for Monitoring and Supervision
 (GEMS) and the use of the TPMA (see Section 9, M&E Design, and Implementation below). The Bank
 team also assigned the Third-Party Monitor to undertake financial management control. (ICR, footnote 19).
 Procurement processes had shortcomings (see Section 10 Other Issues, Procurement below). The team
 mitigated procurement risks by financing dedicated procurement positions and the National Procurement
 Institute conducted relevant training sessions. Significant levels of conflict and violence slowed
 implementation. International firms had limited interest in bidding for technical assistance because of
 difficulty in executing institutional activities in unsecured areas. The Bank team could not resolve safeguard

                                                                                                       Page 16 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Cities Investment Program (P160619)



 issues because of security concerns in the affected areas. The Bank team could not provide transition to
 the follow-on project. The Taliban takeover of the government led to the early closing of the project and
 suspended operations in the country.

 Overall, Bank performance at supervision is rated Moderately Satisfactory.

 Overall, Bank performance is rated Moderately Satisfactory. Moderate shortcomings at entry included too
 wide a scope that proved to be a mismatch to the capacity of the recipient entities, and the performance
 incentives too restrictive. Bank performance at supervision is also rated Moderately Satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The project stated the PDO simply and aimed low - "to introduce" - recognizing capacity constraints. The
 theory of change documented key activities and outputs that led to the outcomes. The four PDO outcome
 indicators were more at the level of output or intermediate outcomes rather than at an outcome level. The
 outcome indicators did not encompass development outcomes that could be attributed to the interventions.
 The results framework reflected sound, specific, measurable, relevant, and time bound output indicators.
 These intermediate indicators captured citizen engagement and gender.

 The results framework did not capture several outputs that contributed to outcomes, particularly those that
 were related to capacity building outputs. The MIS team from the Bank-financed Citizen's Charter
 Afghanistan Project (CCAP) Management Information System (MIS) was to initially assist in developing the
 project MIS. M&E design included engaging a Third-Party Monitoring Agent (TPMA), with planned bi-
 weekly videoconferencing with the PIU (ICR, paragraph 67). Consultants were to deliver baselines as part
 of assessing Afghanistan's two MIS: (i) the Afghanistan Financial Management Information System
 (AFMIS), used by the Ministry of Finance and Kabul Municipality, and (ii) the Integrated Financial
 Management Information System (IFMIS), used by several municipalities. The assessment was to result in
 (i) a recommendation of s system better suited to the municipalities, and (ii) an implementation plan. The
 M&E design and arrangements were well-embedded institutionally.



b. M&E Implementation
  The IDLG Project Implementation Unit assisted by a TPMA implemented the M&E. The TPMA monitored
  both institutional development and infrastructure components, verifying implementation progress,
  safeguards compliance, and fiduciary processes. The development of the project MIS was delayed.
  Workload did not allow the Bank-financed CCAP MIS team to assist in implementing the MIS. The project

                                                                                                 Page 17 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Cities Investment Program (P160619)



  later hired a consultant (ICR, footnote 24). IDLG did not ensure attention to effectively implement the
  M&E design, closed the MIS assessment contract without the recommended appropriate MIS and the
  plan for its implementation (ICR, footnote 15). Instead, the project used the Geo-Enabling method for
  Monitoring and Supervision (GEMS) as its MIS. Provincial staff used smartphones to fill out customized
  digital forms on a weekly basis, captured data related to sub-project progress, and
  identified implementation issues. The PIU developed a bi-monthly report which interpreted the data,
  identified problems, and suggested early corrective measures. Five quarterly reports captured progress
  on the results framework indicators. GEMS collected weekly data streams. The PIU submitted quarterly
  reports every three months. The TPMA submitted reports bi-annually. The GEMS and TPMA
  data reported comparable results.



c. M&E Utilization
  The project used M&E data from GEMS reports, Quarterly Reports, and TPMA reports to inform project
  management. The Bank team used this information to follow up on corresponding corrective
  measures, discuss progress with the government during Bank Implementation Support Missions.

  Overall, the quality of M&E is rated Substantial because of the many mechanisms were put in place
  even as there was limited ability to collect data later on. The M&E design and implementation had
  shortcomings in establishing baselines and providing outcome indicators for capacity building
  interventions. The M&E system as designed and implemented sufficiently assessed the achievement of
  the objectives with the links in the results chain of the completed physical investment. The M&E
  utilization is uncertain at best because of the prevailing circumstances after the Taliban takeover of the
  government. This and the early closing of the project and suspension of Bank operations in the country
  overtook the undertaking of the beneficiary surveys.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Environmental and Social (E&S) Safeguards: At appraisal, the team classified the project as Category
   “B.” The project triggered the following environmental safeguard policies: (i) Environmental Assessment
   (OP/BP 4.01); and (ii) Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11). Environmental and social adverse
   impacts were associated with civil works. These included land degradation, air pollution, noise generation,
   land acquisition, health, and safety concerns from civil construction operations. The Environmental and
   Social Management Framework (ESMF) provided general provisions to mitigate anticipated impacts.
   Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs) were prepared. Contracts included safeguard
   management obligations. The onset of the COVID-19 pandemic required the preparation of Environmental
   and Social Framework/Safeguards Interim Note.

   The project triggered the social safeguards on Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) although project
   design did not involve involuntary land acquisition or resettlement. The TPMA February 2021 report noted

                                                                                                   Page 18 of 21
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Cities Investment Program (P160619)



  29 complaints of private properties, including commercial properties, that were damaged by road
  widening in Khost, Kandahar, and Mazar-e-Sharif. Most complaints were related to contractor activities,
  such as construction delays and payments to sub-project labor (ICR, footnote 30). A Grievance Redress
  Mechanism (GRM) was in place. GRM used the following six uptake channels: complaint box, grievance
  email, hotline, WhatsApp contact number, Facebook page, and in-person communication (ICR, paragraph
  83 and footnote 26). Signboards were not immediately set up on the premises of all sub-projects The PIU
  and the municipalities investigated the complaints, but the PIU did not file reports to provide information on
  resolving these complaints before the project closed. The PIU did not collect reliable data because the sub-
  projects were in contested areas. The Bank team suggested resolving these outstanding complaints after
  the environment stabilizes.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management: The project complied with the Bank's financial management policies. The PIU
  submitted financial and annual external audit reports (ICR, paragraph 90). The Bank accepted the timely
  submission of Interim Unaudited Financial Reports (IUFRs). After the Taliban takeover of the
  government in mid-August 2021, the PIU did not submit the last IUFR, the FY 2019, and FY 2020 audit
  reports. The Bank team assessed internal controls during the conduct of Implementation Support Missions
  and identified control weaknesses. These included records management, delays in payment processing,
  liquidation of advances, and low budget utilization. The Bank team reported that the PIU addressed these
  weaknesses. By June 2021, the TPMA started, but did not complete an internal control assessment
  because of the Taliban takeover of the government. An outstanding advance of US$2.06 million remained.

  Procurement: There were early delays in procurement, but once underway, the PIU implemented the civil
  works of priority sub-projects in 6 to 8 months. The project completed 50 percent of the activities in the
  procurement plan. The Ministry of Urban Development and Land's procurement department delayed
  evaluation of technical proposals. The National Procurement Agency delayed its approvals. The Ministry of
  Interior and other bodies were conducting audits of IDLG in 2020. IDLG management became reluctant to
  approve procurement activities and slowed the implementation of both civil works and institutional
  activities. Poor coordination between the National Procurement Agency (NPA) and the IDLG, and staffing
  capacity issues also delayed the project. The selected international design firm could not operate in
  Afghanistan due to access constraints. There were also delays in procurement of emergency projects due
  to delayed formation of evaluation committees. Poor coordination and slow IDLG management approval,
  control weaknesses due to record management, delays in payment processing, liquidation of advances,
  and low budget utilization delayed the procurement of consulting services. The ICR reported that the PIU
  resolved these delays. The COVID-19 pandemic also caused significant procurement, disbursement, and
  hiring delays. To expedite procurement, the Bank team relaxed the qualification criteria for the shopping
  method, created additional PIU procurement positions, and requested that the National Procurement
  Authority (NPA) not take over high value projects. Municipalities conducted procurement for selected labor-
  intensive emergency projects and opened second-generation bank accounts to pay contractors directly for
  completed works under specific thresholds.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)

                                                                                                  Page 19 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Cities Investment Program (P160619)



   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                   Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                    IEG
                                                                                   Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                          Unsatisfactory        Unsatisfactory
                                 Moderately
Bank Performance                                       Moderately Satisfactory
                                 Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                   Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                   ---                   High


12. Lessons

The ICR presented five lessons and recommendations based on the protracted operations (ICR
paragraphs 99 - 103). Two lessons are combined into one, another was not relevant because the
design was not implemented, and two others are highlighted below with slight modifications.

      Designing incentives to allocate resources for performance-based grant systems
         may consider (i) matching the size, needs, spending patterns, of target municipalities;
         and (ii) a longer-term engagement. In this project, the size of the incentives matched the
         needs of smaller municipalities to be more receptive to undertake meaningful reform in their
         systems and procedures. Proposing radical changes to existing systems, especially in FCV
         settings, necessitates gradual introduction of reforms over a longer period. The initial
         targeting may highlight the services to improve over time by gradually adopting system
         reforms. The tested improvements could then inform how to expand which system reforms.

      Deficient performance of precedent activities may negatively affect a programmatic
         approach. The team designed this project as a first in a series of two under an umbrella
         program in an FCV setting. The second project would proceed after the successful delivery
         of the first set of interventions. Implementation delays, common in FCV settings, would then
         ripple across the portfolio. Projects in a sector portfolio or those that form a programmatic
         approach may have common objectives, but their interdependence may require
         clearly sequenced conditions within reasonable timelines.

      Task teams may take advantage of an external shock, such as a pandemic, to justify
         an early restructuring of projects. In this project, the task team established
         continuous dialogue with the government to lay out potential restructuring scenarios even
         before the MTR knowing that FCV settings usually experience frequent restructurings. The
         task team may use regular Implementation Supervision Missions as opportunities to agree




                                                                                                     Page 20 of 21
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Cities Investment Program (P160619)



         on scenarios beforehand for restructuring the project In this case, the team designed a
         restructuring that responded to the pandemic.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

This ICR was prepared to highlight lessons learned. A government takeover prematurely closed this project.
The report highlighted results and lessons from the protracted implementation period. The ICR followed the
guidelines and presented a clear description of the project operations including the challenges of the
disruptions caused by the pandemic and the Taliban takeover of the government. The rationale behind the split
rating of the outcome was logical and convincing. The breakdown of the revised Theory of Change (Annex 7) of
the project was helpful. A minor inconsistency was in using a total disbursement of US$35 rather than the
US$8.1 million from the data sheet to calculate disbursement rates in the split rating of the outcome. This
discrepancy did not affect the rating. The report clearly attributed lessons to the operations, for example,
establishing a long-term relation at the local level while adopting a gradual approach to reform, and keeping
lines of communication open to devise responsive measures to anticipated restructurings. The quality of the
ICR is rated High.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       High




                                                                                                   Page 21 of 21
