      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Mato Grosso Fiscal DPL (P164588)



                                                                                     Report Number: ICRR0023332

1. Operation Information



 Operation ID                                 Operation Name
 P164588                                      Mato Grosso Fiscal DPL

 Country                                      Practice Area (Lead)
 Brazil                                       Macroeconomics, Trade and Investment



  Non-Programmatic DPF

  L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)                    Total Financing (USD)
  IBRD-89660                                  31-Dec-2021                                           248,883,034.00

  Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
  24-May-2019                                 31-Dec-2021

                                              IBRD/IDA (USD)                                Co-financing (USD)

  Original Commitment                              250,000,000.00                                               0.00

  Revised Commitment                               248,883,034.00                                               0.00

  Actual                                           248,883,034.00                                               0.00




 Prepared by                  Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator           Group
 Patrick Shawn Hettinger      Jennifer L. Keller            Gabriela Chamartin Escobar       IEGEC




2. Program Objectives and Pillars/Policy Areas
DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives

The Program Development Objective (PDO) of this DPL was “to support the State of Mato Grosso to (i) regain
fiscal sustainability and (ii) increase institutional capacity for sustainable agriculture, forest conservation and
climate change mitigation” (PD, page 3).



                                                                                                       Page 1 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Mato Grosso Fiscal DPL (P164588)



b. Pillars/Policy Areas
The operation has two pillars supported by 8 prior actions, as outlined below.

Pillar A: Regaining Fiscal Sustainability

Prior Action 1: The Borrower has enacted legislation that clarifies and tightens personnel spending limits and
sets targets for current savings, as evidenced by the adoption and publication of the Borrower’s Fiscal
Responsibility Law (Law No 614/2019).

Prior Action 2: The Borrower has enacted legislation that conditions annual adjustments of the Borrower’s civil
servants’ salaries on the Borrower’s fiscal capacity, as evidenced by the adoption and publication of Law No
10.819/2019.

Prior Action 3: The Borrower has enacted legislation that strengthens the governance of its pension agency
(MTPREV) by transferring the authority to approve actuarial studies and propose financing plans, as
evidenced by the adoption and publication of Law No 613/2019.

Prior Action 4: The borrower has enacted legislation that establishes its State Fiscal Equilibrium Fund (FEEF)
to increase public revenues from companies benefitting from tax incentives, as evidenced by the adoption and
publication of Law No 10.709/2018.

Prior Action 5: The Borrower has enacted legislation that increases the per-unit levies charged on agricultural
commodities produced in the Borrower’s territory, as evidenced by the adoption and publication of Law No
10.818/2019.

Pillar B: Increasing institutional capacity for sustainable agriculture, forest conservation and climate
change mitigation.

Prior Action 6: The Borrower has enacted regulation that improves prevention and control of illegal
deforestation and forest fires through remote sensing, early warning and swift response, as evidenced by the
adoption and publication of the Borrower’s Decree No 1490/2018.

Prior Action 7: The Borrower has improved the transparency and effectiveness of the Rural Environmental
Registry and of the Program for Environmental Regularization through: (i) the definition of procedures and
oversight for the Rural Environmental Registry and the Program for Environmental Regularization, as
evidenced by the agreement signed among the Borrower’s Public Prosecutor, the Borrower’s Secretary for
Environment and the Borrower’s Secretary for Public Security; and (ii) the definition of operational procedures
for public access to environmental information, as evidenced by the settlement signed between the
Borrower’s Public Prosecutor and the Borrower’s Secretary for Environment.

Prior Action 8: The Borrower has enacted regulation that strengthens the implementation of its “Produce,
Conserve, Include” (PCI) Strategy and institutional capacity (including by appointing the PCI Institute as the
independent agency to implement its PCI Strategy) in order to improve agricultural production while protecting
its forests, as evidenced by the adoption and publication of the Borrower’s Decree No 46/2019.


c. Comments on Program Cost, Financing and Dates


                                                                                                    Page 2 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Mato Grosso Fiscal DPL (P164588)




The operation was approved on May 24, 2019, became effective on September 6, 2019, and closed on
December 31, 2021.

The IBRD loan was approved for USD 250,000,000 and USD 248,883,034 was disbursed. The difference
reflects exchange rates movements.


3. Relevance of Design

a. Relevance of Objectives

 Relevance to country context: The program was highly relevant to the country context, with the country and
 state facing fiscal as well as environmental challenges.

       At the time of appraisal in 2019, Brazil’s economy was slowly recovering from a deep recession in 2015
          and 2016. Spending increases, and the impact of the recession contributed to a large federal fiscal
          deficit and growing public debt. Deep cuts to public investment and other austerity measures since
          2015 were insufficient to control public expenditures, which has been growing strongly for several
          decades, largely due to constitutionally guaranteed social mandates such as pension benefits. The
          difficult fiscal position extended to subnational governments. Public expenditure, mainly on wage bill
          and public pension entitlements, grew as a result of pro-cyclical fiscal rules and growing demand for
          public services.
         At the time of appraisal, the Government of the state of Mato Grosso (the Government) was running
          arrears (similar to other states) despite relatively strong growth. Revenues trailed economic growth as
          production of agricultural commodities for export were exempt by federal legislation from the state’s
          value-added tax and states could not tax rural properties since the rural property tax was assigned to
          the Federal Government. However, the Government continued to produce primary surpluses.
         The state’s expenditures were dominated by high and rising personnel costs. Spending on payroll and
          pensions had grown 69 percent in real terms from 2011 to 2018, increasing from 50 percent of public
          spending in 2011 to 74 percent in 2018. Most of the increase was due to salary growth, due in part to a
          2004 law that granted civil servants universal wage adjustments for inflation, and a 2013 law that
          aimed to double real wages for teachers between 2014 and 2023. The state was also facing a rapidly
          increasing pension deficit, as the number of retired civil servants was increasing rapidly, and their
          pensions were linked to the wages of active staff. The Government also had to contend with significant
          budgetary rigidities as 27 percent of tax revenues were earmarked for education and 12.5 percent for
          health.
         The state of Mato Grosso is Brazil’s third largest by area and over 50 percent of the state’s GDP is
          related to agriculture. Historically, the state’s agricultural growth benefitted from the clearing of forest.
          Average deforestation fell between 2010 and 2019 considerably below levels from 2001 to 2009.
          However, it had started to increase again in 2016. In 2018, about 1,750 km2 of forests were cleared in
          the Amazon biome—130 percent above the low point in 2012. The expansion of agricultural production
          into previously forested lands was a leading contributor to carbon emissions. Moreover, interannual
          climate variability was impacting crop production patterns.
         Preserving its rich environmental resources was a high priority for the government to sustain an export-
          growth model based on sustainable agriculture. The Government had developed an ambitious PCI
          strategy to support sustainable agricultural and livestock production, while limiting deforestation and

                                                                                                         Page 3 of 20
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Mato Grosso Fiscal DPL (P164588)



       forest degradation. Prior actions supported by the DPO were expected to put Mato Grosso in a
       leadership position on the environmental, climate and inclusive rural development agenda in Brazil,
       providing an important model for other states.



Relevance to country development agenda: The DPL was relevant to the country and state development
agenda, expressed at the state level by the newly elected administration.

      Mato Grosso had a new state administration as of January 2019 which gave greater importance to
       accelerating fiscal adjustment and sustainable management of its natural resources. Within its first
       month in office, the new administration declared a “financial calamity” and approved a package of fiscal
       adjustment and reform measures, which included many reforms supported by the DPL. These
       measures focused on expenditure control, including the State Fiscal Responsibility law, changes to
       public sector pay adjustments, changes of the State’s public pension system and an administrative
       reform, reducing the number of State Secretariats and allowing for the closure of State companies. It
       also increased levies on the main agricultural commodities produced in the State.
      Following the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change Paris Agreement
       negotiations, the Government adopted an ambitious strategy aimed at reducing deforestation by 90
       percent and 95 percent in the Amazon and Cerrado biomes, respectively, by 2030. It also announced
       its strategy, “Produce, Conserve, Include (PCI)” that was designed to protect forest assets while
       promoting agricultural productivity by scaling-up efforts to reduce deforestation and forest fires,
       accelerating implementation of the environmental regularization in private properties, and
       institutionalizing the PCI program. The PCI program focuses on efforts covering DPL reforms including
       scaling-up efforts to reduce deforestation and forest fires, accelerating implementation of the
       environmental regularization in private properties, and institutionalizing the PCI strategy.

Relevance to Bank Group Strategy: The DPL was aligned with the first and third pillars of the World Bank
Group supported Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for Brazil for FY2018-FY2023: (i) fiscal consolidation
and government effectiveness; and (iii) equitable and sustainable development.

      It supported the first objective of the CPF’s first pillar: Strengthen fiscal management at all levels of
       government by supporting the state’s fiscal adjustment in close cooperation with the Federal
       Government. The ICR notes that the DPL was expected to have a demonstration effect for other
       subnational governments and was expected to create an incentive for states to address their fiscal
       deficits, reduce risk of unsustainable debt paths and restore the fiscal capacity of subnational entities to
       receive federal guarantees for further borrowing, all while reducing contingent liabilities to the Federal
       Government.
      The DPL also supported the first objective of the CPF’s third pillar: Support the achievement of Brazil’s
       Nationally Determined Contribution with a particular focus on land use by focusing on land use
       planning, deforestation, environmental compliance, and environmental climate finance mechanisms in
       a state that is considered critical to Brazil’s climate mitigation commitment, and which relies on
       adaptation and climate resilience efforts to sustain its growth model.


b. Relevance of Prior Actions


                                                                                                      Page 4 of 20
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Mato Grosso Fiscal DPL (P164588)



Rationale

Objective 1: Regaining Fiscal Sustainability

Prior Action 1: The Borrower has enacted legislation that clarifies and tightens personnel spending limits and
sets targets for current savings, as evidenced by the adoption and publication of the Borrower’s Fiscal
Responsibility Law (Law No 614/2019).

The adoption of the states’ Fiscal Responsibility Law complements the national fiscal responsibility law by
providing more stringent expenditure rules, particularly for wage expenditure, which is one of the largest
spending items. It provides a clearer and broader definition of personnel expenditures that reduces the scope of
interpretation and clarifies the definition of “adjusted net current revenue,” which determines the available
revenues for discretionary spending.

The law states that: (i) when total personnel spending exceeds 60 percent of “adjusted net current revenue”,
salaries cannot be increased, even if pay rises were approved in previous laws; (ii) current administrations
cannot approve pay increases that come into effect in subsequent administrations; (iii) any new expenditure
program must be evaluated by the Secretariat of Finance (SEFAZ) for fiscal impact and sustainability; (iv) the
total amount of tax incentives that can be provided to businesses on any given tax is limited to a fixed
percentage of gross revenues from that same tax (25 percent for the tax on circulation of goods and services
(ICMS)); and (v) the State Government must achieve a current savings rate of 8 percent in the medium term (8
years). Achieving this savings rate would allow the State to regain access to borrowing with federal guarantees.

PA1 was highly relevant to the achievement of PDO1 since the State could not achieve fiscal sustainability
without strong actions to control expenditures and increase savings. While the measures could be expected to
contribute towards containing personnel spending costs below the 60 percent ceiling by limiting the
circumstances under which salaries can be increased, by maintaining targets as a function of adjusted net
current revenue, this does not, on its own, deal with some other problems, such as high levels of pro-cyclicality.
Although a stronger fiscal rule would have reduced pro-cyclical elements by relying on historical revenue trends
over time or having some other cap on expenditure growth, this DPO and prior action was working within the
confines of the federal fiscal responsibility law and credit rating requirements. Defining new means of
measurement would have set this on a different path for monitoring and evaluation solely for WB purposes,
instead of what was already being done in government. Some of the pro-cyclical elements were addressed by
using a weighted average over three years. Rating: highly satisfactory.

Prior Action 2: The Borrower has enacted legislation that conditions annual adjustments of the Borrower’s civil
servants’ salaries on the Borrower’s fiscal capacity, as evidenced by the adoption and publication of Law No
10.819/2019.

The increase in the public sector wage bill and pensions were the largest vulnerabilities to the state’s fiscal
situation, and this PA more tightly regulated growth of public sector salaries. This modified a pre-existing law
that regulated pay increases to all civil servants to be in line with the national consumer price index. Although
the previous law required that the state’s financial capacity be considered when granting salary increases,
language was vague and in practice increases had become automatic.

This new law formalized the fiscal conditions that needed to be met for the inflation-based adjustment to be
granted, including that the state: (i) had available fiscal capacity (ordinary net revenues greater than total
expenditures not financed from other sources), considering the most recent 12-month data; and (ii) ensured that


                                                                                                     Page 5 of 20
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Mato Grosso Fiscal DPL (P164588)



any salary increase would not lead to a loss of this fiscal capacity. The Law conditioning civil servants’ salary
increases remains in place and effective, and no new salary increases (besides individual career progression)
were granted in both 2019 and 2020.

This prior action clearly limits the application of inflation adjustments to salaries, which has been a major
problem in Mato Grasso and Brazil, by clarifying and limiting the conditions under which they can be applied.
While it has been effective in this case through 2020, it also faces a similar concern as PA1, where it is tied to
the most recent revenue figures, which could increase pro-cyclicality. While certainly constrained by country
circumstances, a more effective law may have tied this to trend revenues over a longer period than 12 months,
in order to reduce pro-cyclicality. Rating: satisfactory.

Prior Action 3: The Borrower has enacted legislation that strengthens the governance of its pension agency
(MTPREV) by transferring the authority to approve actuarial studies and propose financing plans, as evidenced
by the adoption and publication of Law No 613/2019.

The MTPREV had been created in 2014 to be the single administrator of the state’s pension system, but the
incorporation of non-executive branches of government foreseen in the law had not taken place. These
branches were represented in the MTPREV Council, which allowed them to prevent changes to the pension
system governed by MTPREV. MTPREV had blocked the MTPREV’s ability to commission actuarial studies
showing growing deficits and to approve proposals aimed at addressing the deficits, even before the proposals
could be advanced to the legislature for approval.

This reform was the approval of a law which authorized the MTPREV directory (instead of the Council) to
approve actuarial studies and propose financing plans for deficits identified in the studies. These changes were
expected to allow the state to make parametric changes to its pension system, aimed at reducing short- and
long-terms deficits.

High spending on pensions is a key component of public expenditure. This reform helped unblock the analysis
of these issues and allowed the government to make proposals to the legislature to reduce these costs which
had been blocked by the MTPREV council. However, this is only an early step in the process as necessitated
by the circumstances at the time, and much more would be needed to make lasting pension reform. The PD
acknowledged that this was an early step in the process, but was necessary to propose more parametric
reforms (the government subsequently made significant progress on pension reform). Rating: moderately
satisfactory.

Prior Action 4: The borrower has enacted legislation that establishes its State Fiscal Equilibrium Fund (FEEF)
to increase public revenue from companies benefitting from tax incentives, as evidenced by the adoption and
publication of Law No 10.709/2018.

In Mato Grosso, fiscal incentives were estimated to forgo tax revenues of R$3.5 billion a year, or 27 percent of
expected total tax revenues in 2018. The concession of new benefits was already limited by the state’s new
Fiscal Responsibility Law, but there was a need to recover part of the previously granted tax expenditures in a
way that was consistent with the legislation that granted them.

As a Prior Action, the state created a fiscal emergency fund (the FEEF) and companies that were benefitting
from certain tax exemptions were obliged to contribute to the fund, in effect resulting in a partial and temporary
“claw back” of the previously granted tax benefit. Contributions were set at between 10 and 20 percent of the



                                                                                                    Page 6 of 20
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Mato Grosso Fiscal DPL (P164588)



benefit received (depending on the sector) until June 2021 (when FEEF was to expire) for those benefitting
from two main programs.

The ICR acknowledges how the creation of the FEEF was a “second-best” solution for quick fiscal gains at the
time. There was a deeper reform eliminating many of these tax exemptions about a year later. However,
political capital was not sufficient to pass the more substantive reform at the time of the DPL, although there
was a need for recovering revenues at the time. The design team was involved in the preparation of the more
structural reform, but for the government it was more important to front-load the rest of the fiscal package
supported and present this reform later. Rating: moderately satisfactory.

Prior Action 5: The Borrower has enacted legislation that increases the per-unit levies charged on agricultural
commodities produced in the Borrower’s territory, as evidenced by the adoption and publication of Law No
10.818/2019.

The state’s main economic activity, export-oriented agriculture, is exempt from ICMS (VAT) taxation by federal
law. Therefore, to capture part of the agriculture’s value added and to help finance public infrastructure, the
state created the state FETHAB in 2000, and as such, a levy was charged on the state’s main agricultural
export crops (soybean, maize, cotton, cattle, wood) and on diesel fuel consumption. The levies are not
permanent and have to be renewed every few years. Resources were shared with municipalities, and until
2018, were largely earmarked for transport infrastructure and housing investments. The higher rates on
commodities— rates levied on agricultural commodities (excluding cattle were doubled in 2017 and 2018,
expired at the end of 2018, threatening a reduction of FETHAB revenues of around 32 percent.

This reform supported actions to strengthen fiscal sustainability by extending existing revenue measures in the
short- to medium-term, and to introduce greater flexibility in the budgetary allocations of those revenues in the
short term. This prior action was for the state to approve a law that would adjust the state Fund for Transport
and Housing (FETHAB) to provide greater budget flexibility by: (i) renewing the FETHAB on commodities from
2019 to 2022; (ii) setting rates on agricultural commodities above the rates prevailing until December 2018,
broadening the coverage of the FETHAB on livestock production and introducing a new level on maize destined
for out-of-state consumption; and (iii) increasing the non-earmarked share of revenues from 30 percent to 60
percent for 2019 and 2020, then gradually declining to 40 percent by 2023. As of August 2022, the FETHAB for
commodities has accumulated R$1,911.5 and it is expected to be above the revenues collected in 2021.

The reform provided a clear increase in revenues in the short and medium term, and by raising the rate above
previously prevailing rates, it set a baseline for future cycles. But due to political considerations, this was only
able to continue the short term system of extensions instead of implementing long term solutions – although the
objective does target more short and medium term objectives of “regaining fiscal
sustainability”. Rating: moderately satisfactory.

Objective 2: Increasing institutional capacity for sustainable agriculture, forest conservation and
climate change mitigation.

Prior Action 6: The Borrower has enacted regulation that improves prevention and control of illegal
deforestation and forest fires through remote sensing, early warning and swift response, as evidenced by the
adoption and publication of the Borrower’s Decree No 1490/2018.

Mato Grosso has the second highest level of deforestation in the Amazon biome, and deforestation was rising
again at the time of appraisal. Reversing the upward trend in the rate of deforestation is made difficult by State’s
large dimensions, remoteness of affected areas and obsolete monitoring and controlling systems – the existing

                                                                                                     Page 7 of 20
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Mato Grosso Fiscal DPL (P164588)



satellite monitoring system provides information with an average delay of 45 days. The State established its first
Deforestation and Forest Fire Prevention and Control Plan in 2013. However, this plan expired in 2016 and
since then the State lacked a proper coordination mechanism to prevent and control illegal deforestation and
forest fires.

The new plan supported by this prior action provides for: (i) the creation of an integrated monitoring center (the
first of its kind in Brazil) to monitor and control legal and illegal deforestation, timber extraction, the quality of
water, air, and soil, and all the information regarding the licensing process for investments with environmental
impact; (ii) replacement of the existing obsolete satellite monitoring system through the adoption of a state-of-
the-art satellite system providing information within 48 hours; (iii) training and capacity building of key
operational partners, such as the Brazilian Institute of the Environment and Renewable Natural Resources,
Polícia Militar Ambiental and Delegacia de Meio Ambiente, and (iv) confiscation of machinery from deforested
areas, preventing them to be reused in other areas.

The resources for these activities are in large part provided through various existing programs and partnerships,
providing a large degree of financial independence from the State’s budget and substantially reducing the risk
of delays in implementation due to lack of funding. Moreover, reform implementation can rely on initiatives such
as the “MapBiomas Alertas” initiative, a multi-institutional project involving universities, NGOs and technology
companies that promotes Brazil’s annual land cover and land use mapping over the last three decades, and
provides free and open data and maps. This type of collaboration can help validate deforestation alerts in a
shorter time, allowing effective action even at the most remote points.

While establishing this coordination mechanism and the integrated monitoring center, replacing the obsolete
satellite monitoring system, and training and capacity building will certainly aid in addressing deforestation,
supporting these activities would have been better suited for an investment project than a DPO (the PDO
targets “increasing institutional capacity” which is not well suited for a DPO). Moreover, the PD indicates how
resources for these activities are already largely available, but it is not clear how this regulation was a key
binding constraint. Rating: moderately unsatisfactory.

Prior Action 7: The Borrower has improved the transparency and effectiveness of the Rural Environmental
Registry and of the Program for Environmental Regularization through: (i) the definition of procedures and
oversight for the Rural Environmental Registry and the Program for Environmental Regularization, as evidenced
by the agreement signed among the Borrower’s Public Prosecutor, the Borrower’s Secretary for Environment
and the Borrower’s Secretary for Public Security; and (ii) the definition of operational procedures for public
access to environmental information, as evidenced by the settlement signed between the Borrower’s Public
Prosecutor and the Borrower’s Secretary for Environment.

This prior action entailed two interrelated measures to support the implementation of the cadaster in compliance
with the Brazilian Forest Code through:

     i. defining procedures and oversight for the Rural Environmental Registry and the Program for
        Environmental Regularization.
             a. This was expected to remove the most significant barrier in the swift application of SIMCAR (the
                environmental registry) by clarifying implementation procedures between SEMA (the state
                Environment Secretariat), the Secretariat for Public Security and the Public Prosecutor,
                simplifying the analysis of data, and strengthening control systems.
    ii. defining operational procedures for public access to environmental information.


                                                                                                        Page 8 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Mato Grosso Fiscal DPL (P164588)



             a. SEMA’s Transparency Portal was to provide environmental information such as SIMCAR data,
                licenses and permits, information about embargoed areas, and data related to the control of
                commercialization and transport of forest products, which supported implementation of Brazil’s
                Forest Cost and curbed non-compliance.

 The capacity for putting in place an updated environmental registry, validated by relevant authorities, in
 compliance with federal legislation, and with information readily accessible to interested parties through this
 reform would support the achievement of PDO2. Implementation had been slow due to limited financial and
 human resources and lack of a clear and transparent implementation process. The lack of transparency on
 environmental permits and registry entries undermined effective monitoring and oversight.

 Improving the clarity of procedures are likely to impact the effectiveness of implementing the forest code as well
 as monitoring and oversight, but the PD also indicates that limited financial and human resources play a role.
 So while this reform may make some progress towards PDO2, it is not clear how much this was an impediment
 instead of just financial and human resources constraints, or other technical constraints. Rating: moderately
 satisfactory.

 Prior Action 8: The Borrower has enacted regulation that strengthens the implementation of its PCI Strategy
 and institutional capacity (including by appointing the PCI Institute as the independent agency to implement its
 PCI Strategy) in order to improve agricultural production while protecting its forests, as evidenced by the
 adoption and publication of the Borrower’s Decree No 46/2019.

 This reform helped put in place an institutional structure to coordinate with donors and investors to help
 mobilize funding for the state’s transition to sustainable agriculture. The state’s PCI Strategy represented a
 long-term development vision for the state, but the state lacked a coherent institutional framework to implement
 the strategy, hampering coordination and scalability of existing programs and initiative between stakeholders
 (e.g., research institutes, NGOs, sector associations, civil society, government). It had also not created the
 enabling environment to attract environmentally-minded donors and investors at scale, raising the difficulty to
 reach its PCI goals. Removing barriers to green finance was considered key as the transition of Mato Grosso’s
 agriculture and livestock production to ambitious low carbon, climate resilient and environmental standards was
 expected to require substantial investments.

 To achieve this, the Government sought to create an institutional structure that would: (i) help coordinate the
 dialogue with donors and investors; (ii) raise resources for the transition to sustainable agriculture aiming at
 climate co-benefits; (iii) advise on public policies and measures and on a balanced mix of innovative technical
 and financial incentives; and (iv) provide technical assistance to create a robust monitoring, reporting and
 verification system to evaluate programs and projects implemented under the PCI strategy. The PCI Institute
 was founded in early 2019 as a private non-profit institution for the above purposes. Rating: moderately
 satisfactory.



Rating

Moderately Satisfactory


4. Relevance of Results Indicators


                                                                                                      Page 9 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Mato Grosso Fiscal DPL (P164588)




Rationale

                                                                                           Actual
                                                                                           change
                                                      Baseline Target          Actual
                                                                                           in RI    RI
                              Associated              (including (including    value as
 RI description                          RI Relevance                                      relative achievement
                              PA(s)                   units and units and      of target
                                                                                           to       rating
                                                      date)      date)         date
                                                                                           targeted
                                                                                           change
 Objective 1: Regaining Fiscal Sustainability

 Current savings as a                                                                      Over
 percentage of adjusted net                              3.6                               100
                                                                           13.2
 current revenue (assesses                Moderately     percent 5 percent                 percent
                            PA1                                            percent                  High
 using the current savings                satisfactory   (data up (2021)                   of
                                                                           (2021)
 indicator established and                               to 2017)                          targeted
 published by the STN)                                                                     change
                                                                                           Over
                                                                                           100
                                                           67.85      60         52
 Wage bill as a share of net-              Moderately                                      percent
                               PA2                         percent percent percent                  High
 current revenue                           satisfactory                                    of
                                                           (2018)     (2021)     (2021)
                                                                                           targeted
                                                                                           change
                                                                                           Over
 Pension deficit realized in
                                                                                           100
 percent of current revenues                               9.1        8.5        1.6
                                           Moderately                                      percent
 compared to 2018 projection PA3                           percent percent percent                  High
                                           satisfactory                                    of
 (based on World Bank                                      (2018)     (2021)     (2021)
                                                                                           targeted
 PROST model)
                                                                                           change
                                                                                           95
                                                           R$85       R$400      R$384     percent
 Revenues recovered by
                               PA4         Satisfactory million       million    million   of       Substantial
 FEEF (cumulative total)
                                                           (2018)     (2021)     (2021)    targeted
                                                                                           change
                                                                                           Over
                                                                                           100
 Revenues raised from                                      R$870      R$1,350 R$2077.6
                                                                                           percent
 FETHAB commodities            PA5         Satisfactory million       million    million            High
                                                                                           of
 (annually)                                                (2018)     (2021)     (2021)
                                                                                           targeted
                                                                                           change
 Objective 2: Increasing institutional capacity for sustainable agriculture, forest conservation and climate
 change mitigation
 Annual deforestation in Mato                              1,749      1,241                21
                                           Moderately                            1,438 km2
 Grosso’s portion of the       PA6                         km2,       km2                  percent Negligible
                                           satisfactory                          (2021)
 Amazon biome                                              revised to (2021)               of


                                                                                                    Page 10 of 20
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Mato Grosso Fiscal DPL (P164588)



                                                         1,490                            targeted
                                                         km2                              change
                                                         (2018)


                                                                                            29
Area of land for which CAR
                                                         2.9 million 20 million 7.9 million percent
information has been                      Moderately
                           PA7                           hectares hectares hectares of               Modest
validated by SEMA                         satisfactory
                                                         (2018)      (2021)     (2021)      targeted
(cumulative total)
                                                                                            change
International and domestic                                                              Over
resources mobilized in                                                                  100
                                                         US$53      US$90      US$125.3
coordination with the PCI                 Moderately                                    percent
                               PA8                       million    million    million           Substantial
Institute for the purpose of              unsatisfactory                                of
                                                         (2018)     (2021)     (2021)
implementing the PCI                                                                    targeted
strategy (cumulative total)                                                             change

Objective 1: Regaining Fiscal Sustainability

RI1: The main intention and part of the prior action is to increase the current savings rate as a share of
adjusted net current revenue through various means, including through tighter controls of personnel
spending and evaluating the impact of expenditure programs on fiscal sustainability, as well as limiting the
granting of tax incentives While achieving this overall savings rate is part of the reform itself, this can be
affected by various expenditure and revenue measures, as well as having as a denominator a variable
influenced by a range of factors. Rating: moderately satisfactory.

RI2: Part of the reform is that for salaries to be increased, the state must have available fiscal capacity
(ordinary net revenues greater than total expenditures not financed from other sources) and ensuring that
any salary increase would not lead to a loss of this fiscal capacity. While the denominator is tied in as part
of the reform measure itself, the wage bill as a share of net current revenues faces a drawback of having
a denominator that is beyond the control of the reform. Rating: moderately satisfactory.

RI3: The reform is intended to allow the state to make parametric changes to its pension system with the
intention to reduce short and long-term deficit. The indicator measures the deficit of the pension system
as a share of net current revenues. While the deficit itself would be influenced by the reform, it would rely
on further subsequent actions, and net current revenues would be affected by many other factors.
Rating: moderately satisfactory.

RI4: The reform targeted increasing revenues to the FEEF which was also the indicator. While this was a
nominal figure, inflation was relatively low (below 5 percent) during the period. This could have instead
targeted the share of tax incentives received or share of tax revenues, but the denominator for these other
indicators would have been affected by other factors outside the control of the reform. Rating:
satisfactory.




                                                                                                     Page 11 of 20
                   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                   Mato Grosso Fiscal DPL (P164588)



               RI5: The reform directly targeted the levy for funding the FETHAB, which is also the indicator. While this
               was a nominal figure, inflation was relatively low (below 5 percent) during the period. Rating:
               satisfactory.

               Objective 2: Increasing institutional capacity for sustainable agriculture, forest conservation and
               climate change mitigation.

               RI6: The reforms provide various measures through which the state can reduce deforestation and the
               indicator provides an appropriate outcome measure for measuring how effectively the state is able to do
               so. The indicator does not measure increasing institutional capacity, but rather the potential impact of
               increasing institutional capacity. It can also be affected by outside factors, such as occurred in this case,
               where the macro-economic situation, drought, reduced SEMA presence in the field due to COVID-19, and
               the need to coordinate efforts with other states also affected the indicator. Rating: moderately
               satisfactory.

               RI7: The reform intended to increase enforcement of the forestry code by expanding the SIMCAR
               coverage to more land area and having this validated by the respective authority (SIMA), with land
               covered in the CAR as the indicator. Other factors beyond this reform could affect this outcome (namely
               sufficient human and financial resources), as well as technical issues (e.g., discrepancies in the
               hydrography database and rural properties’ CARs). Rating: moderately satisfactory.

               RI8: The PD indicates how this reform promotes the institutionalization of the agency for raising carbon
               financing, by helping put in place an institutional structure to coordinate with donors and investors to help
               mobilize funding for the state’s transition to sustainable agriculture. It also is intended to coordinate
               dialogue with donors, advise on public policies and measures, provide TA to support robust monitoring,
               reporting and verification system to evaluate programs implemented under the PCI strategy. Raising
               resources is a major component of this, but it is only one aspect of the mandate of the PCI institute, and is
               only one step forward in reaching PDO2. Rating: moderately unsatisfactory.



   Rating

   Moderately Satisfactory

   5. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
EFFICACY_TBL




                OBJECTIVE 1
                Objective
                Regaining Fiscal Sustainability

                Rationale
                RI1: achievement rated high. Current savings as a percentage of adjusted net current revenue reached 13.2
                percent as of 2021, far higher than the 5 percent targeted, and also significantly above the baseline of 3.2
                percent.




                                                                                                                   Page 12 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Mato Grosso Fiscal DPL (P164588)



RI2: achievement rated high. Personnel spending as a share of net current revenue declined far further than
the target of 60 percent to 52 percent.

RI3: achievement rated high. Pension deficit realized in percent of current revenues compared to 2018
projection far exceeded the target of reducing from 9.1 to 8.5 percent by reaching 1.6 percent.

Following the changes to the MTPREV governance structure supported by the PA, various measures were
approved to reduce the pension deficit. The state prepared a social security reform package which included
changes in benefits (pensions) and contributions to the social security system which aim to reduce the deficit
of the state regime itself. In late 2019, the state adopted a law that increased the pension contribution rate
from 11 percent to 14 percent for active and retired civil servants and expanded contribution base of retirees
and pensioners. Since June 2020, contributions are collected on benefit payments above the minimum wage.
In August 2020, the state legislature approved a law increasing the retirement age and to reduce replacement
rate for survivor benefit. In November 2020, the state has also implemented a complementary capitalized
pension scheme.

RI4: achievement rated substantial. Revenues recovered by FEEF reached 95 percent of the targeted
change, increasing from R$85 million to R$384 million, falling just short of the R$ 400 million target.

RI5: achievement rated high. Revenues raised annually from FETHAB commodities far exceeded the
targeted, increasing from R$ 870 million to R$2077.6 million, far above the R$1,350 target.

The combined rating of objective 1 is satisfactory.



Rating

Satisfactory

OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Increasing institutional capacity for sustainable agriculture, forest conservation and climate change mitigation.

Rationale
RI6: achievement rated negligible. Annual deforestation only reached 21 percent of the targeted change.
Outside factors affected the achievement of this, including the macro-economic situation, drought, reduced
SEMA presence in the field due to COVID-19, and the need to coordinate efforts with other states.

The ICR argues how the state strengthened its institutional capacity for forest conservation through other
means than measured by the RI. It implemented its Plan to Combat Deforestation and Forest Fires and
intensified several measures and actions to combat deforestation, including activation of an Integrated Multi-
Agency Committee; the use of the Planet Satellite Image Monitoring Platform as a preventative environmental
control tool; the use of the integrated monitoring center/situation room for actions of intelligence, informed
strategic planning and decision making; the strengthening of SEMA’s judicial team responsible for the
oversight measures and anticipation of collection of fines; and creation of Integrated Centers of Command



                                                                                                  Page 13 of 20
                         Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                         Mato Grosso Fiscal DPL (P164588)



                      and Mobile Control advanced mobile bases to allow for the geospatial information to reach the field in real
                      time.

                      RI7: achievement rated modest. The area of land for which CAR information has been validated by SEMA
                      reached only 29 percent of the targeted change. The ICR notes how various factors slowed the process
                      (discrepancies in hydrography database and CARs from rural areas have numerous inconsistencies), and
                      after sorting through these issues, improving technical capacity, and the strengthening of the analysis
                      processes reflect improvements in the environmental regularization in the state, and the target of 20 million
                      hectares of validated CARs by SEMA is expected to be achieved in the near future.

                      RI8: achievement rated substantial. The indicator reached over 100 percent of the targeted change, with
                      international and domestic resources mobilized in coordination with PCI reaching $125.3 million by 2021, far
                      above the target of $90 million; however, the relevance of the results indicator was moderately unsatisfactory.

                      The combined rating of objective 2 is moderately unsatisfactory.



                      Rating

                      Moderately Unsatisfactory


OVERALL EFF TBL OLD




Overall Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
Rationale

With the efficacy of the first objective rated satisfactory, the second rated moderately unsatisfactory, the overall
efficacy of the project is rated moderately satisfactory.



Overall Efficacy Rating
Moderately Satisfactory


      6. Outcome

      Rationale

      The relevance of the prior actions is rated moderately satisfactory.

      The overall efficacy rating is moderately satisfactory.

      The overall outcome rating is therefore moderately satisfactory.



                                                                                                                       Page 14 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Mato Grosso Fiscal DPL (P164588)



a. Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

7. Risk to Development Outcome

Political risks are high. As the ICR notes, the results achieved for PDO 1 relied on commitment of the state
Government. The Governor won reelection to another four-year term in October 2022 with an overwhelming
majority, boding well for short term sustainability, but political support for reducing expenditure - particularly
related to remuneration and pensions – as well as increasing revenues can quickly erode. Nonetheless, as
the ICR notes, recent increases in savings have also benefitted the state by increasing the State Payment
Capacity Assessment (CAPAG) score from C (the second worst score) in 2019 to an A in 2021 – which
offers the positive benefit of allowing the state to access federal guarantees for borrowing.

Economic risks include how revenues can be highly affected by the economic cycle, which could derail
savings plans and the country’s commitment to them. There is also the need for Mato Grosso to diversify its
economic base beyond agriculture in order to create more sustainable land demand.

Institutional risks – For objective 2, the institutions that were strengthened need additional time to achieve
results under the program. Yet during this period, further capacity and technical issues could arise, which will
require stronger commitment from the government but it also being supported by a WB IPF. There is a risk
that sub-national level reforms could be derailed by actions in neighboring states or at the national level.


8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Bank Performance – Design

Rationale


Drawing on lessons from previous operations: The DPO was the first of a potential series of
subnational DPLs to support fiscal adjustment and sustainable development for subnational entities and it
was expected to have a demonstration affect for other subnational governments. While there was
substantial experience in supporting previous fiscal reforms through DPOs at the sub-national level –
which this DPO benefitted from -- less experience and analytical work was available to inform the second
objective, which affected the understanding of the theory of change of reforms, their expected impact, and
achievement of results.

The PD indicates how the design of the fiscal pillar incorporated lessons learned from numerous previous
subnational DPFs in Brazil. This included incorporating lessons on: (i) subnational DPFs to support fiscal
adjustment programs in states and municipalities need to include fiscal measures that are sufficient to
achieve relevant fiscal outcomes, and these measures need to be front-loaded to contain moral hazard; (ii)
ownership and leadership at the highest level are needed, and the beginning of the political cycle is the
most promising time for reforms; (iii) close collaboration with the relevant federal agencies strengthens the
design of a fiscal program and monitoring of subnational governments’ fiscal status.


                                                                                                       Page 15 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Mato Grosso Fiscal DPL (P164588)



The PD discussed how the design of the second pillar benefited from the experience of the first
subnational DPL in Brazil focused on climate change and environmental issues, and incorporated lessons
by (i) including in reform preparation and implementation the state legislative assembly, international
organizations, private sector and academia to ensure strong inter-institutional leadership and coordination;
(ii) supporting the institutionalization of the PCI to ensure policy continuity; and (iii) supporting policies with
strong monitoring and evaluation mechanisms such as the interagency process for the rural land cadaster
(CAR) and the multi-stakeholder Instituto PCI. However, the institutional capacity building focus of the
second pillar raises the question of whether a DPO was the right instrument to achieve this aim.

Analytical foundations: While the first pillar benefitted from substantial technical and analytical work, this
was not the case for the second pillar.

For the first pillar, this included the Brazil PER’s analysis on fiscal sustainability, public sector wage bill,
pensions and education spending; analytical work done in intergovernmental fiscal relations in
collaboration with the Federal Treasury; analytical work on subnational pensions in Brazil; and specific
models on pension, wage bill and taxes developed for Mato Grosso.

While the second pillar relied on numerous studies on environmental issues prepared by the Government
and outside agencies and professionals, the only WB analytical work supporting this was carried out in
2005. The ICR notes how part of the challenges observed in the attainment of the second pillar were
related to the lack of similar deep understanding of the theory of change of the reforms and the impact
expected, therefore affecting the achievement of the targets for the result indicators.

Risk identification and mitigation measures: The PD identified risks to the DPO as substantial. It
highlighted macroeconomic risks arising mainly from uncertainty in the pace of reforms at the federal level,
as well as from potential volatility in Mato Grosso’s export volumes and prices. It discussed how pension
reforms will require further actions, including federal government reform in this area and with the need to
take reforms early in the political cycle. Additionally, it discussed institutional risks to fiscal reforms, as well
as highlighted how capacity constraints are a higher risk for the second pillar and some mitigation
measures that should help alleviate this (e.g., SEMA’s earmarked resources and existing external funding).
It identified environmental risks, acknowledging how land use change is a private sector decision. It
described stakeholder risks as substantial, particularly for public spending and public-sector payroll.

Consultations with stakeholders: Public consultations in Mato Grosso took place both during
preparation of public policies and during approval in the State legislature. The State government undertook
an extensive consultation process on the State’s fiscal adjustment program, gaining the backing of elected
representatives and involving stakeholders within and outside the government including public sector
unions, and revenue measures were discussed with industry and agribusiness representatives. The World
Bank team worked in close partnership with the National Treasury Secretariat (the Federal Government
agency that supervises fiscal affairs of subnational government), which joined missions to the State and
participated in the development of the fiscal adjustment program.

The DPO’s second pillar policies were discussed with stakeholders and civil society, including for the Plan
to Combat Deforestation and Forest Fires and for the “PCI Strategy Implementation Plan in Mato Grosso,”.
SIMCAR and PRA land regularization policies were developed with public consultation over several years.
The WB team consulted with international development partners working with Mato Grosso and other
States on the climate change agenda, including Agence France de Développement, the Sustainable Trade



                                                                                                          Page 16 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Mato Grosso Fiscal DPL (P164588)



Initiative of the Netherlands, the German Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit, and the German
Development Bank, which is directly involved in the State’s REDD financing.



Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

b. Bank Performance – Implementation

Rationale

As discussed in the ICR, implementation support was strong, particularly for a stand alone DPO. Four
Implementation Status Reports were prepared after five hands-on supervision missions for which detailed Aide
Memoires were prepared, which detailed progress and challenges by policy areas, prior actions and results.
The task team helped identify sources of financing for needed technical assistance, both from the World Bank
through future operations and through other donors (i.e., KfW) with whom the team maintained regular and
agile contact. Finally, the implementation team continued providing support to the Government to help address
the next-step actions to help ensure sustainability of the results achieved thus far, and to make progress in
areas where adjustment was warranted.



Rating

Highly Satisfactory

c. Overall Bank Performance

Rationale

Program design is rated moderately satisfactory. Program implementation is rated highly satisfactory. Overall
Bank performance is rated satisfactory.


Overall Bank Performance Rating

Satisfactory

9. Other Impacts

a. Social and Poverty




                                                                                                 Page 17 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Mato Grosso Fiscal DPL (P164588)



The DPO’s reforms were not expected to have adverse effects on poverty and inclusion, but some positive
effects were expected in the medium to long term due to expected spending cuts that would enhance equity,
including for civil servants - who were typically among the top 40 percent of income earners in the state.

The Plan to Combat Deforestation and Forest Fires (PA#6) was expected to have some positive impacts on
poor indigenous populations who derive their livelihoods from sustainable forest management and are
threatened by forest fires. However, because deforestation didn’t not decrease, the ICR discussed how it is
expected that these populations were negatively impacted,but did not offer further evidence.

No information was provided on actual impacts.



b. Environmental

DPO reforms were not expected to cause negative effect on the environment, forests or other natural resources,
with limited significant effects from the first pillar of the DPO. Reforms under the second pillar were designed to
help to help improve environmental management and are discussed in sections 3, 4, and 5 above.

No information was provided on actual impacts.



c. Gender

ICR does not discuss specific gender impacts.



d. Other

Not discussed in ICR




10. Quality of ICR

Rationale

The quality of the ICR was substantial. The assessments of both the relevance of the prior actions and the
results indicators were candid and included sufficient evidence to assess efficacy. It provided further discussion
of the reasons behind why various indicators were not met, and an assessment of the outlook for achieving
them. The ICR’s lessons were also based on evidence discussed in the report and would have value for future
DPOs, especially those at a sub-national level.




                                                                                                    Page 18 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Mato Grosso Fiscal DPL (P164588)




a. Rating

Substantial

11. Ratings
                                                                               Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                   IEG
                                                                               Disagreement/Comments
                                                                               Relevance of PAs rated MS (vs
                                                                               HS in ICR – with several PAs
                                                                               being downgraded) and efficacy
                                                                               rated MS (vs S in ICR - with the
Outcome                         Satisfactory         Moderately Satisfactory
                                                                               efficacy of the first objective
                                                                               rated moderately satisfactory,
                                                                               the second rated moderately
                                                                               unsatisfactory).
Bank Performance                Satisfactory         Satisfactory
Relevance of Results
                                ---                  Moderately Satisfactory
Indicators
Quality of ICR                  ---                  Substantial


12. Lessons

Strong WB engagement and analytical work is important to support technical capacity for reforms as well as to
better understand which reforms will help move the agenda forward. This DPO presented an example of this
working well with the first objective, which was supported by fiscal analytical tools and an evidence-based
dialogue with two consecutive administrations and between the state and federal government. This helped to
build trust across stakeholders which led to reform implementation when the political interest (at federal and
state level) aligned, and also led to a realistic approach to fiscal indicators and targets. However, the DPO’s
second objective suffered from the lack of similar deep understanding of the theory of change of the reforms and
the impact expected.

Selecting results indicators and establishing targets are challenging in a federal environment, where existing
monitoring and evaluation systems are already setup in the government, and where they can be affected by
exogenous events. Fiscal indicators were defined in relation to the state’s current revenues, which could be
impacted by macroeconomic cycles as well as the federal government’s increase in transfers to the states to
mitigate the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. Other unforeseen events could similarly impact these in the
future. Indicators could be defined as current revenues net of extraordinary transfers to better measure
progress, and other measures should be considered for reducing impact of economic cycles. However, there is
also a cost in creating new indicators which the government isn’t already tracking. Additionally, exogenous
factors complicated measuring results, particularly in the case of a drought enabled illegal deforestation in
months normally naturally shielded from such events, COVID-related social distancing reducing government’s
field presence. In this case, more output (vs outcome) related indicators could have better measured results.



                                                                                                 Page 19 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Mato Grosso Fiscal DPL (P164588)



Strong Government commitment, and the timing of engagement at the start of an administration, can provide an
important window of opportunity for frontloading a reform program. The experience in Brazil demonstrated that a
new Government could advance important reform initiatives during the first 12-24 months of administration, but
later on reform momentum slows down.


13. Project Performance Assessment Report (PPAR) Recommended?

No




                                                                                                 Page 20 of 20
