     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     AO - Learning for All Project (P122700)



                                                                                    Report Number: ICRR0023216

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                    Project Name
 P122700                                       AO - Learning for All Project

 Country                                       Practice Area(Lead)
 Angola                                        Education


 L/C/TF Number(s)                              Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-52540                                     30-Apr-2018                                         68,207,728.73

 Bank Approval Date                            Closing Date (Actual)
 26-Sep-2013                                   28-Feb-2022

                                               IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                              75,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                               75,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Actual                                           68,250,091.08                                               0.00




 Prepared by                  Reviewed by                    ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Katharina Ferl               Salim J. Habayeb               Eduardo Fernandez              IEGHC (Unit 2)
                                                             Maldonado




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Project Appraisal Document (PAD) (p. vii) and the Financing Agreement of January 16, 2014
   (p. 4) the objective of the project was “to improve teachers' skills and knowledge as well as school
   management in project-designated areas; and to develop a system for systematic student assessment.”



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
                                                                                                     Page 1 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     AO - Learning for All Project (P122700)



  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project had three components:

   Component 1: Improving teachers’ skills and knowledge and school management in primary
   schools of project designated areas (appraisal estimate US$63.0 million, actual US$52.6 million):
   This component included the following sub-components:

   Sub-component 1.1: Consolidating the Zones of Pedagogical Influence: This sub-component was to finance
   the strengthening of the Zones of Pedagogical Influence (ZIP) model in nine provinces where ZIPs were
   being established and setting up additional ZIPs in the remaining nine provinces through: i) carrying out of
   communication campaigns to inform schools of the ZIP structure to which they were assigned as well as of
   their role as center or satellite schools; ii) establishing a ZIP council and a school council in each of the
   schools within the ZIP; iii) carrying out of training to the ZIP and school councils in their roles and
   responsibilities; and iv) developing and implementing a system to produce, disseminate, and use school
   report cards for improved school management and accountability.

   Sub-component 1.2: In-service training program for teachers: This sub-component was to finance improving
   primary teachers' academic knowledge, pedagogical skills, and use of time in the classroom through the
   preparation and delivery of an in-service teacher training program.

   Sub-component 1.3. Improving school-based management strategies for enhancing quality: This sub-
   component was to finance devolving autonomy and responsibilities to school councils and communities in a
   sub-sample of the supported ZIPs through: i) designing Education Projects (EPs) and ii) providing grants to
   ZIP councils in the form of materials and other resources for the implementation of EP.

   Component 2: Establishing a System for Student Assessment (appraisal estimate US$9.0 million,
   actual US$3.8 million): This component was to finance supporting MED's efforts to improve the
   assessment system through: i) developing a five years assessment strategy; ii) carrying out of sample-
   based student learning assessment exercises of grades 4 and 6 in the subjects of Portuguese language
   and mathematics; iii) developing and implementing a second early grade reading assessment (EGRA); (iv)
   carrying out of a service delivery survey; (v) piloting national exams in Portuguese language and
   mathematics in grade 6; and vi) conducting an impact evaluation study of component 1.

   Component 3. Project Management (appraisal estimate US$2.0 million, actual US$11.7 million): This
   component was to finance supporting project implementation by strengthening the management capacity of
   MED staff as well as provincial and municipal education administrators and officers from teacher
   training schools (TTS) participating in the Project, through the provision of technical assistance, carrying out
   of training, and provision of operating costs.

   During the January 2017 restructuring the cost of component 3 was increased. Activities (such as the
   operationalization of the Education Management Information System (SIGE)), that were planned to be




                                                                                                      Page 2 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     AO - Learning for All Project (P122700)



   covered by the government could no longer be funded due to the impact of the 2015 oil crisis on the
   government’s impact.

   During the February 2020 restructuring the costs of component 3 were increased from US$6.0 million to
   US$9.0 million to accommodate: i) US$1.2 million estimated cost for new studies proposed in restructuring;
   and ii) project management costs for an additional 12 months implementation period extension.

   The project had contingencies in the amount of US$1.0 million, which were not used.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project Cost: The project was estimated to cost US$75.0 million. Actual cost was US$68.2 million.

    Financing: The project was to be financed by an IDA credit in the amount of US$75.0 million which
   disbursed at US$68.2 million.

    Borrower Contribution: The Borrower was to contribute US$5.0 million which did not materialize due to
   the impact of the 2015 oil crisis on the government’s budget.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
According to the PAD (p. 1) at the time of appraisal in 2013, Angola had been experiencing strong
economic growth over the past decade. The strong Gross Domestic Product (GDP) growth allowed Angola
to expand its public sector and boost its investments in infrastructure and basic services. Also, the strong
economic performance had a positive impact on employment, the reintegration of displaced people into the
workforce, and a recovery of the agricultural sector. However, improvement in Human Development had
been consistently slow as demonstrated in Angola’s poor ranking in the Human Development Index
(number 148 out of 186). Despite Angola’s middle-income country status, poverty was widespread with 37
percent of the population living below the poverty line (in 2007-09) and experiencing a high maternal
mortality rate (450 per 100,000 births) and high under-five mortality (194 per 1,000 children).

Already a middle-income economy, Angola was committed to diversifying its economy, and a skilled work
force was seen as key to long-term, sustainable growth and human development. According to the PAD (p.
3) public spending on education had grown considerably in recent years before project appraisal largely
due to the extensive recruitment of teachers. While as a share of the GDP, public education spending had
increased from 2.1 percent in 2005 to 3.9 percent in 2011, the sectors faced several challenges: i) many
teachers had weak academic knowledge and pedagogical skills, but often had to teach large classes
without any program for in-service training; ii) lack of involvement of the local community in school
management resulted in shortcomings in school management; iii) absence of systematic assessments of
learning of students, despite recent encouraging progress; and iv) general lack of reporting on education
results, in particular at the school level.



                                                                                                   Page 3 of 15
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      AO - Learning for All Project (P122700)



               The objective of the project was in line with the Angolan National Development Plan (2018-2022) which
               emphasized the need for improved training and management of teachers and improved learning in primary
               education. The objective of the project was also in line with the most recent Country Partnership Strategy
               (FY14-19). Under Pillar 2, Results Area 1 “enhancing quality of service delivery” improving education quality
               was defined as an outcome while expanding in service teacher training, strengthening school accountability
               along with the expansion of ZIPs, and establishing a student learning assessment system were defined as
               milestones.

               The Bank had relevant experience for implementing the project due to its engagement under the Russia
               Education Aid for Development (READ) program, and prior to that, the preparation of an education policy
               note for Angola.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To improve teachers' skills and knowledge in project-designated areas

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change: The project’s theory of change envisioned that project outputs such as in-service training
                             modules being aligned with learning goals, teacher training schools and Zones of Pedogeological Influence
                             (ZIPs) being equipped, schools and teacher kits being produced and distributed as well as primary teachers
                             completing the training would result in improvements in teacher skills and knowledge.

                             Outputs:

                                        26,088 of additional primary teachers were qualified as a result of project interventions, exceeding the
                                         original target of 24,305 teachers and the revised target of 15,000 teachers. According to the Bank
                                         team (January 24, 2023) the target was reduced since the indicator considered a larger estimation of
                                         the number of primary teachers in the country. The project implementation helped to collect more
                                         accurate data and identified that the primary teacher population was smaller.
                                        Six in-service-teacher training modules aligned with learning goals were developed, achieving the
                                         target of these modules being developed.
                                        18 teacher training schools received equipment and pedagogical material, achieving the target of 18
                                         schools.
                                        842 school kits including pedagogical materials were produced and distributed, achieving the target of
                                         842 school kits. During the first restructuring the indicator on teacher kits was added to distinguish
                                         them from school kits. As a result, the original target for school kits was reduced.

                                                                                                                                    Page 4 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   AO - Learning for All Project (P122700)




      17,922 teacher kits were produced and distributed, exceeding the target of 15,000 kits.

Outcomes:

      78.6 percent of teachers demonstrated improvement in teachers’ skills and knowledge as measured
         by results on content and knowledge tests and classroom observations, close to achieving the target
         of 80 percent.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Improve school management in project-designated areas

Rationale
Theory of Change: The project’s theory of change envisioned that project outputs such as ZIPS being active,
equipped and with trained facilitators, school councils being active, report cards being produced and
disseminated as well as education projects being approved, and grants being disbursed were to result in
school management being improved.

Outputs:

      167 ZIPs were set up and were active, exceeding the original target of 164 and the revised target of
         167 ZIPs. The ZIPs served as resource centers and places to conduct in-service teacher training
         activities.
        54 ZIP facilitators were recruited and trained, exceeding the original target of 18 facilitators and the
         revised target of 30 facilitators. The final number surpassed the target since the Ministry involved
         provincial inspectors to partner with facilitators to supervise the ZIP work with school communities.
         The ZIP work included establishing ZIPs, activating ZIP councils, overseeing school education
         projects and school grants, as well as monitoring the use of school report cards.
        167 ZIP center schools were equipped with computer, printers, solar panels, furniture, and
         pedagogical materials, exceeding the original target of 164 and the revised target of 167 schools.
        842 sets of school report cards were produced and disseminated, not achieving the original target of
         984 sets and achieving the revised target of 842 sets. Laminated posters were displayed on the
         school’s walls with data from several areas including curriculum leadership, resource management,
         community activities, remedial education programs, learning evaluations, school priorities, follow-up
         on schools’ education projects and take always from school council meetings. Schools, with support
         from the ZIP facilitators, prepared reports every three months.
        725 education projects were approved, exceeding the original target of 52 and the revised target of
         520 targets.
        673 grants were disbursed, exceeding the target of 520 grants.



                                                                                                     Page 5 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   AO - Learning for All Project (P122700)




      An Impact Evaluation was not conducted as planned due to data quality issues, not achieving the
       target.

Outcomes:

      100 percent of school councils (only in schools targeted by the project) were active, achieving the
       target of 100 percent. Initially, being active was defined as being able to show meeting minutes from
       at least two meetings during the year.

During its March 13, 2023, meeting with IEG, the task team noted that measuring school management is
challenging and clarified the elements of what is accepted as evidence of improved school management in
low-income settings such as Angola. In addition to the above outcome indicator on active school councils,
these elements include: (i) conducting a diagnostic of school and student need with a focus on learning -
which the project achieved through the production and dissemination of 842 sets of schools report cards (see
above outputs); (ii) preparing an action plan to tackle schools’ and students’ needs – which the project
achieved through the preparation of 725 education projects; and (iii) financing / implementing the actions
plans – which the project achieved by providing 673 grants to finance the actions plans. Although the above
elements do not constitute outcome evidence that school management improved, they are likely to lead to
improve school management according to the education literature. With this caveat in mind, this objective is
considered substantially achieved, but only barely so given the lack of more outcome-oriented measures to
demonstrate improved school management.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
Develop a system for systematic student assessment

Rationale
Theory of Change: The project’s theory of change envisioned that project outputs such assessment
framework being revised, and standards being defined, tests and trainings being prepared, sample-based
assessments being carried out as well as a five-year strategic plan being designed was to result in the
outcome of a system for systematic student assessment being developed.

Outputs:

      The assessment framework was reviewed, achieving the target of doing so.
      Minimum standards were defined as well as bank of items and standardized tests were constructed,
       achieving the target of doing so.
      A system for learning assessment at the primary level, in terms of human resources and institutional
       arrangements being in place, was established, achieving the target. However, according to the ICR (p.
       23) Implementation Status Reports (ISRs) from 2019-2021 stated that institutional arrangements had
       not been formalized and evaluations were taking place in an ad hoc manner.

                                                                                                 Page 6 of 15
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                AO - Learning for All Project (P122700)




                                   The learning system was not being utilized, not achieving the target of utilizing it.

                            Outcomes:

                                   Four sample-based assessment exercises were carried out, exceeding the target of three exercises.
                                    These assessments included Early Grade Reading Assessment (EGRA) II and Service Delivery
                                    Indicators I in 2016, and EGRA III and SDI II in 2021. However, SDI were implemented twice but by
                                    different actors, once the government and once an international firm, and used different instruments.
                                    As a result, the data was not comparable. The project was not able to implement two planned
                                    activities including the sample-based learning assessments for grades four and six and the national
                                    exam due to: i) delays in identifying a suitable firm to provide technical assistance; ii) travel restrictions
                                    due to the pandemic; ii) lack of local firms to organize logistics for conducting these assessments.
                                    EGRA II in 2016 (conducted by the government) and EGRA III in 2021 (conducted by an external firm)
                                    also faced data related issues. Therefore, there is no evidence that a system for systematic student
                                    assessment was established.

                            The project also used funds for activities that were not specifically linked to the PDO but benefitted the overall
                            education system. These activities included buying the software license for a school information management
                            system (SIGE), conducting training on system’s management and data collection, as well as providing
                            technical assistance to enhance schools’ questionnaire. Also, the project provided training and equipment to
                            the Statistics Office working at central and sub-national levels. Finally, the project supported the introduction
                            of Statistics Office official in each province and established a regular mechanism to report education data on
                            time.

                            Finally, the project benefited 29,715 beneficiaries, close to achieving the original target of 30,973 and
                            exceeding the revised target of 19,576 beneficiaries. 48.8 percent of the beneficiaries were female, close to
                            achieving the original target of 50 percent. The decrease in the number of direct beneficiaries was impacted
                            by the reduction in the number of primary teachers trained.



                            Rating
                            Modest


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The project was able to improve teachers’ skills and knowledge through providing training and almost
                            achieved the target of the first PDO indicator resulting in a Substantial efficacy rating for the first PDO. The
                            project set up ZIPS, equipped and with trained facilitators; activated school councils; produced report cards;
                            and supported the preparation and implementation of actions plans in schools. Although no outcome
                            evidence was presented; the outputs achieved are likely to contribute to improved school management.
                            Therefore, achievement of the second objective was Substantial, albeit only marginally so. The project was




                                                                                                                                   Page 7 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      AO - Learning for All Project (P122700)



  partially able to develop a system for systematic student evaluations. However, ongoing high-quality student
  assessments are still not happening resulting in a Modest efficacy rating for the third objective.



  Overall Efficacy Rating
  Substantial



5. Efficiency
Economic efficiency:

The PAD (p. 14) did not include a traditional economic analysis and only stated that investments in education,
particularly primary education, generally produce very high economic returns.

The ICR (p. 25) conducted a cost-benefit analysis. The analysis included costs of all teacher training expenses
and half the expenses related to ZIPs. According to the Bank team (January 23, 2023), the inclusion of half of
the costs of ZIPs in the teacher training cost-effectiveness analysis tried to account for the fundamental role
played by ZIPs, even though ZIPs did much more than what was planned under the project. Removing the costs
of ZIPs would have increased the cost-effectiveness even further.

Benefits were defined as high teaching quality which was expected to positively impact student learning and
education attainment and ultimately expected life earnings. The analysis applied a discount rate of five percent.
The Net Present Value (NPV) was calculated at US$351.87 million with an Internal Rate of Return (IRR) of 17
percent, indicating that the investment was worthwhile.

Operational efficiency:

The project experienced several implementation delays due to low implementation capacity, high-turnover within
the Project Implementation Unit (PIU), lack of knowledge of Bank procurement and financial management
procedures, limited local market to contract expertise, and the COVID-19 pandemic. As a result, the
implementation period was extended by a total of 46 months.

According to the ICR (p. 26) the actual costs per unit to achieve the project’s objective ended up being lower
than planned. Under the first objective, “improving teaching skills”, the project was able to train more teachers
despite delays in starting to train teachers. The project also experienced cost savings under objective 3,
“developing a system for systematic student assessment”. Furthermore, the ICR stated that the project reduced
expected costs that allowed for the implementation of COVID-19 related activities without increasing the budget
as well as experiencing a US$7 million reduction of financing throughout the project’s lifetime. According to the
Bank team (January 23, 2023) the project was able to reduce costs due to two main factors. First, the
overestimation of project costs when the project was designed and second, during implementation, fluctuations
in the Foreign Exchange market allowed to reduce cost considering that the majority of project costs were
executed in the Angola Account (AOA).

However, according to the ICR (p. 26) the four assessments conducted had quality issues and as a result were
not of any use. Also, the implementation period took significantly longer than originally planned. The project


                                                                                                     Page 8 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      AO - Learning for All Project (P122700)



experienced substantial higher costs under component 3, “project management” with the actual cost being more
than five times higher than originally planned (US$11.6 million instead of US$2.0 million) shortcomings in
procurement, and financial management inability of the counterpart to provide financing as planned.

Taking everything together, the project’s efficiency is rated Modest.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      0
 Appraisal                                                   0
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      0
 ICR Estimate                                                0
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of the objective was High given the objective’s alignment with the Bank’s most recent Country
Partnership Framework (FY14-19) and its aim to improve the quality-of-service delivery. Efficacy was
Substantial and Efficiency was Modest. The project’s overall outcome rating is Moderately Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

According to the ICR (p. 36) the elections in August 2022 threatened the sustainability of many activities
financed by the project. In the past, the government experienced high turnover rates of staff which also took
place during the implementation of this project. It is unclear to what extent this will happen after the most
recent elections.

However, the project will be followed by a new Bank operation “Girl’s empowerment and learning for
all” (P168699) (financing amount US$250.0 million) which aims to empower Angolan youth, especially girls,
and to improve learning quality for all. The project will continue certain activities such as providing teacher
training, improving school management and implementing student learning assessments.


                                                                                                      Page 9 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     AO - Learning for All Project (P122700)



According to the ICR (p. 37) in June 2022 the government implemented end-of-cycle exams for grades 6 and
12, indicating that the government is committed to testing its internal capacity to conduct examination and
develop a system for systematic student assessment.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  According to the PAD (p. 10) the project built on lessons learned from previous implementation
  experience of ZIPs in nine other provinces. These lessons learned included ZIPs placing supervision at
  the center of pedagogical support to teachers, mainly due to the low preparation of school personnel to
  deal with children from disadvantaged or different social backgrounds. Also, lessons learned from a study
  visit to Brazil and the importance of adequate student assessment and evaluation systems were taken
  into account. Furthermore, the choice of lending instrument, Investment Project Financing (IPF) was
  appropriate.

  The project’s objective of implementing a student evaluation system might have been overly ambitious
  given the initial four-year project implementation period, the country’s limited technical capacity and the
  number of activities implemented under the other two objectives.

  According to the PAD (p. 19) the Bank identified relevant risks and identified capacity, governance, and
  delivery, monitoring and sustainability as High. Mitigation measures included training for all members of
  the project management team, as well as technical assistance in key areas of project implementation
  such as procurement, financial management, and monitoring and evaluation. However, mitigation
  measures were insufficient resulting in implementation delays.

  The project’s Results Framework had several shortcomings (see section 9a for more details).



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 According to the Bank team (January 23, 2023) the Bank conducted 14 supervision missions throughout
 project implementation.

 The ICR (p. 35) stated that the Bank team facilitated capacity building at the central, provincial, and local
 level through providing several trainings to existing and new staff resulting in an upgrade of ratings towards
 the achievement of the objective and overall implementation progress from Moderately Unsatisfactory to
 Moderately Satisfactory. The Bank team restructured the project to account for the initial delays and extend
 the implementation period to allow sufficient time for the implementation of activities as well as modify the




                                                                                                     Page 10 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     AO - Learning for All Project (P122700)



 Results Framework to account for realities faced on the ground. However, despite several modifications
 there was still a lack of clarity of the definition of some indicators (see section 9 for more details).

 According to the ICR (p. 36) the Bank team was able to incorporate supporting activities to address the
 Covid-19 pandemic without increasing the budget or cancelling any of the original activities. However, the
 project required an extension of the implementation period due to pandemic related delays in the
 implementation of activities such as students assessments.

 The ICR (p. 36) stated that the project experienced four changes in Task Team Leaders (TTLs) impacting
 the work dynamic with counterparts and different interpretations of indicators’ metrics. From 2019, a Bank
 team member was based in the country, positively impacting procurement challenges and allowing for
 continuous implementation support.




  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The objective of the project was clearly specified. Also, the project’s theory of change and how most of the
 key activities and outputs were to lead to the intended outcomes were sound. However, there was a lack of
 clarity in regard to second and third PDO indicators. Activities of component 3 (project management) were
 not captured in the project’s Results Framework even though these activities included supporting, together
 with UNESCO, the development of a school information management system (SIGE). According to the ICR
 (p. 24) the project’s funds were used to buy the software license, conduct training on system’s
 management and data collection, and to provide technical assistance to improve schools’ questionnaire.

 The PDO was formulated on the outcome level “improve teachers’ skills and knowledge as well as school
 management” and the output level “develop a system for systematic student assessment”. The three
 outcomes of the PDO were measured by three PDO indicators of which only the first PDO indicator
 measured an actual outcome “demonstrated improvement in trained teachers’ skills and knowledge as a
 result of the training” while the others measured outputs such as “percentage of active school councils” and
 “number of sample-based assessment exercises carried out”. Beyond the lack of outcome orientation, the
 indicator on “number of sample-based assessment exercises carried out” had additional shortcomings,
 namely the PAD did not specify what type of exercises would be carried out and its target was overly
 ambitious given the project’s time frame, other substantial project activities, and limited M&E capacity.

 According to the ICR (p. 32) when the project was designed, there was a lack of data to determine some
 targets and detailed metrics to assess indicators resulting in the overestimation of target for percentage of


                                                                                                    Page 11 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     AO - Learning for All Project (P122700)



 active school councils, number of schools with report cards, and number of beneficiaries of the teacher
 training program.

 The project design included an impact evaluation to assess activities related to teacher training and school
 management. However, according to the ICR (p. 32) the impact evaluation had to be cancelled due to
 technical issues that compromised the sample.

 The Ministry of Education was responsible for managing the project’s M&E activities and collecting data on
 the school and local level.



b. M&E Implementation
  During the 2017 restructuring the Results Framework was modified to clarify some measures and adjust
  targets to reflect reality on the ground. For example, indicators measuring the percentage of active school
  councils and the number of schools with report cards were re-assessed using clarified definitions. Also,
  since the progress captured before the restructuring was not directly related to project activities, these
  values were adjusted to reflect the clarified definitions. Targets for the average number of schools per ZIP
  and average number of teachers per school were reduced to reflect the reality on the ground. However,
  even after these revisions, there continued to be a lack of clarity in regard to second and third PDO
  indicators resulting in the second PDO indicator only being measured once per school during the
  project’s entire life and the third PDO indicator lacking any measurements of the quality of the
  assessment activities.

  Also, according to the ICR (p. 33) the project experienced data collection issues for the third PDO
  indicator. Issues with school IDs prevented crossing information on learning and service provision.

  According to the ICR (p. 32) when the project added activities to address the COVID-19 pandemic, the
  Bank and the government agreed on a set of indicators to be monitored alongside the project’s Results
  Framework.



c. M&E Utilization
  According to the ICR (p. 33) the project’s M&E data, such as the school data, was used to prepare the
  Education Statistical Annuals and provided inputs in the improvements of schools’ infrastructure and
  construction of new schools in locations with high student-teacher ratio. Also, data collected through
  Service Delivery Indicators were used to guide teacher training and data on teacher skills were used to
  identify teachers needing extra training. The Bank team (January 23, 2023) stated that the project’s M&E
  was an important factor in informing course corrections throughout implementation, including the several
  restructurings that took place along the way. However, timelier M&E would have been helpful in ensuring
  that project management was even more responsive to the challenges as they emerged.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest


                                                                                                   Page 12 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     AO - Learning for All Project (P122700)



10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as category C and did not trigger any of the Bank’s safeguard policies. The
   project did not conduct any construction activities and did not use any land or areas that could have
   potentially triggered any resettlement issues.

   The ICR (p. 34) stated that the project ensured that factors related to both gender and vulnerable groups
   were taken into account. According to the Bank team (January 23, 2023), the project supported the
   implementation of the Angolan government’s inclusive education policy, which included training sessions for
   teachers to screen students for disabilities, as well as the distribution of specialized materials to the ZIPs,
   such as Braille printers. In terms of gender, some of the factors that were considered when scheduling
   teacher training activities were the timing and the location, to minimize participants having to travel through
   zones perceived as unsafe, or after hours.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Procurement: According to the ICR (p. 30) due to a lack of capacity at the PIU and lack of knowledge of
   Bank procurement procedures, the project experienced significant issues resulting in lengthy time needed
   to prepare Terms of Reference, process bidding and other documents for contracting firms. These issues
   resulted in delays in disbursement and implementation delays of key activities, especially under
   component 2. The Bank team addressed these issues by providing training to a total of 3,627 government
   staff at the central, provincial, municipal, and school levels. Also, according to the ICR (p. 34) international
   consultants with experience in Bank procurements were hired to support, together with a local counterpart
   and an assistant, designated procurement staff at the central and provincial levels. Furthermore, when the
   project experienced logistics and delivery issues, the government split procurement into two steps, making
   one firm responsible for printing and another one for delivery. At project closure, the project’s procurement
   performance was rated Satisfactory.

   Financial Management:

   According to the ICR (p. 34) the project ‘s financial management (FM) arrangements were adequate
   throughout implementation. Most reports were submitted in a timely manner and were of good quality.
   Also, the auditing reports were clean and satisfactory. The project experienced FM related issues at the
   provincial level due to a high turnover of provincial consultants who were responsible for managing the
   funds at the provincial level, resulting in delays and poor quality reports. The project addressed this issue
   by recruiting financial supervisors who were responsible for travelling to the provinces and providing on the
   job support and building capacity.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---


                                                                                                      Page 13 of 15
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       AO - Learning for All Project (P122700)



d. Other
   NA



11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                            ICR                  IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
                                   Moderately
Outcome                                                Moderately Satisfactory
                                   Satisfactory
                                   Moderately
Bank Performance                                       Moderately Satisfactory
                                   Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                     Modest              Modest

Quality of ICR                     ---                 Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR (p. 37-38) provided a variety of useful lessons learned which were adapted by IEG:

       o When a Bank operation plans to implement highly technical activities, such as
         learning assessments, it is critical to provide technical assistance through local or
         international expertise to build capacity first. In this project, it was overly ambitious to
         envision the establishment of a system for student assessment completely implemented by
         the Ministry of Education given its low technical capacity.
       o When introducing financial mechanisms such as school grants, conducting an
         analysis of the flow of funds can ensure that the mechanism will work out and schools
         can become as autonomous as planned. In this project, due to flow of fund issues from
         the central level to the school level, the project decided to centrally distribute the same
         package of materials to all schools not allowing for addressing the individual needs of each
         school.
       o When data quality during project preparation is poor, collecting data of adequate
         quality and revising the indicators in the Results Framework allow for better
         monitoring. The 2017 restructuring of this project revised the targets of some indicators to
         reflect the reality on the ground and provide a better understanding of the definitions of some
         indicators. However, some definitions were still not sufficiently clear and did not allow for
         effective monitoring.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

                                                                                                    Page 14 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     AO - Learning for All Project (P122700)




The ICR provided an adequate overview of project preparation and implementation. The ICR was internally
consistent, sufficiently outcome driven and included an appropriate Economic analysis. The ICR included useful
lessons learned that can be applied in future Bank operations in this area. The ICR would have benefitted from
providing more detailed information on critical areas such as why the actual cost of component 3 was five times
higher than actually planned.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                 Page 15 of 15
