     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                      Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Benin FMST DPO1 (P168668)



                                                                          Report Number: ICRR0023331

1. Program Information



 Country                              Practice Area (Lead)
 Benin                                Macroeconomics, Trade and Investment

 Programmatic DPF

 Planned Operations                    Approved Operations
 2                                     2

 Operation ID                          Operation Name
 P168668                               Benin FMST DPO1




 L/C/TF Number(s)                     Closing Date (Original)                 Total Financing (USD)
 IDA-65260,IDA-66940,IDA-D5460,IDA-   31-Dec-2020                                       151,644,023.96
 D6670

 Bank Approval Date                   Closing Date (Actual)
 12-Dec-2019                          31-Dec-2020
                                      IBRD/IDA (USD)                             Co-financing (USD)

 Original Commitment                       100,000,000.00                                           0.00

 Revised Commitment                        150,000,000.00                                           0.00

 Actual                                    151,644,023.96                                           0.00




P172749_TBL
 Country                              Practice Area (Lead)
 Benin                                Macroeconomics, Trade and Investment

 Operation ID                         Operation Name
 P172749                              Benin FMST DPO2 ( P172749 )



                                                                                           Page 1 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Benin FMST DPO1 (P168668)




 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                   Total Financing (USD)
 IDA-65260,IDA-66940,IDA-68060,IDA-         31-Dec-2021                                           103928776.59
 D5460,IDA-D6670,IDA-D7530

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 16-Dec-2020                                31-Dec-2021

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                Co-financing (USD)

 Original Commitment                           100,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                            100,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Actual                                        103,928,776.59                                               0.00



 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 William F. Steel            Judyth L. Twigg              Jennifer L. Keller              IEGEC




2. Program Objectives and Pillars/Policy Areas
EVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives

The Fiscal Management and Structural Transformation Development Policy Financing for Benin consisted of two
single-tranche operations (FMST DPO1 and FMST DPO2) that were “designed to support GAP [Government
Action Plan] to achieve faster, more inclusive, and sustained growth between 2016 and 2021” (ICR, para. 7;
Program Document 2 [PD2], para. 4.1). The program development objectives (PDOs) were “to (i) strengthen
fiscal and debt management, (ii) improve the financial sustainability of the energy sector, and (iii) foster the
development of the digital economy” (ICR, para. 18).


b. Pillars/Policy Areas
The series’ three pillars corresponded to the PDOs (ICR, paras. 20-22):

“Pillar 1: ‘Strengthen fiscal and debt management’ to broaden the tax base, create fiscal space, and promote
debt sustainability…was structured around (a) improving the efficiency of tax revenue mobilization and tax
administration, and (b) strengthening debt management.

Pillar 2: ‘Improve the financial sustainability of the energy sector’ to consolidate the Government of Benin's
(GoB’s) efforts to achieve the long-term sustainability of the energy sector… by: (i) improving the operational



                                                                                                   Page 2 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Benin FMST DPO1 (P168668)



performance of Benin Electricity Company (SBEE); (ii) ensuring the financial viability of SBEE; and (iii) promoting
the use of renewable energy sources and increasing access to electricity.

Pillar 3: ‘Foster the development of the digital economy’ to support the government’s efforts to reduce the
digital divide and accelerate Benin’s structural transformation…[by] (i) fostering the development of trusted
service providers; (ii) supporting investments in telecommunications infrastructures—chief among them fiber
optic backbones; and (iii) supporting the establishment of the interoperability framework for digital platforms to
allow for the development of the national portal for public services.”


c. Comments on Program Cost, Financing and Dates

The total program cost of US$ 250 million was financed through IDA grants in the amount of SDR 90.1 million
(US$ 125 million equivalent) and IDA credits in the amount of EUR 110.8 million (US$ 125 million equivalent).
FMST DPO1 originally was for US$ 100 million, but received a supplement of US$ 50 million in 2020 to help
cope with the fiscal costs of the COVID-19 pandemic. FMST DPO2 was for US$ 100 million. Each of the three
operations (FMST1, FMST1 supplement, FMST2) was financed equally from an IDA grant and an IDA credit.
Actual FMST1 disbursement on 27 December 2019, amounted to US$ 100,487,914, with the supplement
disbursed on 30 December 2020, in the amount of US$ 51,156,110. FMST2 was disbursed on 30
December 2020, in the amount of US$ 103,928,777. Actual disbursements totaled US$ 255,572,801, exceeding
the estimated amount due to exchange rate fluctuations.


3. Relevance of Design

a. Relevance of Objectives

 This DPO series built upon the prior Fiscal Reform and Growth DPF series with the overall objective “to
 create fiscal space and bolster the structural transformation of the economy” (PD2, para. 1.1). The reform
 areas were critical for implementation of the GAP 2016–2021, which was “oriented toward accelerating
 structural transformation and enabling private sector development” (ICR, para. 3).

 The PDOs directly addressed two of the “three binding constraints to medium-term economic and productivity
 growth identified in the 2017 Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD): scarce public resources, low
 competitiveness, and infrastructure constraints - notably low access to electricity and digital services” (PD2,
 para. 1.5). Tax reforms under PDO1 to increase public resources were based on the analytical work and
 recommendations of the World Bank’s FY19 tax policy study in Benin (ICR, Table 5). PDO2 directly
 addressed “the poor financial viability of the electricity sector,” which was identified as a critical “bottleneck to
 its development” in a 2015 Policy Note on Energy (ICR, Table 5). PDO3 responded to background analysis
 for the SCD and Country Partnership Framework (CPF, 2018) regarding the legal and strategic frameworks
 needed for digital transformation.

 These objectives and reform areas were suitable for World Bank involvement, and indeed the DPF series
 supported parallel investment projects (Public Investment Management and Governance Support; Energy
 Service Improvement; Digital Rural Transformation).




                                                                                                         Page 3 of 20
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Benin FMST DPO1 (P168668)



Table 1: Objectives and Prior Actions (PAs) for Benin FMST DPO Series

PAs under DPO1                                             PAs under DPO2
Objective 1: Strengthen Fiscal and Debt Management
Tax mobilization and administration
PA1: To increase tax revenue, the Recipient’s
                                                           PA2: To increase tax revenue, the Recipient has: (i)
President has adopted a decree transmitting to
                                                           adopted a harmonized three-rate tax framework on
Parliament the Budget Law 2020: (i) elimination the
                                                           personal income, property and profits from industrial
exemptions of fees on property transactions, by re-
                                                           and commercial activities, and capital gains on
institution of a 5 percent fee; (ii) increasing the excise
                                                           property as evidenced by the Budget Law 2020; and
tax rates on tobacco, alcoholic beverages, energy
                                                           (ii) defined the application of the Transfer Pricing Tax
drinks and fruit juices; and (iii) increasing the
                                                           Framework by the adoption of three arrêtés.
corporate minimum tax by 0.25 percent.
PA3: To improve tax administration, the Recipient’s
Ministry of Economy and Finance (MEF) has (i)
adopted an arrêté which (i) sets up certification terms PA4: To improve tax administration, the Recipient has
for an electronic tax payment system used by               (i) established a risk-based system for the accelerated
companies; issued (ii) a circulaire which contains its reimbursement of Value-Added Tax (VAT); and (ii) set
technical specifications; and (iii) a circulaire that      out the modalities for taxpayers to pay their Motor
expands electronic notification and payment coverage Vehicle Tax obligations through electronic means on a
to medium-sized businesses located in the Littoral,        digital platform.
Atlantique and Bourgou-Alibori departments of the
Recipient’s territory.
Debt management
PA5: To improve debt management, the Recipient’s
                                                           PA6: To improve debt transparency the Recipient has
MEF has adopted an arrêté on external borrowing
                                                           instructed the Debt Management Agency (CAA) and
requiring the prior approval of the National
                                                           the General Directorate in Charge of State-Owned
Commission for Indebtedness (CNE), through the
                                                           Enterprises to: (i) annually publish the debt of SOEs
issuance of a formal opinion, on the basis of (i) a face-
                                                           on the CAA website no later than June 30 of the
to-face meeting for the approval of non-concessional
                                                           following Fiscal Year; and (ii) publish state-owned
or commercial loans, and concessional loans greater
                                                           enterprise (SOE) debt for Fiscal Years 2017 to 2019
than FCFA 67 billion; or (ii) a virtual consultation by
                                                           no later than December 31, 2020.
mail for other concessional loans.
Objective 2: Improve the Financial Sustainability of the Energy Sector
Operational performance
PA7: To improve the technical performance of SBEE, PA8: To improve the operational performance of
the Recipient’s Ministry of Energy and MEF have            SBEE, SBEE and the Recipient have established key
approved a recovery plan for the electricity sector for performance targets for SBEE for the period 2020-
the period 2019-2022, including policies to reduce         2023 consistent with the Recovery Plan for improving
technical and non-technical losses.                        the financial performance of the electricity sector.
Financial viability
PA9: To ensure the financial balance of the SBEE, the PA10: (i) To ensure financial viability of SBEE, the
Recipient has (i) initiated a process to ensure that       Recipient has caused the SBEE and Benin Electric
electricity bills are paid regularly to SBEE by public     Community (CEB) to enter into a Transport Service
sector companies by signing Memoranda of                   Agreement providing specific obligations for each
Understanding with Benin's Stadiums Management             entity to ensure an efficient and financially sustainable
Office; and (ii) approved an inter-ministerial arrêté      transmission of electricity, including an electricity

                                                                                                       Page 4 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Benin FMST DPO1 (P168668)



 establishing a compensation mechanism under which transmission tariff; and (ii) to increase transparency,
 it ensures the periodic payment of the revenue gap         the Recipient has mandated that all SOEs annually
 arising from electricity tariffs approved by the regulator publish the annual audit reports of their financial
 and actual tariffs to enable SBEE to achieve its           statements (including SBEE).
 financial equilibrium.
 Renewable energy
 PA11: To promote renewable energy sources, the
 Recipient’s Council of Ministers has adopted and           PA12: To promote the use of renewable energy
 submitted to Parliament, a draft Electricity Code which sources, the Recipient has (i) adopted a National
 includes (i) a chapter on renewable energy and whose Renewable Energy Development Policy; and (ii)
 objective is to increase its share in the energy mix;      specified the modalities to facilitate private sector
 and (ii) the designation of the responsible entity for its participation in the energy sector.
 implementation.
 Objective 3: Foster the Development of the Digital Economy
 Trusted service providers
 PA13: To guarantee the quality of digital services, the
                                                            PA14: To improve the quality of digital services the
 Recipient’s Ministry of the Digital Sector, has adopted
                                                            Recipient has adopted a decree relating to the
 an arrêté creating the supervisory body for the
                                                            assignment, organization and operation of the
 trust[ed] service providers in accordance with the
                                                            Supervisory Body for Trust[ed] Service Providers.
 Recipient’s Code du Numérique.
 Investment in telecommunications infrastructure
                                                            PA16: To develop digital infrastructure and ensure
                                                            competition in the telecommunication sector, the
                                                            Recipient (i) has set up a regulatory framework
 PA15: To develop digital infrastructure, the Recipient’s
                                                            establishing the modalities for obtaining authorization
 Council of Ministers has adopted a decree defining
                                                            to deploy optical fiber cables throughout the country
 the new regulatory framework for the mutualization of
                                                            for all telecom operators in the Recipient’s territory,
 Fiber-to-the-Home (FTTH) infrastructure.
                                                            and (ii) through the Beninese Agency for Universal
                                                            Electronic Communications and Postal Services has
                                                            adopted a universal access policy 2021-2025
 Interoperability for digital platforms
                                                            PA18: To promote the use of digital platforms, the
 PA17: To promote the use of digital platforms, the         Recipient has (i) adopted a single framework for
 Recipient’s President has adopted a decree creating interoperability of digital platforms, and (ii) established
 and operationalizing the National Agency for Security the national portal for public services and established
 Information Systems (ANSSI).                               setting the rules for its management and use of said
                                                            portal.

Source: ICR, Table 2.




b. Relevance of Prior Actions

Rationale

                                                                                                       Page 5 of 20
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Benin FMST DPO1 (P168668)




Each of the two DPOs had nine policy actions (PAs) in eight policy areas, with a total of 18 PAs and 31
specific sub-actions. The PAs in DPO2 directly built on those in DPO1 in each policy area. Although neither
the ICR nor the PDs presented explicit results chains, the PDs clearly stated the rationale underlying each set
of PAs, especially in terms of overcoming constraints and addressing gaps. Many of the actions established
the regulatory, supervisory, and policy framework that was necessary for the intended results to be realized,
although the ICR and PDs did not always spell out the further steps needed to achieve those results.

Objective 1: Strengthen Fiscal and Debt Management

The design of PA1 and PA2 focused on the need “to increase tax revenue.” These measures directly
addressed important sources of Benin’s low tax revenue collection relative to neighboring countries by
eliminating exemptions, reintroducing fees, raising rates, and closing loopholes, covering all the major
sources of revenue. Thus the reforms were comprehensive and capable of having a significant impact on
total revenue collection.Rating: PA1: Highly Satisfactory; PA2: Highly Satisfactory

PA3 and PA4 addressed the need “to improve tax administration”. Most of the specific sub-actions laid the
groundwork for expanded use of electronic means for tax payment, and thereby supported PDO3 as well as
PDO1. These measures represented substantial contributions to the objective of strengthening fiscal
administration. Accelerating VAT reimbursements was also expected to result in enhanced liquidity of private
firms and an improved business climate. Rating: PA3: Satisfactory; PA4: Satisfactory

PA5 and PA6 carried forward measures to improve debt management and transparency, consistent with the
post-Debt Management Performance Assessment (DeMPA) 2019 (PD, para. 2.13). The measures addressed
gaps in the oversight and transparency of debt management, especially regarding non-guaranteed
commercial debt of state-owned enterprises (SOEs) and on-lent loans, which can result in budgetary risks
(PD2, para. 4.18). The TTLs reported that, while Benin had been making substantial and steady progress in
improving debt management, lack of transparency and prior consultation to approve new debt had been
identified as important weaknesses. These measures addressed the observed weaknesses in reporting and
monitoring in order to strengthen the efforts of the National Commission for Indebtedness (CNE) to “bring
together all the institutions involved in the debt chain” (PD2, para. 4.19). PA6 measures to increase
transparency and accountability were intended to “reinforce the existing incentives to limit non-guaranteed
debt of public enterprises” (PD2, para. 4.20). Rating: PA5: Satisfactory; PA6: Satisfactory

Objective 2: Improve the Financial Sustainability of the Energy Sector

PA7 and PA8 were intended to improve the technical and operational performance of the Société Béninoise
d’Energie Electrique (SBEE). The ICR (para. 31) reported that “the government started implementing a
recovery plan in 2019, with both financial and technical measures,” so it is not evident based on the program
documentation what value was added by PA7 requiring that such a recovery plan be adopted. PA8 was more
relevant in introducing performance targets to be included in agreements signed with the operator, but there
was no clear results chain from the setting of targets to defining and implementing the measures needed to
achieve them. In-depth prior investigation of what steps are actually required to address technical challenges
and to enhance revenue collection could have generated more specific actions to overcome barriers and an
assessment of the time and resources required. Rating: PA7: Moderately Unsatisfactory; PA8: Moderately
Unsatisfactory




                                                                                                   Page 6 of 20
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Benin FMST DPO1 (P168668)



PA9 and PA 10 were aimed at ensuring the financial balance, viability and transparency of SBEE. Key
underlying causes of “the poor financial performance of both the public utility distribution company SBEE and
the Togo-Beninese energy importing and transporting company CEB [were] technical losses, underpricing,
and bill collection losses” (ICR, para. 31). PA9 addressed only the latter issue, with respect to payments by
public sector companies and filling gaps resulting from tariff limitations imposed by the regulator. Program
documentation was not clear how large a share of the collection losses was represented by these two types
of shortfalls. Nonetheless, PD1 (para. 4.24) indicated that these measures would more closely align SBEE
revenues with operating costs, with the expected result that it could better make needed capital investments
that had been postponed when shortfalls were compensated by subsidies on an irregular basis. PD2 (para.
4.34) asserted that the Transport Service Agreement supported by PA 10 should ultimately reduce costs to
consumers as a result of greater transparency with respect to costs and tariffs, making it easier to avoid
hidden subsidies. And reducing electricity costs was seen as an important step toward improving the
business climate for investment in Benin, given that the relatively high cost of electricity (“among the highest
in the developing world”) was seen as “significantly hampering the competitiveness of the private sector”
(PD1, para. 4.24 and Benin Electricity Sector Review Note, 2019,). Rating: PA9: Moderately Satisfactory;
PA10: Moderately Satisfactory

PA 11 and PA 12 promoted renewable energy sources, which were seen as important to “achieving a
sustainable energy mix through the adoption of new technologies,” increased competition, and “development
of a least cost generation plan,” as specified in the 2020 Electricity Law (PD, para. 4.31). The actions were
appropriate to strengthen the legal, policy and regulatory framework for investment in renewable energy and
to clarify “Government responsibility of granting tax exemptions and/or subsidies to companies producing or
promoting the production of renewable energy sources… and implement[ing] a national policy setting sound
regulations on off-grid tariffs, off-grid coverage, incentives, etc.” (PD1, para. 4.28). The measures were seen
as critical “to comply with the Nationally-Determined Commitments (NDCs) under the Paris Declaration,” in
particular to facilitate implementation of contracts with independent power producers and the “development of
solar plants … with the support of the French Development Agency and the Millennium Challenge
Corporation” (PD1, para. 4.28). While the intention to facilitate private investment in energy was explicit, the
results chain from these actions to actual supply of renewable energy was not well articulated, and the
“modalities” were not clearly specified, perhaps because the actions were carrying forward momentum that
had already been established through those programs. Rating: PA 11: Moderately Satisfactory; PA 12
Satisfactory

Objective 3: Foster the Development of the Digital Economy

PA 13 and PA 14 were intended to guarantee and improve the quality of digital services. Broadband
penetration and the use of digital payments had been severely constrained in Benin by the monopoly role of
the Benin Telecom SA and the consequent deterrence of investment by private operators in fiber optic
infrastructure, internet exchange points and data centers (PD1, para. 4.32). The Benin Digital Sector analysis
indicated that an additional constraint was that “private telecom operators willing to deploy fibre faced an
unpredictable and unreliable regulatory process to obtain the authorization from the regulatory authority” (PD,
para. 4.45 and Annex 4). These actions appropriately set up a supervisory framework as a condition for more
competitive and well-regulated service provision, although the PD and ICR did not elaborate on what further
steps would lead from establishment of the supervisory/regulatory framework to achievement of the desired
result of increased investment by private service providers. Hence the need for a “study assessing the
potential of the sector” (ICR, para. 47) to provide appropriate data and recommend incentives to attract
private investors. Rating: PA 13: Moderately Satisfactory; PA 14: Moderately Satisfactory



                                                                                                    Page 7 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Benin FMST DPO1 (P168668)



 PA 15 and PA 16 likewise addressed the regulatory framework needed to develop digital infrastructure and
 ensure competition. Development of the digital economy was at risk of being stifled by an “alarming lack of
 infrastructure on the fixed market” associated with the monopoly position of the public operator, which in 2020
 was permitted to operate in the retail as well as wholesale market (PD2, para. 4.45). Mutual access to FTTH
 infrastructure was expected to “eventually decrease the marginal costs of investments….[and] unlock the
 operators’ ability to invest in coverage in rural areas” (PD1, para. 4.34). The measures to facilitate
 authorizations for fiber optic cables and adopt a universal access policy were especially important
 contributions to establishing conditions for the PDO to be achieved. Rating: PA 15: Satisfactory; PA 16:
 Satisfactory

 PA 17 and PA 18 established further conditions to promote the use of digital platforms. Establishment of
 ANSSI to oversee cybersecurity was an enabling condition to build confidence in digital systems. The
 measures to establish interoperability across digital platforms and a national portal for public services were
 important steps to roll out digital delivery of public services, which can be an important driver of more
 widespread participation in the digital economy.Rating: PA 17: Satisfactory; PA 18: Satisfactory



Rating

Satisfactory

4. Relevance of Results Indicators

Rationale

The two operations used 11 results indicators (RIs) to measure the achievement of results of the nine pairs of
PAs, generally focusing on one key measure relevant to the pair of PAs, though in three cases tracking the
result of a specific sub-action. For the second operation, the team modified four of the original indicators to
reflect better the realities on the ground (in particular to take into account the economic shocks associated with
COVID-19) or better capture the intended result. Some of the indicators were more suitable as longer-term
measures of progress toward objectives than of the implementation and effectiveness of specific PAs. The
definition, baseline, and availability of data were generally clear and credible (except for SBEE’s operational
deficit calculation).



Table 2: Results indicators by objective and PAs; baseline and target values; status and
achievement
                                                                           Actual as
                                                               Actual
                                   RI                                      % of
Results indicator (RI)     Asso-           Baseline Target
                                                                           targeted RI Achieve-
                           ciated                              (2021)
                                   Rele-                                   change     ment rating
                           PAs             (2018)   (2021)
                                   vance

Objective 1: Strengthen fiscal and debt management
RI 1: Domestic tax revenue PA 1 S        CFAF   + 25%                 +42%        167%        H
(CFAF billion)*                          482.9

                                                                                                      Page 8 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Benin FMST DPO1 (P168668)



                           PA 2           billion              (CFAF 684
                                                               billion)
RI 2: Average lead time
(number of days) for            PA 4 S    60 days 30 days       15 days    150%        H
processing tax refunds*
RI 3: Share of taxpayers
                                PA 3
using the electronic system
                                      S   0%          45%       68%        151%        H
for e- invoicing of VAT and
                                PA 4
e-payments
RI 4: Debt management:
Share of non-concessional
and commercial loans
                                PA 5 MS   80%         100%      100%       100%        H
approved after face-to-face
consultations with the NDC
[sic]
RI 5: Number of years for
which the SOE debt
                                PA 6 S    0           4         4          100%        H
statistics are published on
the CAA website*
Objective 2: Improve the financial sustainability of the energy sector
RI 6: Percentage of             PA7
technical and commercial              MS  24%         20%       23.4%      15%         N
losses of SBEE                  PA 8
RI 7: Operational deficit of PA 9                                          700% of
SBEE in percent of                    MS   - 20%       - 17%    + 18%      targeted    S
Operating Expenses              PA 10                                      reduction
                                PA 11                           25 MW
RI 8: Photovoltaic capacity
                                      MS  0 MW        30 MW                83%         S
installed*
                                PA 12                           (2022)
Objective 3: Foster the development of the digital economy
RI 9: Number of digital         PA 13                           0
providers registered by the           S   0           5                    0%          N
supervisory body                PA 14                           (2022)
RI 10: Access to broadband PA 15
internet (percent of the              S   13.8%       20%       38.4%      410%        H
population)                     PA 16
RI 11: Number of online
                                PA 17
services provided for
                                      MS  0           100       139        139%        H
citizens in the national portal
                                PA 18
of public services




                                                                                             Page 9 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Benin FMST DPO1 (P168668)




*Modified from FMST DPO1.



Objective 1: Strengthen Fiscal and Debt Management

RI 1 (domestic tax revenue) directly measured the intended result of the various actions to raise taxes and end
exemptions/loopholes and hence progress toward the objective of strengthening fiscal management. PD2
appropriately shifted the indicator from a percentage of GDP (which is susceptible to other factors influencing
GDP) to the amount collected (though the outcome could still be affected by variations in other taxes that were
not addressed in the PAs). Although the PDs/ICR did not specify the relative shares in total tax revenues of the
taxes included in the PAs, and no sub-indicators were included to track performance of the major tax sources,


                                                                                                   Page 10 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Benin FMST DPO1 (P168668)



PD1 (para. 4.15) expected the “combination of measures supported by the proposed series …to have an
important impact on domestic tax revenue”). Rating: Satisfactory.

PD2 (para. 4.16) introduced RI 2 (average lead time [number of days] for processing tax refunds) as a sub-
indicator of progress with respect to the reimbursement of VAT, which had been added to the PAs in DPO2. It
related both to the PDO in terms of improved tax administration and to the overarching objective of enhancing
private sector-led growth (by improving firms’ liquidity). The indicator as defined related only to the de jure target
for reimbursement, although the ICR (para. 42) reported the actual time taken. Rating: Satisfactory.

RI 3 (share of taxpayers using the electronic system for e- invoicing of VAT and e-payments) directly measured
the actual impact of the measures in PA3 and PA4 on taxpayer utilization of electronic services. This was
expected to lower compliance costs to taxpayers (thereby improving compliance and hence revenues), reduce
opportunities for fraud, and strengthen audit control (PD1, paras. 4.13-14). Definition, measurement and data
were clear and credible. Rating: Satisfactory.

RI 4 (share of non-concessional and commercial loans approved after face-to-face consultations with the NDC)
was intended to track improvement in debt management through increased compliance with the requirement
that all loan projects involving external borrowing be evaluated by the National Debt Commission (NDC or CNE)
before signature by the Minister of Economy and Finance. “In practice, loan evaluation is not systematic"
and only large loans were being referred, resulting in Benin being “poorly rated in the 2016 Debt Management
Performance Assessment” (PD1, para. 4.16). RI 4 was intended to track how effectively PA 5 (requiring prior
face-to-face evaluation by the NDC) was being implemented. The indicator as stated incorrectly refers to the
share of loans approved after consultation, rather than the percentage of approved loans that had in fact been
evaluated, but the TTL confirmed that the latter was what was intended and actually measured. The definition
and measurement were not clear. Rating: Moderately Satisfactory.

RI 5 (number of years for which the SOE debt statistics are published on the CAA website) was introduced in
DPO2 as a direct indicator of PA6 to improve debt transparency by posting current and past SOE debts on the
agency website. Besides measuring implementation of PA6, this indicator represented good debt management
practices (although the ICR, para. 43, noted “weaknesses related to the absence of monitoring SOEs’ non-bank
debt”). The definition and measurement were clear and credible. Rating: Satisfactory.



Objective 2: Improve the Financial Sustainability of the Energy Sector

RI 6 (percentage of technical and commercial losses of SBEE) directly measured progress toward redressing
major identified causes of SBEE’s poor financial performance. Rather than tracking whether the specific actions
in PA7 and PA8 were implemented, RI 6 appropriately indicated whether these measures were sufficient to
produce the intended result of reduced losses, a key component of improving financial sustainability. However,
the PD and ICR did not clarify if there is an important distinction between measures to address “technical" losses
("distributional, transmission. and collection rates," PD1, para. 4.26) and “non-technical” (or “commercial”) losses
(“underpricing and bill collection losses,” PD2, para. 4.24), nor did they specify the source of the data. While RI 7
comprises RI 6 along with other determinants of profitability, inclusion of RI 6 was important because it
represents critical factors underlying long-term success in making SBEE financially self-sustainable. However,
separate indicators for technical and commercial losses would have better clarified relative successes (or
failures) and helped motivate appropriate actions. Rating: Moderately Satisfactory.



                                                                                                       Page 11 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Benin FMST DPO1 (P168668)



RI 7 (operational deficit of SBEE in percent of operating expenses) was an appropriate indicator of progress
toward the objective of making SBEE financially sustainable, whether by addressing underlying inefficiencies
(PA7 and PA8, as indicated by RI 6), ensuring payment by public sector companies (PA9), subsidizing revenue
gaps (PA9), regulating transmission agreements and tariffs (PA 10), or other factors. Because the actual deficit
may indeed by affected by other factors, RI 7 serves better as an indicator of the PDO than of the
implementation and effectiveness of specific measures in PA9 and PA 10. The ICR (para. 45) indicated that
other factors may have undermined the accuracy of the measure in representing the intended results (“the
auditors have criticized the data for 2020, including the inclusion of the deferment of some debt not collected in
revenue, and highlighted that expenses might have also been underestimated”). Rating: Moderately
Satisfactory.

RI 8 (photovoltaic capacity installed) was an appropriate indicator of the impact of the policy actions on progress
toward the objective of making the energy sector more financially sustainable by promoting renewable energy to
provide competitive options for a cost-effective energy mix. The indicator focused the supply of solar energy,
which was seen as having cost-reducing potential over time and promoting energy security by reducing
dependence on imports (PD, para. 4.26). However, given that PA 11 and PA 12 only laid the legal, policy and
regulatory groundwork for promoting private investment in renewable energy, this indicator was more
appropriate as a long-term results indicator than as a measure of the shorter-term implementation and
effectiveness of the specific actions involved. It served to indicate whether the policies supported in these
operations (along with other measures and support) are helping to keep Benin on track and will
“ultimately…promote rapid off-grid access to electricity by rural households” (PD1, para. 4.28). It was
appropriately modified in DPO 2 to track the absolute growth of renewable energy, rather than the relative share,
although how the data were to be collected was not specified (PD2, para. 4.36, only states that the Code
supported under PA 11 would include the role of “the Electricity Regulatory Authority in the examination process
for the issuance of license, concession, and permit related to the generation, transport, distribution and sale of
electricity in Benin”). Longer-term indicators would be needed to reveal whether installed capacity was
operational and delivering additional energy to users on a sustainable basis. Rating: Moderately Satisfactory.

Objective 3: Foster the Development of the Digital Economy

RI 9 (number of digital providers registered by the supervisory body) directly measured the results of PA 13 and
PA 14 in providing a regulatory/supervisory framework conducive to the emergence of private trusted digital
service providers, representing growth of the supply side needed to achieve the PDO. It was simple and easily
measured and monitored. Rating: Satisfactory.

RI 10 (access to broadband internet – percent of the population) appeared to represent the demand side of
progress toward the PDO, though in practice it is more oriented toward supply in that it measures availability
rather than actual use. Besides being likely easier to obtain data, it is appropriate as an indicator of
implementation of PA 15 and PA 16, which promote development of infrastructure (fiber optic cable) and
competition as a basis for expanded usage. The PD did not specify the source of the data, though it presumably
would be monitored by the state-owned digital infrastructure company Societe Beninoise d’Infrastructures
Numeriques (SBIN), which took over the assets of the former Benin Telecoms Infrastructures. Rating:
Satisfactory.

RI 11 (number of online services provided for citizens in the national portal of public services) indicated the
extent of progress toward expanding digitization via platforms for public services as a result of the measures to
create a digital security agency (PA 17), adopt a single interoperability framework, and establish a national portal
for digital services (PA 18). DPO2 shifted the measure from total digital platforms to focus on the availability of


                                                                                                     Page 12 of 20
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  Benin FMST DPO1 (P168668)



  digital public services. Given the important role of digital public services in driving the digital economy in other
  countries, this was a suitable measure both of implementation of the PAs, although a complementary of usage
  would have better measured progress toward achieving the PDO. The availability of data itself depended on
  successful implementation of PA 18 to establish the national portal for public services and the rules for its
  management. The only shortcoming was that it only measured the availability of services, not the use.
  Rating: Moderately Satisfactory.




  Rating

  Satisfactory

   5. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               Strengthen Fiscal and Debt Management

               Rationale
                All five RIs were fully achieved or exceeded (in three cases). Thus, the actions were highly satisfactory in
                achieving the objective of strengthening fiscal and debt management.

                A range of tax policy instruments contributed substantially to a significant increase in domestic tax revenue by
                42 percent (RI 1), well beyond the targeted 25 percent increase over a three-year period. These instruments
                included reinstating fees, eliminating exemptions, raising excise taxes, and modernizing the tax system
                (including electronic payment, facilitated also under Objective 3), boosted by resumption of cross-border trade
                with Nigeria (ICR, paras. 28 and 41). The TTLs reported that further reforms of property titling and valuation
                (supported under the subsequent DPO series) provided an offset to the risk of adverse effects on property
                transactions from eliminating the exemption by making it easier to comply. Furthermore, the TTLs reported
                that tax increases have elicited little observable pushback.

                The significant reduction in the time taken to process tax refunds (RI 2), from 60 days to 15 (twice as fast as
                the target of 30 days) represented important success in achieving the objective of streamlining tax
                administration (ICR, para. 42). The accelerated procedures were within a risk-based framework that aligned
                Benin with West African Economic and Monetary Union standards (PD2, para. 4.13) and had positive effects



                                                                                                                Page 13 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Benin FMST DPO1 (P168668)



  both on the objective of increasing tax collection and on the longer-term goal of facilitating private investment
  (by improving liquidity of firms).

  The exceptional increase in the share of taxpayers using the electronic system (RI 3) – reaching 68 percent
  from a baseline of zero – represented positive achievement of Objective 3 (developing the digital economy) as
  well as the primary objective of strengthening fiscal management, in particular by reducing the cost of
  compliance and facilitating outreach to the broader population (ICR, para. 42; PD2, para. 4.13).

  Reaching “100 percent consultation with the National Debt Commission for all government non-concessional
  and commercial loans and for concessional loans” (ICR, para. 43) represented achievement of the objective of
  strengthening debt management through prior review and monitoring (RI 4). The TTLs confirmed that the
  indicator measured the share of all projects approved on the basis of the required consultation.

  Achievement of RI 5 by publishing four years of SOE debt statistics supported the objective of strengthening
  the transparency and monitoring of government and SOE debt. The TTLs reported that the World Bank is
  monitoring to ensure continued publication in the future. While this established a necessary condition for more
  effective management of contingent liabilities, the ICR (para. 43) noted “weaknesses related to the absence of
  monitoring SOEs’ non-bank debt.”

Rating
Highly Satisfactory



OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Improve the Financial Sustainability of the Energy Sector

Rationale
One RI target was substantially exceeded and one substantially met (with some delay), while initial progress
toward the third was reversed, yielding moderately satisfactory achievement overall.

RI 6 measured the key objective of reducing SBEE’s technical and commercial losses as a critical step
toward sustainability. While the various actions to improve performance initially yielded some improvement
(from 24 percent losses in 2018 to 21.5 percent in 2019), the losses rose again to 23.4 percent in 2022,
representing a negligible net gain (ICR, para. 44). The ICR noted that a review has identified a number of
substantial further actions that will be needed to achieve the objective in the medium term.

RI 7 tracked the principal desired result of reducing the operational deficit of SBEE, which was not only
achieved but unexpectedly exceeded in that SBEE showed a surplus of 10 and 18 percent over operating
expenses in 2020 and 2021, respectively (ICR, para. 45). The extent to which this highly positive result can
be sustained, however, must be qualified. A substantial share of the surplus may have been attributable to
government subsidies, both to compensate “in 2020 for the suspension of a tariff increase of 5 percent for
three months due to the economic downturn” (ICR, para. 44) and to fill “the revenue gap arising from
electricity tariffs approved by the regulator and actual tariffs” (PA 9) (data were not provided on the
breakdown of revenues). The ICR (para. 45) also noted that “the auditors have criticized the data for 2020,


                                                                                                   Page 14 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Benin FMST DPO1 (P168668)



including the inclusion of the deferment of some debt not collected in revenue, and highlighted that expenses
might have also been underestimated.”

Substantial achievement of RI 8 through installation of a 25 MW photovoltaic power plant (albeit in 2022, after
some delay) indicates progress toward the objective of improving the financial sustainability of the energy
sector by engaging with independent power producers to expand energy production through renewable
sources that were needed to diversity the energy mix with potential lower-cost options and reduced
dependence on imports. While the ICR (para. 46) noted that “the country still has a lot of room for
improvement” in rolling out solar (not to mention other renewables), this result represented a positive step
forward, achieved through actions supported by the DPO series.



Rating
Moderately Satisfactory



OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
Foster the Development of the Digital Economy

Rationale
  Results substantially surpassed two targets, indicating substantial progress toward development of the digital
  economy, at least in terms of availability of services. Nevertheless, the actions to facilitate registration of
  private digital service providers have not yet yielded that result.

  Although the supervisory body for registration of digital service providers (under PAs 13 and 14) became
  operational, no registrations took place; progress toward the RI 9 target was therefore nil. Recruitment of a firm
  to study investment opportunities in Benin was still pending as of September 2022 (ICR, para. 47).

  Nonetheless, actions taken to develop digital infrastructure (fiber optic cable in particular) exceeded
  expectations in expanding the proportion of the population with access to broadband internet (RI 10) at over
  four times as fast as targeted, from a baseline of 13.8 percent to 38.4 percent (ICR, para. 47). This represents
  important progress toward implementation of the policy of universal access to broadband internet, including
  rural areas and public schools.

  Similarly, adoption of a single interoperability framework (PA 18) enabled the government to establish a
  national e-services portal and expand the number of services even faster than expected (RI 11; ICR, para. 48).
  The adoption of a national digital security strategy and agency (PA 17) helped to secure and build confidence
  in this system (PD2, para. 4.41).

Rating
Moderately Satisfactory



                                                                                                  Page 15 of 20
                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                      Benin FMST DPO1 (P168668)




OVERALL EFF TBL OLD




Overall Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
Rationale

Achievement of Objective 1 was Highly Satisfactory, while Objectives 2 and 3 were Moderately Satisfactory due
to one Negligible achievement in each case. Overall, 8 out of 11 RIs were met or exceeded, with Negligible
progress in just two (and Substantial progress in the other).



Overall Efficacy Rating

Satisfactory

6. Outcome

Rationale

Both the relevance of prior actions and efficacy are rated as Satisfactory.


a. Rating

Satisfactory

7. Risk to Development Outcome

Institutional capacity remains the main challenge to sustaining the improvements in fiscal and debt
management. “The institutional capacity risks were only partly mitigated in FMST 1 and may have been
weakened by the COVID-19 pandemic during FMST 2” (ICR, para. 57). While some measures have been taken
to mitigate “constraints such as low salaries and perverse incentives,” the “ambiguity of the administrative
structure in some ministries…complicates the implementation of sectoral reform strategies,” and “the focus on
managing the pandemic may have diverted resources and affected the implementation capacity of World Bank-
supported programs” (ICR, para. 57), with possible adverse effects on the sustainability of the tax measures.

Insufficient means and will to address technical and commercial losses of SBEE pose a substantial risk
that the measures undertaken successfully to improve its financial sustainability in the short run may be
insufficient to resolve the underlying structural sources of deficits. To the extent that the operating surplus
resulted from government subsidies, this may prove fiscally unsustainable, especially if political pressures to
restrain tariff increases widen the revenue gap to be covered.




                                                                                                   Page 16 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Benin FMST DPO1 (P168668)




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Bank Performance – Design

Rationale

The FMST DPO series was based on strong analytical underpinnings and experience from the previous Fiscal
Reform and Growth DPFs (ICR, para. 16). The PDs identified major risks, and the operations included relevant
implementation and mitigating measures.

Lessons from prior experience

The DPO series carried forward previous support for the “fiscal and energy sectors as well as the digital
economy, [and] was informed by lessons learned from the implementation of the previous operations, the
SCD, and the CPF” (ICR, para. 17). The design was based on the finding that “DPFs can be more effective if
the series supports a targeted reform agenda with a well-designed objective rather than a broad agenda with
multiple objectives” (ICR, para. 17). Hence the series prioritized “prior actions in areas that were supported by
World Bank investment projects, technical assistance (TA) operations, and/or donor activities,” which were
found likely to have a greater impact.

Results chain

Although the PDs and ICR provided the rationale for each policy action, the logical chain (“theory of change”)
linking actions to results was generally implicit rather than laid out. Some results indicators (domestic tax
revenues, SBEE operating deficit and technical/commercial losses) directly measured achievement of the
desired objective.

Risk identification and mitigation

PD 1 (section 6) identified substantial macroeconomic, political, and governance risks, as well as important
“capacity constraints and weaknesses in public administration…[including] (i) low salaries and perverse
incentives…(ii) the ambiguity of the administrative structure in some ministries…and (iii) potential resistance
to politically sensitive reforms, in the electricity sector and taxes” (para. 6.4). Besides focusing “on a limited
range of policy areas that have been identified as priorities by the administration,” the DPOs mitigated these
risks through stakeholder consultations and by providing technical support (PD1, para. 6.4).

Stakeholder consultation and coordination with Development Partners

Stakeholder consultations were important to “build consensus and institutional capacity around the supported
reforms” (PD1, para. 6.4). In the design phase, “the MEF frequently convened meetings among various
ministries involved. Thus, officials had extensive opportunities to present alternatives, identify challenges, and
ponder alternative solutions, modifications, or timing changes to the various actions” (PD1, para. 50).
“Engagement in Benin with civil society, the private sector, trade, and labor unions, and across various
government departments/ministries was well developed” (PD1, para. 4.41). Some of the measures were
designed to be “complemented by the International Monetary Fund (tax reform), and the African Development
Bank, the European Union, and MCC (energy reform)” (PD1, para. 4.40). The monitoring and evaluation


                                                                                                       Page 17 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Benin FMST DPO1 (P168668)



framework was designed to support “the coordinated action and synergies between stakeholders” (PD1, para.
5.19).
Rating

Satisfactory

b. Bank Performance – Implementation

Rationale

Monitoring

“The donor community and the government agreed to an annual review process that includes quarterly review
meetings, additional meetings on special subjects as needed, a mid-year progress review on the previous year’s
aide memoire, individual sector reviews, a joint donor-government review mission,” etc. (PD1, para. 5.19). “The
World Bank conducted regular supervision and sustained day-to-day support from the field office. Experts in
several areas resided in the field and supported several supervision missions” (ICR, para. 61).

Adaptation

The implementation team modified a number of triggers and RIs in preparing FMST DPO2, adapting to changing
circumstances and refining the indicators. Adjustments “were made to improve the specificity of and strengthen
the reform program and increase the likelihood of implementation within the timeframe of the series. These
adjustments helped maintain program relevance without sacrificing significant reforms” (ICR, para. 60).

Preparation of a supplement to FMST DPO1 late in 2020 was an effective adaptation to the fiscal implications of
the COVID-19 pandemic and associated economic downturn. It “helped to keep the reforms' momentum while
helping Benin to mitigate the impact of the COVID-19 crisis in the socio-economic recovery phase” (ICR, para.
68).



Rating

Satisfactory

c. Overall Bank Performance

Rationale

Both design and implementation are rated as Satisfactory.


Overall Bank Performance Rating

Satisfactory

                                                                                                 Page 18 of 20
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Benin FMST DPO1 (P168668)



9. Other Impacts

a. Social and Poverty

It is too early for evidence to be available on possible social and poverty impacts. “The actual impact is not yet
measurable because the household survey has not been conducted since 2018-19” (ICR, para. 50).



b. Environmental

Environmental implications were negligible, and it is too early for evidence to be available.



c. Gender

There were no gender-targeted PAs or RIs, and no expected gender-differentiated implications.



d. Other

n.a.



10. Quality of ICR

Rationale

The ICR provides a coherent narrative of the operation's context, rationale, design, and results. It reviews the
context for the program and the rationale for deepening the reforms initiated in the previous DPF series. It
provides adequate data to support the conclusions and interrogates the quality of certain data. The lessons
learned are fairly general, though relevant to the experience of the DPO series. In the case of two RIs with
negligible progress, some remedies are indicated. The ICR is consistent with guidelines and well written.


a. Rating

High

11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                    IEG
                                                                                  Disagreement/Comments
Outcome                          Satisfactory          Satisfactory


                                                                                                     Page 19 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Benin FMST DPO1 (P168668)



Bank Performance               Satisfactory          Satisfactory
Relevance of Results
                               ---                   Satisfactory
Indicators
Quality of ICR                 ---                   High


12. Lessons

Focusing on reforms with strong government commitment and champions raises the likelihood of
successful implementation. “The positive results in mobilizing tax revenue and debt management reflect
strong leadership at the Ministry of Economy and Finance” (ICR, para. 66). There was less success in the area
of developing the digital economy, which lacked an existing strong agency to drive implementation.

Adaptation to fiscal shocks helps maintain the pace of sectoral reforms. The fiscal and economic shocks of
the COVID-19 pandemic risked diverting funds as well as attention away from the reform program supported by
the FMST DPO series. The World Bank’s quick response in providing supplementary financing to the first DPO
alongside the second helped to mitigate this risk and keep the program on track. PAs addressed identified
constraints, and RIs measured their implementation and impacts.


13. Project Performance Assessment Report (PPAR) Recommended?

No




                                                                                                 Page 20 of 20
