      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Burkina Faso Crisis-Response DPF (P174315)



                                                                                       Report Number: ICRR0023350

1. Operation Information



 Operation ID                                  Operation Name
 P174315                                       Burkina Faso Crisis-Response DPF

 Country                                       Practice Area (Lead)
 Burkina Faso                                  Macroeconomics, Trade and Investment



  Non-Programmatic DPF

  L/C/TF Number(s)                             Closing Date (Original)                     Total Financing (USD)
  IDA-67990,IDA-D7460                          31-Dec-2021                                           102,001,893.99

  Bank Approval Date                           Closing Date (Actual)
  15-Dec-2020                                  31-Dec-2021

                                               IBRD/IDA (USD)                                 Co-financing (USD)

  Original Commitment                             100,000,000.00                                                  0.00

  Revised Commitment                              100,000,000.00                                                  0.00

  Actual                                          102,001,893.99                                                  0.00




 Prepared by                   Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator            Group
 Rashmi Shankar                Judyth L. Twigg               Jennifer L. Keller                IEGEC




2. Program Objectives and Pillars/Policy Areas
DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives

This standalone Crisis Response Development Policy Financing (CR-DPF) operation for $100 million aimed
to support Burkina Faso in response to the COVID-19 pandemic outbreak.

The program development objective (PDO) of this operation was to support Burkina Faso by (i) expanding
economic opportunities for growth; (ii) building crisis-adaptive capacity of the state; and (iii) improving fiscal

                                                                                                         Page 1 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Burkina Faso Crisis-Response DPF (P174315)



transparency and accountability (Implementation Completion Review [ICR], p. 5; Program Document [PD], p.
5).

For the purpose of this ICRR, the objectives of the operation (against which outcomes will be assessed) are
taken to be the following:

Objective 1: Expanding economic opportunities for growth;

Objective 2: Building crisis-adaptive capacity of the state; and

Objective 3: Improving fiscal transparency and accountability.


b. Pillars/Policy Areas
The three pillars of the operation were identical to the objectives listed above with the following prior actions
(PAs) under each (ICR, p. 11 and p. 12):

Pillar 1, "Expanding Economic Opportunities for Growth" had two PAs under it:

Prior Action #1: To improve access for smallholder farmers to subsidized agricultural inputs and allow for
better targeting of beneficiaries, the Recipient’s Ministry of Agriculture and Hydro-Agricultural Development
has adopted the nation-wide rollout of an electronic distribution system for subsidized inputs (“Agri-Voucher”),
which can exceptionally be waived to allow direct provision of agricultural inputs and equipment subject to the
authorization of the minister in charge of agriculture, as evidenced by Arrêté N°2020-0079/MAAH/CAB dated
August 7, 2020.

Prior Action #2: To improve access to credit of individuals, micro, small and medium enterprises, the
Recipient’s Council of Ministers has mandated major public and private utility billers, including, inter alia,
water, electricity, and mobile providers to report post-paid consumer data to the electronic platform for sharing
credit information as evidenced by Decree N°2020-0726/PRES/PM/MINEFID/MDENP/ MCIA dated August
24, 2020.

Pillar 2, "Building Crisis-Adaptive Capacity of the State," had three PAs under it:

Prior Action #3: To increase health system capacity and resilience, to prevent, detect, respond, and recover
from zoonotic and vector-borne diseases, the Recipient has specified the attributions, composition,
organization and functioning of the Technical Steering Committee, the One Health technical secretariat, as
evidenced by inter-ministerial Arrêté N°2020-210/MS/MINEFID/MESRSI/MAAH// MRAH/MEEVCC dated June
30, 2020.

Prior Action #4: To facilitate access to services and strengthen the country’s crisis-response capacity, the
Recipient has: (i) aligned the system issuing identity credentials to personnes indigentes to the construction of
an ID platform in the context of the West Africa Unique Identification for Regional Integration and Inclusion
(“WURI”) Program, as evidenced by inter-ministerial Arrêté N°2020-
0046/MFSNFAH/MATDC/MINEFID/MDENP dated July 3, 2020; and (ii) adopted a data sharing protocol, as
evidenced by inter-ministerial Arrêté N°2020-0047/MFSNFAH/MATDC/MFPTPS/MINEFID dated July 3, 2020.



                                                                                                        Page 2 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Burkina Faso Crisis-Response DPF (P174315)



Prior Action #5: To support the business continuity of the state, improve service delivery, and prepare the
digital transformation of the economy, the Recipient’s Prime Minister has ordered the roll-out and uptake of
high-priority digital platforms, as evidenced by Arrêté N°2020-037/PM/CAB dated July 13, 2020.

Pillar 3, "Improving Fiscal Transparency and Accountability," had two PAs under it:

Prior Action #6: To improve efficiency, transparency and accountability in the use of COVID-19 funds and
accelerate the response during future crises and/or disasters as defined in Law N°012-2014/AN dated April
22, 2014, the Recipient’s Ministry of Economy, Finance and Development has established a crisis-response
governance framework, as evidenced by Arrêté N°2020-418/MINEFID/CAB dated August 26, 2020.

Prior Action #7: To improve debt management and transparency, the Recipient’s Ministry of Economy,
Finance and Development has defined the scope, responsibilities, timing, and procedures for: (i) the quarterly
publication of a debt bulletin; (ii) the annual publication of a borrowing plan; and (iii) the annual review of the
implementation of the borrowing plan, as evidenced by Arrêté N°2020-298/MINEFID/SG/DGTCP dated July 2,
2020.


c. Comments on Program Cost, Financing and Dates

The standalone CR-DPF operation was approved on December 15, 2020, and closed on December 31, 2021
after becoming effective on March 29, 2021.The operation consisted of US$50 million in IDA grant financing
(SDR 35.6 million) and a US$50 million in IDA credit (Euro 42.7 million) at approval (ICR, p. 5). A total of $102
million were disbursed (reflecting EUR-$ exchange rate movements).


3. Relevance of Design

a. Relevance of Objectives

 Relevance to Country Situation: Crisis Response

 The CR-DPF aligned with the WBG COVID-19 Crisis Response Approach Paper 2020, which outlined 4
 pillars: (i) saving lives; (ii) protecting poor and vulnerable people; (iii) ensuring sustainable business growth
 and job creation; and (iv) strengthening policies, institutions and investments for rebuilding better. This
 operation fell within pillars iii and iv and was focused on structural reforms that complement the Government of
 Burkina Faso's response to the pandemic. Burkina Faso put containment measures in place early during the
 COVID-19 pandemic, which had exacerbated an already fragile economic situation. An acceleration
 of violence and deteriorating security had already led to pre-pandemic closures of educational and health
 institutions amid a declaration of emergency in 6 out of 13 provinces. The number of internally displaced
 persons (IDPs) increased 20-fold from 50,000 in January 2019 to over a million by August 2020. Increasingly
 severe droughts associated with climate change have further worsened the socio-economic distress caused
 by the internal conflict and the pandemic. The poverty rate was high at 40% at the onset of the pandemic, with
 the economy projected to contract by 5 percent in per capita terms in 2020, jeopardizing progress on inclusion
 in earlier years. Critical vulnerabilities in this largely agrarian country were identified as chronic food insecurity,
 weak crisis preparedness in the health sector, and doubling of the fiscal deficit from pre-pandemic trend along



                                                                                                          Page 3 of 17
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Burkina Faso Crisis-Response DPF (P174315)



with rising public debt projected to increase by 20 percentage points of GDP between 2013 and 2023 and 11
percentage points of GDP between 2019 and 2023. (PD, p. 5, 6 and 37; ICR, p. 6)

WBG Priorities and Link with the CPF

The CPF is based on the priorities identified in the 2017 Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD) and is aligned
with the Government’s PNDES. The CPF focuses on three strategic pillars: (1) accelerate sustainable private-
sector-led growth for job creation; (2) invest in human capital and social protection systems; and (3) strengthen
governance and support citizen engagement. The support provided through this Crisis-Response DPF
was consistent with all three pillars of the CPF. Policy reforms in agriculture (Prior Action #1) and access to
credit (Prior Action #2) supported sustainable growth and job creation (CPF Pillar 1). Policy reforms in health
(Prior Action #3) and social protection (Prior Action #4) contributed to human capital (CPF Pillar 2). Finally, the
digitalization of the public administration (Prior Action #5), the governance of crisis-funds (Prior Action #6), and
debt management and transparency (Prior Action #7) fell under CPF Pillar 3. (PD, p. 37; ICR, p. 10).


b. Relevance of Prior Actions

Rationale

Pillar 1, “Expanding Opportunities for Economic Growth”, had two PAs under it, meant to address
constraints on the business environment, namely: financial access of MSMEs and agricultural productivity. Both
were identified as priorities under the 2017 Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD).

PA1: Improved access to fertilizers and seeds for poor small holder farmers. Agricultural productivity
needs to be raised for rural poverty to fall and for economic growth to increase, given Burkina’s largely
agriculture-based economy. Food insecurity is a significant vulnerability, given conflict, climate change and
high, mainly rural poverty rates that were only expected to increase with the sharp decline in per capita income
envisaged in 2020. Various analyses identified inefficient and insufficiently progressive subsidy distribution as a
major bottleneck to raising productivity of small farmers. The traditional system was paper heavy with limited
targeting and traceability and no private sector access or participation (from agro-dealers). The PA addresses
these issues by mandating a nation-wide roll out of a new e-voucher system, piloted earlier through a World
Bank IPF, that would build upon a digital platform with a reliable database of targeted beneficiary farmers, a
directory of and access to the platform for agro-dealers, and a monitoring and evaluation (M&E) system. This
PA directly contributes to the desired outcome of supporting agricultural productivity of small holder farmers to
promote opportunities for growth. (PD, p. 23 and 24; ICR, p. 15)

Relevance of PA1: Satisfactory.

PA2: Improving access to credit of individuals, Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MSMEs): Financial
access had been identified as a major constraint to private sector development by the World Bank SME
Finance Survey (2017) in Burkina Faso. The pandemic has further compromised both the resilience and
capacity of lenders as well as of borrowers. Only 20 percent of bank account holders are women and gender
gaps in credit access are high (an estimated 17 percent), since women have weaker access to land, legal
rights, and education. One of the factors driving access to credit is the effectiveness and coverage of the credit
bureau. Various analyses (not detailed in the PD or ICR) suggest that expanding and strengthening BIC
(Bureau d’Information sur le Credit) could improve financial access of MSMEs. PA2 mandates that water,
electricity and mobile companies share consumer financial information with BIC to help increase its reach

                                                                                                      Page 4 of 17
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Burkina Faso Crisis-Response DPF (P174315)



beyond the 2 percent of the adult population covered at the time (compared to 11 percent for Sub-Saharan
Africa). Non-traditional information sharing through mobile operators is stated to have the potential to be
especially beneficial to women who have better access to mobile banking (and account for 34 percent of mobile
accounts) than to traditional bank accounts. Expanding the coverage of BIC would improve lenders’ ability to
score credit risk and strengthen the available credit history and data of borrowers. (PD, p. 25; ICR, p 15)

Relevance of PA2: Moderately Satisfactory

Pillar 2, "Building Crisis-Adaptive Capacity of the State," had three PAs under it, meant to improve the
capacity and resilience of the health system by strengthening its ability to identify, monitor for and respond to
shocks, strengthen social protection especially in terms of targeting and identification of vulnerable populations,
and support digitization of government services, all with a view to supporting the country's crisis-response
functionality.

PA3: Increasing Health System Capacity and Resilience: Burkina Faso did not meet the 2005 World Health
Organization (WHO) International Health Regulations (IHR) requirements, lacking an integrated disease
surveillance and response system. It also does not meet the World Organization for Animal Health (OIE)
International Standards. The lessons of the West Africa Ebola outbreak have not addressed weaknesses such
as inadequate lab facilities, weak medical capacity at borders, lack of a coordinated framework of prevention,
detection, response, and recovery to zoonotic and vector-borne diseases, and insufficient monitoring of the
supply chain for essential medicines. The COVID-19 outbreak found the country ill-equipped to cope in the
absence of needed strategies and capacities or even a coordinating mechanism. PA3 helps address this need
by creating and operationalizing the One Health Technical Secretariat - an internationally agreed approach to
monitor signs of risks across human, animal and environmental health. PA3 is the regulatory step needed to
create the technical secretariat and its defining framework, and as such is the first step towards ultimately
setting up the One Health System. This prior action specifies the responsibilities, composition, organization and
functioning of the Technical Steering Committee, the One Health Technical Secretariat, and does support the
objective. Its implementation is anchored in multiple complementary projects, including the programmatic DPF.
The measure would be expected to have a direct and credible impact on the desired outcome of improved
crisis-preparedness given that lack of institutional structure and poor inter-ministerial coordination were
constraints on crisis surveillance and response. (PD, p. 28; ICR, p. 15)

Relevance of PA3: Satisfactory

PA4: Strengthening the Social Protection System and Crisis Response Capacity. The two crucial building
blocks of an effective social protection system were absent in Burkina Faso, namely: a unique identifier through
a foundation ID system and a social registry. Various social programs relied on ad hoc data from registered
households entering the data in different non-communicating systems. Women and the poorest households are
least likely to have IDs. PA4 supported the harmonization of identification systems and the establishment of a
unique identifier developed through the West Africa Unique Identification for Regional Integration and Inclusion
(WURI) Program. The establishment of the unique identifier was expected to reduce inefficiencies in benefit
delivery, and support the development of a social registry that could process intake, registration, and
assessment of household needs and eligibility. This requires data sharing protocols between the registry and its
implementing agency partners and interoperability with other government databases for data verification and
validation, with appropriate data protection and privacy measures. The prior actions address directly and
credibly contribute to the goal of improving the capacity of the social protection system to target beneficiaries,
critical to effective crisis response (PD, p. 28; ICR, p. 15)



                                                                                                     Page 5 of 17
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Burkina Faso Crisis-Response DPF (P174315)



Relevance of PA4: Satisfactory

PA5: Digitizing the Public Administration. Burkina Faso lacks both the strategy and the platform that could
support digitization of Government-to-Government (GtoG) services. The former is a pre-requisite to developing
digitized government-to-business (GtoB) services. Digitized Government services were critical to government
response during the COVID-19 pandemic in many countries, given social distancing and other barriers. In the
absence of legal pre-requisites, the private sector was limited in its use of e-commerce, which could have
mitigated some of the impacts of the pandemic on the private sector. PA5 required all public entities to adopt
digital platforms with a focus on GtoG services. Several platforms had been developed and deployed to
selected pilot bodies through a complementary IPF and were ready for government-wide roll out at the time of
CR-DPF approval. These pertained to information on procedures and contact information; data; digitization of
forms, records, archives; travel management; and mobile data collection to collect, store and deliver
administrative data. PA5 has direct and credible line of sight to the goal of supporting digitization of government
services and supporting the effectiveness of public administration during periods of crises (PD, p. 31, ICR, p.
15)

Relevance of PA5: Satisfactory

Pillar 3, "Improving Fiscal Transparency and Accountability," had two PAs meant to improve the
governance of crisis response funds and the management and transparency of public debt with a view to
strengthening overall fiscal transparency and accountability.

PA6: Improving the governance of crisis response funds. There was no adequate framework in place to
manage crisis-related funds according to principles of good governance (efficacy, efficiency and transparency)
and to channel funds to target beneficiaries based on crisis-impact. To start addressing this gap, the
government established a crisis management center to implement the COVID-19 Emergency Plan. PA6
establishes the crisis-response governance framework necessary to foster transparency and accountability in
the Emergency Plan implementation. It covered crisis oversight, budgeting, financial management, procurement
including single source medical supplies where justifiable, and an audit and accountability mechanism that
supported public participation. The framework assigned a role for civil society in the crisis management center
chaired by the Prime Minister, and in the dissemination of financial reports, audits, and follow up on
implementation. The framework provides for measures to trace crisis spending to publish information on
resources collected, procurements, beneficiaries, and cash positions in the bank accounts. Reporting
arrangements would be clarified, and biannual audit reports would be issued with provision for joint audit with
Civil Society Organizations. The framework was meant to foster transparency and accountability for public
institutions to citizens and partners. The framework included a procurement pillar, which provided for
emergency recourse through streamlined procurement procedures. PA6 has direct line of sight to strengthening
fiscal transparency and accountability and complements Objective 2. It has a clear and credible contribution to
the outcome envisaged under Objective 3. However there was no reference to any enforcement mechanism or
penalties in the event of misappropriation of funds. (PD, p. 33; ICR, p. 15)

Relevance of PA6: Moderately satisfactory

PA7: To improve debt management and transparency. The capacity of the debt office needed to be
strengthened, in particular by updating the Medium Term Debt Strategy (MTDS) post-COVID, expanding the
annual borrowing plan (ABP) to cover domestic borrowing, and ensuring that previous ABP data feeds into the




                                                                                                    Page 6 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Burkina Faso Crisis-Response DPF (P174315)



 preparation of the current ABP. On debt transparency, the priorities were to improve debt reporting especially
 on data accessibility, timeliness and periodicity of publication, and on debt coverage by expanding it to

 contingent liabilities such as guarantees and non-guaranteed SOEs debt. PA6 addressed these shortcomings
 in a direct and credible manner supporting the overall macroeconomic policy framework and the objective of
 improved fiscal transparency and accountability. The above priorities are consistent with the last Debt
 Management and Performance Assessment (DeMPA) implemented for Burkina Faso in 2008 as well as the
 latest Country Policy and Institutional Assessment (CPIA). The DeMPA noted that in particular, significant
 weaknesses remain in the areas of DeM strategy, DeM operations, audit, external borrowing, cash flow
 forecasting and cash balance management, operational risk management, and debt records and
 reporting. (PD, p. 34, 35; ICR, p. 15)

 Relevance of PA7: Moderately Satisfactory




Rating

Satisfactory


4. Relevance of Results Indicators

Rationale

RI1 (PA1): Share of fertilizer and seeds input distributed through the e-voucher system based on volume

The share of inputs distributed through the e-voucher system to poor small holder farmers directly
captures progress on achieving the objective supported by the PA, given that the e-voucher system builds
on a database of target beneficiary farmers. As noted in the description of PA1 in Section 3, details on the
targeting methodology were not provided in the PD but the digital database was developed through a
complementary World Bank Investment Financing Project. The PD does note that small farmers that
satisfied certain criteria only were eligible for the e-vouchers. The RI is therefore relevant.

Relevance of RI1: Satisfactory

RI2i (PA2): Individuals and businesses listed in the largest credit bureau as a share in percent of the adult
population

RI2 captures for the most part progress towards achieving the outcome of expanding coverage of the
largest credit bureau, though the use of utility bills leads to coverage biased against women given that
90% of utility connections in Burkina Faso are held by men (ICR, p. 16). An effort to generate data on the
impact of expanded coverage on actual financial access of MSMEs would have facilitated this review’s
understanding of the RI’s relevance As it stands, RI2 does not capture actual impact on access to finance
given that the PD is silent on the evidence that credit bureau coverage is the major constraint on access
to finance.


                                                                                                    Page 7 of 17
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Burkina Faso Crisis-Response DPF (P174315)



Relevance of RI2i: Moderately Unsatisfactory

RI2ii (PA2): Women listed in the largest credit bureau as a share in percent of the adult population

See note under RI2i.

Relevance of RI2ii: Moderately Unsatisfactory

RI3 (PA3): Number of (a)One Health Strategies; (b) roadmaps of thematic commissions; (c) reports of
thematic commissions published.

This process-oriented RI mostly captures progress towards the objective supported by PA3; however it
does not capture institutionalization of the One Health System or even the actual utilization of the
strategies, roadmaps, and reports. (ICR, p. 16).

Relevance of RI3: Moderately Unsatisfactory

RI4 (PA4): Number of poor persons, IDPs and women to whom an identity credential adapted to the
foundational ID platform has been issued.

RI4 directly captures progress on issuing an identity credential to target populations. However in the
absence of an indicator that captures the actual expansion of the social registry and the use of
enhanced data sharing and inter-operability across Government agencies, the RI rating is as below. The
RI does not capture actual progress on expanding targeted social protection but does capture progress
on institution-building, important in the FCV context.

Relevance of RI4: Moderately Satisfactory

RI5 (PA5): Number of ministries using at least 5 digital platforms.

As presented in the PD and ICR, this RI does not capture actual uptake of GtoG services across agencies
and does not capture adequately impact of PA5. As noted in the ICR, the baseline was not well-defined
since some ministries were already using digital platforms in 2019.

Relevance of RI5: Moderately unsatisfactory

RI6i (PA6): Procurement contract lead time for medical supplies (days)

RI6i directly measures improvement in efficiency of response to emergency needs by tracking the contract
lead time for the procurement of medical supplies. It is clear that reducing procurement lead times,
particularly for essential goods, is important to crisis response.

Relevance of RI6i: Satisfactory

RI6ii (PA6): Number of COVID-19 value for money audit reports published (including notes on the follow-
up on the implementation of recommendations of the preceding audit).

This RI captures adequately improvements in transparency of utilization of public funds as an aspect of
the improved governance framework described under PA6. Value for money audits are expected to

                                                                                                    Page 8 of 17
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Burkina Faso Crisis-Response DPF (P174315)



capture economy, effectiveness and efficiency of utilization of funds. While there is no capture of progress
on enforcement of the improved governance framework of Covid-19 funds, the RI does confirm the
implementation of the audits themselves.

Relevance of RI6ii: Moderately satisfactory

RI7: Number of (a) debt bulletins or reports, (b) borrowing plans, and (c) reviews of the borrowing plan
published in line with the order

RI7 directly captures the actual output of PA7 without capturing progress on outcomes supported by the
prior action. While it may indicate improved reporting and transparency, the actual impact on debt
management and transparency is not being measured here, since the RI says nothing about the quality of
reporting and is based on an outdated DeMPA assessment.

Relevance of RI7: Moderately Unsatisfactory

Table 1.

   Indicator Name     PA RI relevance      Unit of Baseline Target             Actual       Actual      RI
                                          Measure (2019) (2021)              achieved at Change in achievement
                                                                             completion RI Relative   rating
                                                                               (2022)    to Targeted
                                                                                           Change

                                                                                              (%)
Objective 1: Expanding Economic Opportunities for Growth
 RI 1: Share in % of PA1 Satisfactory         %    Fertilizer: Fertilizer:   Fertilizer:   Fertilizer:   Substantial
 fertilizer and seeds                                46%         70%
   input distributed                                                           74.5%          118
    through the e-
   voucher system                                                             Seeds:        Seeds:
  based on volume                                   Seeds:      Seeds:        46.6%
                                                     23%         60%                         63.7
RI 2i: Individuals and PA2 Moderately         %       2%         10%           7.1%           64         Negligible
businesses listed in        Unsatisfactory
   the largest credit
bureau as a share in
     % of the adult
      population
RI 2ii: Women listed PA2 Moderately           %        0.4%       5%           1.65%           27        Negligible
 in the largest credit      Unsatisfactory
bureau as a share in
     % of the adult
      population
Objective 2: Building crisis-adaptive capacity of the state
  RI3: No. of (a)One PA3 Moderately Number 0/0/0                1/5/15         1/2/5       100/66.6/-     Modest
  Health Strategies;        Unsatisfactory                                                    100

                                                                                                         Page 9 of 17
                   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                   Burkina Faso Crisis-Response DPF (P174315)



                   (b) roadmaps of
                       thematic
                  commissions; (c)
                reports of thematic
                     commissions
                       published
                   RI4: No. of poor PA4 Moderately Number           0       500,000,      No IDs          Not       Negligible
                 persons, IDPs and         Satisfactory                        incl.   issued at the    achieved
                women to whom an                                            150,000       time of
                 identity credential                                        are IDPs    completion
                    adapted to the                                             and
                   foundational ID                                          250,000
                 platform has been                                              are
                        issued                                               women
               RI5: No. of ministries PA5 Moderately Number         0           22,         21             N/A       Modest
                   using at least 5       Unsatisfactory                     revised
                   digital platforms                                          to 14
               Objective 3: Improving fiscal transparency and accountability
                RI 6i: Procurement PA6 Satisfactory       Days     169          90       28 (single        100         High
                 contract lead time                                                     source); 44
               for medical supplies                                                    (competitive)
                         (days)
                  RI 6ii: Number of PA6 Moderately Number           0            2          2              100         High
                COVID-19 value for         Satisfactory
               money audit reports
               published (including
                notes on the follow-
                       up on the
                 implementation of
               recommendations of
                the preceding audit
                RI 7: Number of (a) PA7 Moderately Number 0/0/0               3/1/1       8/1/1        166/10010/0 Substantial
                   debt bulletins or      Unsatisfactory
                      reports, (b)
               borrowing plans, and
                  (c) reviews of the
                    borrowing plan
               published in line with
                       the order

   Rating

   Moderately Satisfactory

   5. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
EFFICACY_TBL




                                                                                                                   Page 10 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Burkina Faso Crisis-Response DPF (P174315)




OBJECTIVE 1
Objective
Expanding economic opportunities for growth

Rationale
This objective was supported by PAs designed to improve productivity of poor small holder farmers and
strengthen access to credit of individuals and MSMEs, including women and women owned MSMEs. The RI
was relevant to the prior actions but line of sight of the expansion in coverage of BIC to actual improved
access to finance was weak.

RI1 was mostly achieved with a rating of substantial. RI2i and RI2ii were both not achieved and given RI2
relevance of moderately unsatisfactory, rating is downgraded from modest to negligible.

Achievement under Objective 1 is therefore rated as Moderately Unsatisfactory.



Rating

Moderately Unsatisfactory

OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Building crisis-adaptive capacity of the state

Rationale
Objective 2: Building crisis-adaptive capacity of the state

This objective was supported by three PAs relating to strengthening the capacity of the health and social
protection systems, and improving digitization of public administration.

The process oriented RI 3 called for the preparation of strategies, roadmaps and reports of thematic
commissions. In addition to quantitative targets not being achieved, the quality of the outputs was uneven
(ICR, p. 18). This was attributed by the ICR to difficulties in achieving required levels of Government
coordination in the face of the pandemic and the deteriorating security situation in the country. The One
Health System was dependent on donor funding and the Government did not allocate a line item in the
budget. There has also been substantial Government turnover, but, albeit with delays, additional information
provided to the ICR team would suggest that there is continuing process on the reform and that an integrated
disease surveillance system is being maintained. The indicator was partially achieved, with the technical
secretariat and inter-ministerial committees being put in place.

RI4 measured progress towards the objective through the issuance of unique IDs building on the WURI
project. The Government did publish data on the number of persons who received IDs, including IDPs and
women. However because of delays, no IDs were issued suggesting that the targets were not realistic - the
actual platform for issuing the IDs had not been built, though progress was made on establishing both the
mechanism for the unique ID and the protocol for data sharing. RI4 was not achieved though qualitative
evidence reported in the ICR suggests that progress continues on the reforms.


                                                                                                Page 11 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Burkina Faso Crisis-Response DPF (P174315)



RI5 was on the increased use of key digital government platforms. 22 ministries - or 2/3 of the 33 ministries
that existed at approval were to be targeted. However following significant re-shuffling, only 21 ministries
remained and the target was revised downwards to 14. This revised target was exceeded, though with the
caveat that the baseline was not accurately defined - some ministries had already achieved digitization.

Achievement under Objective 2 is rated as Moderately Unsatisfactory.



Rating

Moderately Unsatisfactory

OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
Improving fiscal transparency and accountability

Rationale
This objective was supported by PAs meant to strengthen the governance of the Government's crisis-
response framework by improving the management of the crisis-response funds, and to improve both debt
transparency and debt management.

RI6i and RI6ii captured improvements in the governance of crisis-response funds through improved
procurement times for critical medical supplies and the number of COVID-19 value for money audit reports
published (including notes on the follow up on the implementation of recommendations of the previous audit
report). Both targets were achieved.

RI7 corresponded to PA7, which supported improvements in the Government's debt reporting and
transparency. The results indicator had three parts and all targets were exceeded or achieved. This has
contributed to Burkina Faso becoming the leading country in debt transparency among all IDA countries, as
measured by the Bank’s Debt Transparency Heatmap. This accomplishment is particularly significant
because the upgraded and now regular reporting includes coverage of contingent liabilities – now reported on
and analyzed in all debt reports, including the MTDS and quarterly debt bulletins – in order to enable the
Government to take more informed decisions and improve fiscal risk management and accountability vis-à-vis
citizens. The production of quarterly debt bulletins has been put on a solid basis with a clear definition of roles
and responsibilities. These achievements are a large improvement over the previous situation where reports
were irregular and not comprehensive. There is substantial additional evidence of the strong results in this
reform area, including outstanding performance in comparison with other countries. The ABP is consistent
with international standards and incorporates the effects of the new and post-COVID-19 environment. The
Medium-term Debt Strategy (MTDS) 2021-2023 along with the ABP 2021 are now supplied with more
accurate debt data that includes domestic financing. An implementation review of the ABP was carried out
and published that contributed to the preparation of the MDTS and borrowing plan. Regular, better quality
debt reporting has continued, which is evidence of sustained impact. In terms of comparison with other
countries, Burkina Faso was ranked first out of 74 IDA countries in debt transparency and reporting, as the
only country achieving the maximum rating in all 9 dimensions of the Bank’s debt transparency heatmap.
These accomplishments are especially impressive given Burkina's security situation and high risk status. All



                                                                                                    Page 12 of 17
                         Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                         Burkina Faso Crisis-Response DPF (P174315)



                      the RIs, which captured directly and credibly progress on achieving the objectives supported by the
                      objectives, were met or exceeded targets.

                      Achievement under Objective 3 is therefore rated as Satisfactory.



                      Rating

                      Satisfactory


OVERALL EFF TBL OLD




Overall Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
Rationale



Overall Efficacy Rating
Moderately Satisfactory


      6. Outcome

      Rationale

      With satisfactory relevance of prior actions and moderately satisfactory efficacy, overall outcome is rated as
      moderately satisfactory.

      The operation was designed in a high risk, low capacity environment, with strong reliance on
      complementary investment lending that experienced. The operation was for the most part well-designed,
      balancing the needs of longer run reforms with those of crisis response and addressing lessons learned during
      the pandemic with a view to strengthening both ongoing and future crisis response. The PAs were well
      anchored in the country strategy, national plan, and an extensive body of analytical work. Even where RIs were
      not achieved, progress was made in spite of the deteriorating security situation and FCV context, all of which
      place strains on fiscal space and commitments, and development partner and Government implementation
      capacity.


      a. Rating

      Moderately Satisfactory

      7. Risk to Development Outcome

      Complementary TA and investments mitigate risks to progress on reforms. For example, on the objective of
      improving crisis response, the e-voucher system, One Health system, digitization of GtoG services, and

                                                                                                                       Page 13 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Burkina Faso Crisis-Response DPF (P174315)



improved social protection system are all served by a number of ongoing projects. While the social registry
could not be directly supported through the CR-DPF, the groundwork was laid for it to be covered by the
programmatic DPF series, which is ongoing. The strong commitment of the Ministry of Finance to the
Sustainable Finance Debt Policy (SFDP) has already led to significant reform beyond that supported by the
CR-DPF.

However risks to project outcomes remain from political volatility, worsening conflict, the large burden placed
by sizeable IDPs, and the adverse impacts of climate change on the Sahel including Burkina, all of which
place strains on fiscal space and commitments, and development partner and Government
implementation capacity. Some of these risks may be mitigated by continued engagement through the
complementary programmatic DPF series currently under implementation.


8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Bank Performance – Design

Rationale


The Bank team leveraged analytical work and several investment policy finance operations (IPF) to inform
the design of this operation. The report on “Enabling Business for Agriculture”, (World Bank, 2019), noted
that efficient fertilizer distribution schemes support increased fertilizer use by farmers and consequently
higher yields. This would be especially relevant for Burkina Faso, where the “Rural Income Diagnostic”,
(World Bank, 2019) highlighted that overall fertilizer use is still low, compared to peer countries, in spite of
high but inefficiently distributed input subsidies. The policy solution identified in the diagnostic was the use
of e-vouchers, based on pilot experiences from West Africa outlined in “Digitizing Agriculture. Evidence
from e-Voucher Programs in Mali, Chad, Niger and Guinea” (World Bank, 2019). “The way forward for
social safety nets in Burkina Faso” (World Bank, 2019), highlighted that while overall social protection
spending is enough to eliminate extreme poverty, poor targeting means that only a small fraction of the
population benefits from safety nets.

The program internalized lessons learned from previous engagements in Burkina Faso, including the
ongoing and previous programmatic DPF series. Specific lessons include the need for: (a) strong and
sustained commitment to and leadership for sensitive reforms such as social targeting; (b) greater realism
to better reflect what can be achieved in a context of limited institutional capacity; (c) simple design to
ensure effective and successful implementation; (d) sustained follow-up of prior actions that can have
cascading effects on the follow-up measure to achieve results; and (e) leverage parallel policy-based
support through technical assistance and investment financing operations. I

The CR-DPF leveraged complementary IPF to support institution building through the reforms supported
by CR-DPF, for example, the steps taken towards institutionalization of One Health or attempting to
strengthen social safety nets. In addition, improvements in debt transparency and management, and the
new governance framework for managing crisis response funds support core Government capacity to
deliver services, respond to crises and develop an adequate macroeconomic policy framework.




                                                                                                       Page 14 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Burkina Faso Crisis-Response DPF (P174315)



Fifth, the program drew on the Poverty and Social Impact Analysis (PSIA) to support effective design of
prior actions.

Sixth, the program design builds on collaboration and complementary work with development partners, the
Government and Civil Society. The CR-DPF complemented the Government’s COVID-19 Response Plan,
which was the result of recommendations from the National Pandemic Management Committee chaired by
the Prime Minister and comprised of a dozen sectoral ministries, technical and financial partners, and civil
society organizations. The World Bank coordinated closely with the IMF on the macroeconomic policy
framework and the assessment of the impact of COVID-19 on the economy as reported in both the PD and
the ICR. Prior actions were developed within existing sectoral collaboration frameworks, that include
consultation processes with a range of development partners. For example, on Prior Action #1 the World
Bank collaborated closely with the Alliance for a Green Revolution in Africa (AGRA), the Food and
Agriculture Organization (FAO), the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) and the private
sector. On Prior Action #2, the World Bank worked with the United Nations Capital Development Fund
(UNCDF), the French Development Agency (Agence Française de Développement, AFD), and the
Embassy of Luxemburg. On Prior Action #3 the Bank engaged with USAID, the Center for Disease Control
and Prevention (CDC), FAO, and others. The work on Prior Action #4 was coordinated with the IMF, the
European Commission, the International Labor Organization (ILO), the International Organization for
Migration (IOM), the World Food Program (WFP) and others. Prior Action #6 benefited from collaboration
with the IMF, the EU, the AfDB, and the WHO. In other areas covered by this multi-sectoral operation, the
World Bank joined forces with BOAD, AFD, the Dutch Embassy and other development partners.



Rating

Satisfactory

b. Bank Performance – Implementation

Rationale

Bank Performance -- Implementation is rated as Satisfactory.

The Bank accounted adequately for institutional context and for risks to development outcomes through
continued focus on complementary technical assistance and capacity building through the larger country
engagement, which had been factored into program design by the DPF team. The PD and ICR present
evidence suggesting strong coordination with donors, effective use for the most part of underlying ASA and
complementary IPF engagement




Rating

Satisfactory


                                                                                                   Page 15 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Burkina Faso Crisis-Response DPF (P174315)




c. Overall Bank Performance

Rationale

Overall Bank performance is rated as Satisfactory given the FCV context.


Overall Bank Performance Rating

Satisfactory

9. Other Impacts

a. Social and Poverty

PAs 1, 2, 3, 4 and 6 were assessed in the PD as being likely to have significant, positive impact on poverty and
inclusion. However based on the underachievement of several RIs, actual impact of the CR-DPF is unlikely to
have been as significant as expected.



b. Environmental

The ICR does not present evidence of significant environmental impacts.



c. Gender

The ICR does not present evidence of significant gender impacts.



d. Other

No additional impacts were identified.




10. Quality of ICR

Rationale


                                                                                                  Page 16 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Burkina Faso Crisis-Response DPF (P174315)




The quality of the ICR is rated as substantial since overall ratings were validated. Additional information was
needed from the PD and the team in order to adequately assess program design and bank performance. ICR
could have benefited from a more focused discussion on how the analytical work contributed to PAs, relevance
of PAs, and relevance of RIs. The ICR was quite thin on how RIs capture development impact.



a. Rating

Substantial

11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                 Disagreement/Comments
                                Moderately
Outcome                                               Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
Bank Performance                Satisfactory          Satisfactory
Relevance of Results
                                ---                   Moderately Satisfactory
Indicators
Quality of ICR                  ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR presents several lessons. This ICRR suggests two main lessons:

1. Project design needs to be tailored to Burkina's context, with realism on targets, implementation progress of
complementary investment lending, and institutional capacity factored in.

2. Results frameworks are more likely to capture progress on objectives when indicators are outcome rather
than output or process oriented.




13. Project Performance Assessment Report (PPAR) Recommended?

No




                                                                                                   Page 17 of 17
