     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MG Statistical Capacity Building (P160071)



                                                                                    Report Number: ICRR0023257

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                   Project Name
 P160071                                      MG Statistical Capacity Building

 Country                                      Practice Area(Lead)
 Madagascar                                   Poverty and Equity


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)                 Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-59960                                   31-Mar-2022                                            31,882,553.27

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 29-Mar-2017                                 31-Mar-2022

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                       Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                              30,000,000.00                                                0.00

 Revised Commitment                               30,000,000.00                                                0.00

 Actual                                           31,882,553.27                                                0.00




 Prepared by                  Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator           Group
 Sara Johansson de            Judyth L. Twigg              Jennifer L. Keller               IEGEC (Unit 1)
 Silva




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Financing Agreement (FA) states the objective of the Project as: “to strengthen the capacity of the
   National Statistics Institute (INSTAT) to produce quality statistics and to enhance its statistical dissemination
   practices” (FA, p. 4). The PDO can be unpacked into two objectives, reflecting distinct results chains:

   Objective 1: Strengthen INSTAT’s capacity to produce quality statistics



                                                                                                      Page 1 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MG Statistical Capacity Building (P160071)



   Objective 2: Enhance INSTAT’s statistical dissemination practices



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   1. Institutional Reform and Capacity Building (US$3.4 million IDA allocation, US$0.65 million actual).
   This component contained four sets of activities:

        a. Institutional reform of the national statistical system, to (i) modernize the regulatory framework and
           (ii) improve INSTAT’s organizational structure and management.
        b. Support for developing a new National Strategy for the Development of Statistics (NSDS).
        c. Modernization of information and communications technology (ICT) and equipment.
        d. Strengthening of human resources to improve production, analysis, and dissemination of quality
           statistics.

   2. Data Collection, Analysis, and Dissemination (US$24.8 million IDA allocation, US$29.9
   million actual). This component supported the production of statistics to close critical data gaps,
   enhancement of accessibility and dissemination practices, and capacity building in these areas. The
   component contained four sets of activities:

        a. Production of a new Population and Housing Census.
        b. Production of two Household Poverty and Living Standards Surveys (Enquête permanente auprès
          des ménages, EPM) for 2018 and 2021, respectively.
        c. Updating of national accounts (NA) and Consumer Price Index (CPI) to latest international
          methodological standards.
        d. Support for data analysis and dissemination, including developing policies and platforms and
          strengthening institutional capacity.

   3. Component 3: Project Management (US$1.8 million IDA allocation, US$1.2 million actual).



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   The project was approved on March 29, 2017; became effective on August 31, 2017; held a mid-term
   review in November 2020; and closed as planned on March 31, 2022.

   The project was approved at a cost of US$30 million, equivalent to 22.4 million SDR, as IDA Allocation.
   Bank funds were expected to be complemented with US$2.5 million from development partners and US$2.6
   million from the government, in support of the population and housing census (PAD, p. 2). At approval,
   development partners included the United States Agency for International Development (US$0.7
   million) and the United Nations Population Fund (US$1.8 million). There were also ongoing discussions with


                                                                                                      Page 2 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MG Statistical Capacity Building (P160071)



   the European Union on the possibility of an additional US$6 million in funding (PAD, p. 16). The
   government did not provide the requisite funds.

   At closure, the project had disbursed US$30.88 million, exceeding the budget by nearly US$2 million. The
   project incurred higher than foreseen expenditures as the census (component 2a) incurred unexpected
   additional expenditures on the order of US$5 million. The project was not restructured. Given the
   importance of the census, as the basis for other statistical products, funds were reallocated within the
   project to cover the higher costs of the census. The project reallocated expenditures from component 1 to
   the census and within component 2, from other activities to the census (Table 1). Funding for work on NA
   and CPI (component 2c), the NSDS (component 1b), one of the two EPMs (component 2b), and support to
   ICT (component 1c) was cancelled. The contribution of the Bank as well as development partners increased
   (Table 2). Information on the detailed contributions is not available in the ICR.

   Table 1. Amount by component, at approval and project closing.

                   Amount at approval         Actual spending at project
   Components
                   (US$M)l                    closing (US$M)
   Component 1     3.40                       0.65
   Component 2     24.80                      28.46
   Component 3     1.80                       1.20
   TOTAL           30.00                      30.31
   Source: ICR, annex 3, drawn from the financial reporting system of the PIU.

   Table 2. Estimated and actual expenditures on household census funding.

                                Initial
                                                  Final
                                estimates
   Project contribution         $20.2 million     $25.4 million
   Government                   $2.6 million      ~$0.3 million
   Development partners         $2.5 million      ~$6.3 million
   Global cost                  $25.3 million     ~$32.0 million
   Source: ICR, p.12




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
At project inception, Madagascar’s statistical capacity was low, as measured by the World Bank’s Statistical
Capacity Index (62.6, compared to an average of 62.9 for IDA countries). Low capacity resulted from a
weak regulatory framework and a large but underqualified staff. Lack of financial resources had made it
difficult to retain qualified staff and led INSTAT to focus on revenue-generating activities with development
partners instead of core statistical functions. Madagascar’s score was particularly weak regarding “source

                                                                                                   Page 3 of 15
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                     Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      MG Statistical Capacity Building (P160071)



               data” (50.0, compared to an average of 60.5 for IDA countries), reflecting a lack of key statistical
               information for population, national accounts, and poverty. The lack of an up-to-date population census
               posed a particular challenge, as the census forms part of core statistical sources, without which the
               credibility of the entire statistical system is put in question.

               The PDO was fully aligned with the Government’s National Development Plan 2015-2019 (NDP), which
               recognized both the importance of targeted and evidence-based policy making to move Madagascar onto a
               higher, more inclusive, and sustainable growth trajectory, and the role of reliable, accessible, timely, and
               relevant data underpinning these policy directions. More and better statistics, widely disseminated, would
               help strengthen governance and accountability and support the policy targeting needed to foster economic
               recovery and improve inclusive growth and local roots of development, two main pillars of the NDP.

               The project remained relevant to the World Bank’s strategy, as expressed in the country partnership
               framework (CPF) FY17-FY21. The CPF emphasized the need for effective and targeted policy interventions
               to foster inclusive growth, address significant gender and income gaps, and promote higher social
               accountability and citizen participation to increase the legitimacy and credibility of policy interventions and
               support much-needed resource mobilization. The CPF highlighted the role of the statistical capacity building
               project as a means of informing the implementation of policies central to the NDP, especially social
               services, decentralization, and civil registration.

               At the time of this Review, a new country partnership framework was not in place. An update to the
               Systemic Country Diagnostic (dated April 2022), intended to inform the upcoming CPF 2023, emphasized
               the continued governance challenges facing Madagascar and the need to strengthen citizen engagement to
               deliver better policy outcomes and limit state capture, all of which needs to be underpinned by reliable data.
               The operation was expected to provide basic information that would feed directly into subsequent World
               Bank-financed operations in Madagascar. This suggests that strengthening statistical capacity remains
               highly relevant to Madagascar’s needs and the World Bank’s engagement.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Strengthen INSTAT’s capacity to produce quality statistics

                             Rationale
                             More effective management and organization of INSTAT, together with strengthened skills in INSTAT and
                             updated ICT equipment and software, are critical ingredients to enable the production of core statistics –
                             adequate population data, national accounts, consumer price index, and data on poverty and employment --


                                                                                                                           Page 4 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   MG Statistical Capacity Building (P160071)



essential to inform government, the general public, and other stakeholders and improve policy design,
implementation, monitoring, and evaluation.

Theory of Change (ToC):

The PAD did not provide a ToC. The ICR constructs one ex-post based on the project's results framework,
including activities, outputs, two PDO/outcomes consistent with the two unpacked objectives presented in this
Review (production and dissemination of quality statistics), and a higher-level outcome on sustained capacity
to produce and disseminate quality statistics to support evidence-based policy making. The ToC presents a
plausible results chain from activities to outputs and outcomes. Technical assistance, capacity building, and
upgraded technology logically and plausibly assist in producing key statistical outputs that could be
disseminated to different users.

Inputs:

At appraisal, the key activities (inputs) were defined as (i) technical assistance/capacity building to improve
skills among INSTAT staff and guarantee long-term provision of relevant skills and (ii) upgrading of ICT
equipment and software. More specifically, planned technical assistance/capacity building encompassed the
following activities:

      Review of the existing regulatory framework and human resources; support to development of a new
          regulatory framework and a new National Strategy for the Development of Statistics (NSDS)
      Skills enhancement of existing staff in capacities directly linked to production and dissemination of
       statistics
      Improved training in the national statistics school, including a scholarship program for new recruits
      Direct support to the production of the population census and household poverty and living survey and
       the revision of national accounts and CPI statistics.

At closure, due to the increased costs of the census and the outbreak of COVID-19, the set of activities
undertaken had been modified as follows:

      Cancelled: Support to activities on national accounts and CPI were stopped due to the census overrun
       and the fact that only one set of EPM had been undertaken, as data collection was interrupted in 2020
       due to COVID-19. NSDS and the modernization of ICT/equipment were also stopped; the NSDS was
       instead funded by the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP).
      Added: The project funded four rounds of high-frequency phone surveys on COVID-19's impact on
       households and two rounds of business pulse surveys on COVID-19's impact on businesses.

Outputs:

The outputs expected (as per the ToC), were: (i) an updated legal framework and a new NSDS, (ii) a
workforce equipped with skills and technology to undertake large-scale statistical productions, (iii) a
completed Housing and Population Census, two Household Poverty and Living Standard Surveys, and NAs
aligned with international standards. There were three intermediate (output) indicators related to Objective 1.




                                                                                                   Page 5 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   MG Statistical Capacity Building (P160071)




      Skills enhancement was measured by the number of staff achieving improvements in skills knowledge
       compared to a pre-training baseline (baseline 0, target 75). By December 2021, 186 staff had
       improved their skills related to production, analysis, and dissemination of data, exceeding the target.
      Production of key data sources was measured by the number of census, welfare, employment, and
       business surveys implemented (baseline 0, target 6). By December 2021, 6 surveys had been
       implemented. The Population and Housing Census was successfully carried out. Data collection for a
       household poverty and living standards survey was completed in March 2022, after an earlier attempt
       in 2020 had to be abandoned due to COVID-19. In addition, four rounds of high-frequency phone
       surveys on the impact of COVID-19 on household welfare, and two rounds of business pulse surveys,
       were undertaken and used to directly inform government policy. The number of products exceeded
       targets. However, the rapid phone surveys cannot be said to represent the same quality of output as
       the full business survey, informal survey, and poverty household survey they supplanted.
      Improved BA and CPI (baseline 0%, target 100%, weighted as follows: Coverage of the informal
       sector (20%), updated source data on businesses (20%), updated CPI basket (20%), updated base
       year of national accounts (20%), and use of the 2008 system of national accounts (20%)). Funds for
       this component were reallocated to the census. The indicator is estimated to have been achieved to
       60%, representing updated source data on business, updated base year of NA, and updated
       consumption basket for the CPI. By March 2020, the NA had been rebased to the year 2007 but
       remained based on System of National Accounts (SNA) 1993.

The original results framework did not contain a specific indicator related to regulatory reform. However, the
ICR reports that (i) a new statistical law was adopted in 2018, but the ensuing decrees have not yet been
adopted, and (ii) an institutional assessment of INSTAT management and organization was undertaken,
including recommendations to strengthen human resources management.

Out of the three output indicators, the target for one (staff training) was fully achieved, but the production of
key data sources and improved NA and CPI were only partially achieved.

Outcomes:

The expected outcome was an increase in the capacity of Madagascar to produce relevant quality statistics
as measured by:

      An increase in the statistical capacity index (SCI) score for the variables that the project will target
       (baseline 62.6, target 71). By March 2022, the SCI had only improved marginally, to 63.3. This modest
       progress was due to the decrease in the “poverty survey” and “income poverty” sub-indices, as the
       earlier household survey became outdated and a new one was not yet completed. The new World
       Bank statistical performance index (SPI), which replaces the SCI, indicates more substantial
       improvement in statistical capacity, with the overall SPI index improving from 41.7 in 2017, to 52.0 in
       2019. The sub-score for data sources also improved, albeit more modestly and from a very low level,
       from 11.7 to 21.0.
      The number of statistical products supported by the project designed and implemented in line with
       international standards (baseline 1, target 4: CPI, Census, Household Survey, National Accounts). By
       June 2021, 5 statistical products had been produced, including the population census, NA, CPI, and
       the rapid phone surveys for households and businesses. The household survey was completed just




                                                                                                      Page 6 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   MG Statistical Capacity Building (P160071)



         after project closure (May 2022). Although the NA was updated, it did not meet international
         standards, as it made use of the 1993 SNA whereas the most recent standard is the 2008 SNA.

Conclusion:

The project increased INSTAT capacity by supporting the provision of a key statistical product (the census)
that underpins other surveys. The project adapted resources to produce relevant statistical information during
COVID-19 (rapid phone surveys). However, several products (household income, business, and informal
sector surveys) had to be abandoned, and other core statistics, such as the NA, have not improved
sufficiently to meet international standards. The rating of efficacy under objective 1 is modest.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Enhance INSTAT’s statistical dissemination practices

Rationale
The discussion under objective 1 applies to objective 2.

Theory of Change

The discussion objective 1 applies to objective 2.

Inputs

The activities under Objective 1 – regulatory framework, skills development, data production -- also supported
Objective 2. Improved data and microdata dissemination policy and the production of source data were
necessary conditions for dissemination.

Outputs

In addition to skills enhancement (objective 1), the outputs defined in the ToC relevant for outcome 2
included: (i) reports and anonymized micro-datasets for the Population and Housing Census and Poverty and
Living Standards Survey available online; (ii) disseminated national accounts and price indices; and (iii)
available user feedback intended to enhance user friendliness. INSTAT adopted a new data and microdata
dissemination policy, and a platform was created to support microdata sharing. The intermediate outputs
related to Objective 2 were:

      Number of statistical reports funded by the project available online, disaggregated by availability of
         gendered statistics (baseline 0, target 20). By December 2021, 23 reports were available.
      Number of survey and census micro-datasets available online (baseline 0, target 6). By March 2020,
         7 such datasets were available online: the census, and the 6 rapid phone surveys.


                                                                                                   Page 7 of 15
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                MG Statistical Capacity Building (P160071)




                                    User feedback measured by whether focus groups had been held to gather feedback (baseline No,
                                     target Yes). At the end of the project, user feedback had been collected through quantitative and
                                     qualitative surveys.

                            Out of the 3 output indicators, targets for all were achieved, with rapid phone surveys replacing the household
                            surveys originally planned.

                            Outcomes.

                            The expected outcome was an increase in the capacity of Madagascar to disseminate relevant statistics to
                            users, as measured by:

                                    The number of statistical products that are released according to the statistical release calendar
                                     (baseline 1, target 4: population census every 10 years, household surveys every 3 years, NA every
                                     year, CPI monthly). The NA and CPI have been released regularly, and the census has been
                                     released. The results from the household rapid response and business surveys have also been
                                     released, bringing the number of products to 5.

                                    Number of views of micro-datasets available online (baseline 72,000, target 100,000). Due to a
                                     mistake in the baseline/target values set up originally, this indicator was monitored with "views on
                                     INSAT website." This is arguably a completely different but nonetheless relevant indicator of
                                     information dissemination. By December 2021, there were 182,370 views, much above the target.

                            The ICR provides additional indicators as evidence of improved quality and relevance of dissemination:

                                    The new statistical capacity index, SPI, shows a significant increase in the sub-index related to
                                     services (data releases, online access, advisory and analytical services, and data access services),
                                     from 18.3 in 2017 to 56.3 in 2019 (latest year available).
                                    The ICR reports that the rapid phone surveys (not foreseen in the PAD) were used directly by the
                                     government to inform its policy responses to COVID-19.

                            Conclusion: INSTAT managed to increase the availability of relevant data, significantly exceeding targets.
                            The achievement of Objective 2 is therefore rated high.



                            Rating
                            High


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The project achieved only modest increases in the statistical capacity index score due to weak results on the
                            outcome related to production of quality statistics. Lower efficacy was partly due to COVID-19 and thus
                            beyond the control of the project. At the same time, the project achieved a critical output – the census – thus

                                                                                                                                Page 8 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      MG Statistical Capacity Building (P160071)



  contributing to a central statistical product, whereas other components were taken over by other partners. The
  project also supported high achievements in data dissemination practices and higher usage of data.

  Given the combination of modest and high achievements on key outcomes, and the unavoidable impact of
  COVID-19 on data collection, project efficacy is rated substantial.



  Overall Efficacy Rating
  Substantial



 5. Efficiency
The project’s objective does not lend itself to comprehensive cost-effectiveness analysis. The ICR instead
provides costs of different components in other countries as a basis for comparison. Despite the budget overrun,
the cost of the population census, for a total of US$32 million, is estimated at about US$1.2 per capita. This is
lower than the estimated costs for censuses in other Sub-Saharan African countries (Comoros US$1.7, Sierra
Leone US$1.5, Ghana US$3.0). This suggests efficient resource management from a total cost perspective.
However, it also raises questions as to why the census was budgeted at a significantly lower cost initially
(budgeted US$ 25.3 million for a population of 24 million, i.e., US$1.05 per capita), which would have introduced
risks of overrun. Total costs of the household survey, at approximately US$1.9 million, appear to be in line with
international levels/averages (US$1.7 million).

The project performed comparatively well on timeliness. The time lapse between project approval and the first
disbursement was under six months. Despite the emergence of COVID-19 during implementation. the project
closed as planned on March 31, 2022.

During implementation, some delays and abandoned activities were due to external events (presidential election
campaign, COVID-19). Data cleaning and analysis work on the census, and the data collection field work of the
first EPM, were especially affected. However, underestimation of costs and timelines needed for execution,
delayed government contributions, and poor fiduciary compliance also delayed implementation compared to
plan. Census preparation (Cartography) and validation of results (by National Council) took longer than foreseen
and incurred higher costs. This also delayed the first EPM, for which the census was to have provided the
sampling frame. The preparation of the second round of the EPM was delayed due to lack of funds, partly due to
delayed government contributions. COVID-19 had a deep negative impact on Madagascar, which widened fiscal
deficits significantly and, together with mounting financial pressures from public entities, raised pressures to
prioritize other spending.

At the same time, project management made a logical decision in prioritizing the census. The update of the
census was urgent, as it also constituted the foundation for the other surveys. The project also adapted to
supporting unforeseen but relevant activities, namely the rapid phone surveys. Finally, other development
partners partly took over financing or technical assistance for some abandoned project components (e.g., the
NSDS by UNDP, and NA/CPI by the International Monetary Fund (IMF)).

Procurement and financial management of the project was marked by poor performance, especially in 2017 and
2018. First, there were significant cumulative delays in appraising offers for consultants, goods, and non-


                                                                                                    Page 9 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      MG Statistical Capacity Building (P160071)



consulting services. Second, financial management, in particular relating to the census activities, was
unsatisfactory, and fiduciary risk mitigation measures were not applied.

In sum, the project responded to delays to ensure the completion of the census and also ensured the completion
of other activities through other funding sources. However, procurement and financial management practices
were poor, contributing to derailing the project and severely limiting the production of quality data (resulting in
modest achievement of the first objective). Hence, project efficiency is rated modest.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     0
 Appraisal                                                  0
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     0
 ICR Estimate                                               0
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

At inception, the project’s objectives of improving statistical capacity and dissemination as a foundation for
better governance were highly relevant to Madagascar’s development challenges and for the World Bank’s
partnership. These objectives remained relevant at project closure and beyond. Overall project efficacy was
substantial, despite external challenges, with a completed census 25 years overdue, an EPM, new COVID-19-
related survey tools, and significant headway on statistical reporting and dissemination; however, one outcome
– the production of source data - was rated modest. The project's efficiency is rated modest, due to weak
procurement and financial management, and the significant reorganization of the team.

Given high relevance, substantial efficacy, and modest efficiency, the overall outcome rating is Moderately
Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome



                                                                                                     Page 10 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      MG Statistical Capacity Building (P160071)



The main risks are related to the sustainability of human and financial resources, part of which are due to
slow progress on institutional reform and the macro-fiscal context, which remains challenging.

First, higher capacity is the main pillar of the project’s achievements. The current institutional framework
precludes market-based remuneration, reducing INSTAT’s capacity to recruit and retain competent staff,
including staff with skills enhanced through the project.

Second, weak commitment on the part of the government to secure adequate financing remains a key risk.
Without a government-INSTAT contract specifying resource allocation, the government may divert resources
to other pressing needs. The shortfall in the government contribution during project implementation
underscores this risk.

A new World Bank statistical capacity building project is under preparation, which may secure some
continuation over the medium-term.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The Bank designed a highly relevant project focusing on key missing statistical products that were
  essential for results-based policy making and accountability. The project centered on much-needed
  institutional reform and capacity building to ensure sustainable increases in statistical capacity. Project
  design did not adequately consider the weak governance context when setting up an ambitious set of
  activities and outputs to be achieved. The Bank underestimated: (i) the cost of a census (planned cost of
  around US$1.05 per capita, whereas international comparison suggested higher costs) (ii) the potential
  impact of the presidential election on census activities and (iii) the sensitivity of the schedule to delays in
  the census for other activities that depended on the sampling frame and (iv) the implementation capacity
  of the counterparts.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The Bank conducted regular supervision missions (two per year, plus a mid-term review). The ICR refers to
 the Implementation Status and Results Reports (ISRs) to support its assertion that the Bank made efforts
 to resolve many of the issues that arose during implementation and ensured strong coordination and
 engagement with external stakeholders, including by ongoing coaching of the PIU. Confronted with the
 census budget overrun, the Bank chose not to restructure the project and did not acquire additional
 financing, based on the logic that an upcoming project would be able to cover those activities that were not
 undertaken. As a result of the gap in financing, the Bank chose to abandon work on the regulatory




                                                                                                       Page 11 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MG Statistical Capacity Building (P160071)



 framework, although the framework is critical to ensure sustainability and accountability of governance
 within the statistics system, which may have put sustainability at risk.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The results chain outlined in the PAD was logical, with a clear overall objective and links between inputs,
 outputs, and outcomes that could easily be translated into a ToC in the ICR. In general, indicators were
 relevant, measurable, and time-bound (annual, or by end of project), and baselines and targets were well
 defined. Some shortcomings included:

       The results chain lacked output indicators related to progress on institutional reform.
       Indicator 2 under outcome 1 measured the number of statistical products produced but did not
        capture the relative importance of statistical products. The fact that several of the regular key
        surveys planned (including enterprise, informal sector) were not undertaken due to reallocation of
        funds and COVID-19 reduced the overall efficacy of outcome 1.
       Indicator 2 under outcome 2 measured the number of views of micro-data sets. Unlike reports,
        dashboards, and similar analysis, access to raw data may indicate interest primarily by the research
        community or international organizations. It is less likely to include policy makers in the country (for
        improved policymaking) or the general public (for higher accountability). In reality, this indicator had
        to be measured by hits on the INSTAT website, which in fact may be a better indicator of general
        access to information.

 The Project Implementation Unit (PIU) within INSTAT was responsible for progress monitoring. The Bank
 highlighted the lack of experience with World Bank projects as a key risk to be mitigated with recruitment of
 qualified personnel and specific training and continuous support by the Bank. Given the project's poor
 financial management performance, more significant support may have been needed.



b. M&E Implementation
  The Bank monitored progress through regular missions and regular reports (including 10 ISRs, 5 audit
  reports, and mission aide memoires). The ICR reports that these monitoring products provided key
  implementation information, including progress, challenges, and critical actions needed. Internal auditing
  highlighted major weaknesses in asset management related to the census. Additional support was given
  to INSTAT (by a professional accounting firm) to track ineligible expenses and improve financial
  management and reporting.


                                                                                                    Page 12 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MG Statistical Capacity Building (P160071)



  However, the ICR has not been able to reconstruct the financial contributions of development partners to
  the project (ICR, p.12). This information appears to be critical information given the importance of
  partners to the completion of the project, especially given reallocations of project funds.



c. M&E Utilization
  The ICR (p. 25) states that monitoring output from INSTAT, together with Bank ISRs, was used to inform
  INSTAT management and prompt corrective action, but it does not specify what actions.



  Overall, the design of M&E showed some shortcomings, and the project might have benefitted from
  more significant effort at strengthening the PIU's M&E capacity from the outset. On the other hand, the
  project benefited from frequent monitoring with clear guidance for action, supporting an overall M&E
  rating of substantial.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project did not trigger any environmental or social safeguards.

   An operational grievance mechanism was put in place for overall project activities as well as for project
   workers. The project recorded a total of 97 complaints, all covered and closed in compliance with the
   established grievance mechanism.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   As noted, the project underperformed on financial management, especially at the outset. Procurement
   processes were lagging significantly at both appraisal and approval. These problems were addressed only
   with the onboarding of a new procurement team in 2019. At project closure, procurement performance was
   rated satisfactory. Similarly, the lack of control of census activities reflected weaknesses related to slow
   recruitment of an independent firm to handle enumeration, poor performance of the firm finally recruited,
   and the use of cash instead of mobile money to pay enumerators. The Bank identified ineligible expenses
   of the order of US$1 million in 2021. The government refunded these expenses and devised an action plan
   to improve financial management. These efforts were successful, and at the end of the project financial
   management was rated Moderately Satisfactory.




                                                                                                   Page 13 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MG Statistical Capacity Building (P160071)




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None reported in the ICR



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                   Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                    IEG
                                                                                   Disagreements/Comment
                                 Moderately
Outcome                                                Moderately Satisfactory
                                 Satisfactory
                                 Moderately
Bank Performance                                       Moderately Satisfactory
                                 Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                   Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                   ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR offers several lessons, with which IEG concurs:

      A holistic approach to learning by doing is central to effective institutional capacity building.
       By focusing on building INSTAT capacity through the roll-out of core statistical products, the
       project contributed to building not only technical skills but also human resources
       management, project organization, and financial management, as INSTAT management
       was responsible for project implementation.
      Project teams need to be agile to quickly adapt to changing contexts while maintaining focus
       on identified critical data gaps. In this case, the census, which was central in the hierarchy of
       all statistical products, was successfully completed despite several challenges, albeit at the
       expense of other planned outputs.

IEG adds the following lessons:

      The learning process needs to be accompanied by significant training, coaching, and
       ongoing technical support. In addition to technical experts, for example, the project had
       country office experts providing ongoing training and advice on an “as-needed“ basis. The
       IMF also provided intense technical support for key statistical products.
      Parallel progress on institutional reform is necessary to sustain results from capacity building
       interventions. The lack of reform of INSTAT management and organization now poses a
       significant threat to sustainability by reducing coordination and accountability mechanisms
       and endangering INSTAT statistical capacity.



                                                                                                      Page 14 of 15
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       MG Statistical Capacity Building (P160071)



        Sustainability also depends on adequate financing. Ensuring/institutionalizing government
         funding of statistical capacity building projects should be a priority.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provides a comprehensive, concise, and candid analysis of the project’s design and implementation
processes. The ICR provides a clear account of the implementation of the project, sources of changes, and the
rationale and consequences of the reallocations undertaken. The discussion around efficacy adequately
highlights achievements not covered by results indicators, and presents additional information collected,
especially on statistical dissemination, to support the ratings on efficacy. The ICR provides a highly useful
overview of key factors that affected implementation and outcome (positively or negatively) and summarizes
these in a salient (non-standard) table, drawing logical lessons learned from each factor, and recommendations
going forward. However, the analysis of “lessons learned” could have benefitted from focusing even more on
higher-level findings with implications for other projects and institutions. Some key information on final financial
contributions is also missing, although this reflects weaknesses in project M&E.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                      Page 15 of 15
