     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PK National Social Protection Program (P158643)



                                                                                Report Number : ICRR0023355

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Program Name
 P158643                                    PK National Social Protection Program

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Pakistan                                   Social Protection & Jobs


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)            Total Program Cost (USD)
 IDA-59730                                  30-Jun-2021                                       104,071,071.26

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 15-Mar-2017                                30-Jun-2022

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                    Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           100,000,000.00                                             0.00

 Revised Commitment                            100,000,000.00                                             0.00

 Actual                                        104,071,071.26                                             0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator        Group
 Judyth L. Twigg             Salim J. Habayeb             Eduardo Fernandez             IEGHC (Unit 2)
                                                          Maldonado




2. Program Context and Development Objectives

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The objectives of the program were to strengthen national social safety net systems for the poor to enhance
   their human capital and access to complementary services (Financing Agreement, March 30, 2017, p. 5). The
   program appraisal document (PAD, p. 6) further elaborated on these objectives, noting longer-term outcomes
   to: (a) consolidate achievements and ensure effective delivery of basic income support as well as cash
   transfers linked to education co-responsibilities, which have collectively demonstrated impacts on promoting
   the human capital development of children by reducing short-term malnutrition and improving enrollment and


                                                                                                 Page 1 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PK National Social Protection Program (P158643)



   attendance in basic education; and (b) improve beneficiaries' access to complementary services with the
   ultimate goal of providing the poor with opportunities to achieve self-sufficiency over the longer run.




b. Were the program objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during
   implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The program was designed as a US$90 million Program for Results (PforR), disbursing against key results
   as part of the government's program, and a US$10 million investment project financing (IPF) technical
   assistance (TA) component to finance critical areas to achieve quality results.

   PforR program content and results areas. The program was designed to support three elements of the
   government's broader income support system: (i) the basic cash transfer program, delivered by the Benazir
   Income Support Program (BISP), an autonomous authority working under the Ministry of Finance; (ii)
   the Waseela-e-Taleem (WeT) program to incentivize primary school enrollment of BISP beneficiary families'
   children; and (c) facilitation support to improve BISP beneficiaries' access to complementary
   services. PforR activities aimed at advancing results in the following two priority areas (PAD, p. 7):

        1. Institutional and Systems Development supported updating of the National Socioeconomic
           Registry (NSER), improved safety net administration, and strengthened service delivery. The NSER
           update had already undergone a Phase 1 implementation, with a revised proxy means testing (PMT)
           formula, recertification, and exit modalities, in 16 districts; the program was to support national
           rollout (Phase 2). Administration and service delivery was to be strengthened through enhancement
           of the management information system (MIS), modernization of payment services to address
           gender-specific constraints on access to finances, promotion of financial literacy for beneficiaries,
           and strengthening of capacity at BISP tehsil field offices that are the front line for program
           operations.
        2. Income Support for Human Development and Access to Complementary Services supported
           coordination and expansion of the WeT and improved access to complementary social and
           productive services. Specifically, it was to support expansion of the WeT from 32 to 50 districts;
           development of suitable models of collaboration and coordination among various levels and actors in
           the WeT implementation process; capacity building of BISP Beneficiary Committees (BBCs); use
           of NSER data to identify needs relative to complementary services (education, nutrition, and health
           services, including the Prime Minister's National Health Insurance Scheme) and productive services
           (labor market interventions and asset transfer schemes, such as that administered by the Pakistan
           Poverty Alleviation Fund); and putting in place the management tools to operationalize linkages
           among these services.

   TA component. The TA component had an objective "to strengthen the capacity of the implementation
   agency to design, deliver, and monitor and evaluate the activities needed to achieve the program

                                                                                                   Page 2 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PK National Social Protection Program (P158643)



   objectives" (PAD, p. 52). It was structured around four programmatic areas: development of a dynamic
   NSER model, monitoring and evaluation (M&E), capacity building, and strengthening of fiduciary, social,
   and environmental controls. It was to support BISP access to international expertise in areas that were not
   available in the country but were considered critical to achieving the DLIs, including the design, piloting, and
   evaluation of models to support dynamic update of the NSER; periodic fiduciary performance reviews; and
   design and evaluation of activities such as complementary services to BISP beneficiaries to be provided
   through linkages and partnerships with other programs.



e. Comments on Program Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   The program was to be financed by a US$100 million International Development Association (IDA) Credit
   and a US$5.276 billion contribution from the government, for a total program cost of US$5.376 billion.
   Actual Bank financing was US$104.1 million, and the government's actual contribution was US$6.483
   billion, bringing actual total program costs to US$6.587 billion.

   Dates. The program was approved on March 15, 2017 and became effective on April 28, 2017. A mid-term
   review was carried out on January 30, 2020. The program closed on June 30, 2022, one year beyond the
   originally anticipated closing date of June 30, 2021.

   Restructuring. The program underwent a level-2 restructuring (June 29, 2020) to extend the closing
   date from June 30, 2021 to June 30, 2022. The program closing date was extended due to implementation
   delays and constraints stemming from the COVID-19 pandemic.




3. Relevance   TBL




a. Relevance of Objectives    New




  Rationale
  The objectives were highly relevant to country context, although the objective to enhance human capital
  could have been more specific. Nearly one-third of Pakistan's population was classified as poor at the time of
  program appraisal, and the country had not met education- and health-related Millennium Development Goal
  targets by 2015. In the decade prior to the program, significant steps had been taken to develop modern
  social safety net systems for the poor. The BISP, launched in 2008, was designed in the short term to
  cushion the adverse effects of food, fuel, and financial crises, and over the longer term to meet redistributive
  goals by providing a package of minimum income support and opportunities for human development. It
  provides quarterly cash transfers to female representatives of eligible families, covering about 17 percent of
  the population at program appraisal. The BISP was underpinned by the NSER that effectively targets the
  poor using a poverty score card based on a PMT; three-quarters of beneficiaries come from the bottom two
  income quintiles. Transparency is strengthened through technology-based payment and grievance redressal
  systems, and a management information system (MIS) supports BISP administration. In 2012, the
  government introduced WeT, a co-responsibility cash transfer (CCT) program for incentivizing primary

                                                                                                      Page 3 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   PK National Social Protection Program (P158643)



education of BISP beneficiaries' children. As of mid-2016, more than 1.6 million children had been enrolled in
primary schools under WeT.

The program was designed to consolidate and strengthen these systems. The NSER had become outdated
because of changes in the socioeconomic landscape, variations in poverty and vulnerability, and loss of
livelihood and assets due to natural disasters. The PMT did not effectively estimate urban poverty.
Implementation arrangements for WeT relied on a partner firm; it was recognized that BISP and WeT would
be more effectively managed if core functions were consolidated and brought in-house, requiring
strengthening of BISP's own capacity and better coordination with education departments at various levels.
In addition, other social support programs had begun using NSER data to target services to the poor, but
coordination and integration between BISP and those programs was weak. BISP's capacity for service
delivery did not match increasing demands as the complexity of its mandate expanded. Finally, devolution of
various social sector and service delivery responsibilities to the provincial level had reduced clarity on the
roles of actors at all levels. There was a need for BISP to establish its position as the national safety net
authority, with clear understanding of its role in implementation of core programs (including updating and
maintenance of the NSER) and facilitation for complementary services.

The program was fully aligned with the Bank's Country Partnership Strategy at appraisal (CPS, FY15-FY19),
which had priority areas for inclusive growth and reduced inequality for the marginalized and vulnerable
population, and for improved service delivery. That CPS was extended to FY20 under the 2017 Performance
and Learning Review (PLR), and preparation of a new Country Partnership Framework (CPF) was deferred
in FY21 because of the COVID-19 crisis and catastrophic monsoon floods in 2022. The program remained
highly relevant to the CPS as updated at the time of the PLR, which scaled up inclusion efforts and
enhanced focus on service delivery, explicitly emphasizing school enrollment. According to the ICR (p. 11), a
new CPF is under preparation for delivery in the second half of FY24.

The program was also fully aligned with the government's vision for social protection, reflected in its Vision
2025 document. The identified key areas of investment aimed to enhance the effectiveness of social
protection instruments through strengthened administration and expanded scope of the government's income
support program. The immediate outlook focused on an updated and dynamic NSER for beneficiary
identification, provision of targeted subsidies, development of modern payment delivery systems,
consolidation of federal and provincial partnerships for service delivery, expansion of the WeT program, and
refinement of complementary initiatives for helping the poor to exit poverty. The government's 2016 Social
Protection Policy framework advocated for a unified targeting system managed by the federal government,
technology-based payment delivery, and a shift from universal subsidies toward targeted programs. From
2012 through the time of program appraisal, the government had spent about US$950 million annually
through BISP, about half of the total social protection expenditure in the country, with planned increases over
subsequent years to accommodate an increase in benefit value and expansion of the WeT program. Impact
evaluations of BISP and WeT had found positive effects on malnutrition, primary school enrollment,
consumption expenditures, and women's empowerment, and no disincentive effect on labor.

The program's objectives were appropriately situated in the context of prior Bank support for Pakistan's
social protection agenda, and specifically for BISP. A 2009 US$150 million sectoral Development Policy
Credit was accompanied by a US$60 million Social Safety Net technical assistance project (P103160),
scaled up in 2012 with $150 million in additional financing to support expansion of the program and
introduction of disbursement-linked indicators (DLIs). That program closed in 2017, at the same time this one
was being approved, with essentially the same objectives but in the context of the BISP having matured, the
government having a well-defined vision for strengthening safety net systems, and the need for a continued

                                                                                                 Page 4 of 17
                              Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                              PK National Social Protection Program (P158643)



                       common programmatic framework to leverage and harmonize other development partners' support. Other
                       partners already engaged included the Asian Development Bank (ADB), United Kingdom Department for
                       International Development (DfID), and the United States Agency for International Development. The program
                       was designed to allow scalability if more resources became available from IDA or other partners interested in
                       use of a common framework, which turned out to be the case: DfID (now the Foreign Commonwealth and
                       Development Office) invested US$450 million through an approach that adopted the program's DLI results
                       framework, and ADB invested US$394.5 million in social support programs that aligned with the program's
                       institutional strengthening elements. The PforR instrument was appropriate, as the government was already
                       familiar with the DLI approach, and it encouraged the authorities to focus on the specific results necessary to
                       maintain BISP's momentum.


       Rating Relevance TBL




                       Rating
                       High


b. Relevance of DLIs                           New




DLI RELEVANCE TBL




                DLI 1
                DLI
                Percentage of BISP beneficiary households from Phase 2 (national rollout) districts that have updated Poverty
                Score Card information in NSER

                Rationale
                Results Area 1: This DLI supported the nationwide rollout of the updated NSER, with robust validation
                through monitoring the number of BISP beneficiaries with updated welfare information (based on the unique
                national identification number of the beneficiary). The DLI appropriately incentivized the government to
                update the welfare information of beneficiaries, and to validate the functionality of the BISP MIS targeting
                module by assessing new poverty score card (PSC) information entered into the module.



                Rating
                High

                DLI 2
                DLI
                Percentage of tehsil offices with adequate skills and performing redefined responsibilities in accordance with
                Operational Guidelines

                Rationale
                Results Area 1: This DLI supported capacity enhancement of tehsil offices for improved services to
                beneficiaries. It was designed to ensure that BISP had developed operational guidelines for tehsil offices



                                                                                                                         Page 5 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      PK National Social Protection Program (P158643)



outlining the redesigned roles and responsibilities of staff, and that staff were performing in accordance with
these responsibilities.



Rating
High

DLI 3
DLI
Management information system (MIS) action plan implemented

Rationale
Results Area 1: This DLI supported enhancement of the BISP MIS, including the NSER, for strengthening of
data integrity, security, and operational effectiveness. BISP was to hire an independent audit firm to conduct a
complete audit of the overall BISP information system and its modules, providing a time-bound action plan to
address any gaps found. The DLI was to incentivize implementation of this action plan.



Rating
High

DLI 4
DLI
Number of WeT districts where WeT-related functions are carried out by provincial and tehsil offices in
accordance with revised Operational Guidelines

Rationale
Results Area 2: This DLI was to ensure continuity of key WeT functions through their integration within the
responsibilities of designated BISP units and staff. It was to support the development and operationalization
of revised WeT operational guidelines, including key performance indicators and measurement arrangements
for field offices carrying out their designated responsibilities for the WeT program.



Rating
High

DLI 5
DLI
Number of children of WeT beneficiary families paid for at least two consecutive quarters based on compliance
with school attendance co-responsibilities

Rationale



                                                                                                    Page 6 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      PK National Social Protection Program (P158643)



Results Area 2: This DLI was to facilitate gradual expansion of the WeT program, supporting an increase in
the number of children enrolled in the program and regularly attending school. It was also to ensure that the
compliance data collection and benefits delivery mechanisms kept pace with the growing size of the program.



Rating
High

DLI 6
DLI
Results Area 2: Number of Union Councils in WeT districts that have at least one BISP Beneficiary Committee
(BBC) formed and respective mother leader trained on core WeT functions

Rationale
Results Area 2: This DLI focused on capacity enhancement of the BBCs that were to be created in all WeT
districts. The BBCs were to serve as an essential mobilization tool to encourage enrollment in the WeT
program and facilitate beneficiary engagement and trust building. The standard protocols for BBC creation
required that BBC members receive training on core functions, including their roles as beneficiary outreach
mechanisms, motivators of WeT compliance, and providers of feedback to BISP and its implementing
partners.



Rating
High

DLI 7
DLI
Percentage of Union Councils with information on aggregated characteristics of BISP beneficiaries available at
all administrative levels for provision of complementary services

Rationale
Results Area 2: This DLI supported the facilitation of BISP beneficiaries' access to complementary social and
productive services. Data from the updated NSER were to be used to develop aggregated beneficiary
characteristics at the Union Council level, to be made available through an on-line module and used by BISP
provincial and tehsil offices.



Rating
High

DLI 8
DLI
Number of BISP beneficiary households with at least one member enrolled in at least one complementary
service

                                                                                                 Page 7 of 17
                                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                    Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                  PK National Social Protection Program (P158643)




                  Rationale
                  Results Area 2: This DLI supported the systematic linkage of BISP beneficiary households with relevant
                  complementary social and productive services through, among other means, data sharing and formal
                  agreements with service providers. It was also to ensure that BISP developed and operationalized a
                  monitoring mechanism to track beneficiary uptake of services.



                  Rating
                  High


      OVERALL RELEVANCE DLI TBL




                  OVERALL RELEVANCE RATING
                  Rationale
                  The objectives were highly relevant to country context, Bank strategy, and government strategy, and were
                  appropriately framed in the context of prior Bank engagement in the sector. The DLIs effectively supported
                  both results areas, with the DLIs catalyzing critical actions and indicators along the results chain toward
                  achievement of the objectives (ICR, p. 12). For example, DLI 1 incentivized updating of poverty targeting
                  data, and then the related outcome indicator measured achievement of targeting performance by assessing
                  the percentage of beneficiary households from the bottom two expenditure quintiles. Five of the eight DLIs
                  were scalable (the disbursement of financing was proportional to progress toward achieving the respective
                  disbursement-linked result). Each DLI was well defined and measurable, with clear protocols and
                  methodology for monitoring and verification. Targets were ambitious but feasible for achievement within the
                  time frame of the program. The amounts allocated to each DLI were appropriate to incentivize associated
                  actions.



                  Rating
                  High



   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
EFFICACY_TBL




                       OBJECTIVE 1
                       Objective
                       Strengthen the national social safety net systems for the poor

                       Rationale
                       The theory of change for this objective held that updating the NSER and improvements in the MIS, payment
                       services, training, communications, and operating guidelines would lead to updated PSC information for
                       beneficiary households being updated in the NSER, an increase in the skills and redefinition of


                                                                                                                      Page 8 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   PK National Social Protection Program (P158643)



responsibilities for tehsil offices, and implementation of an MIS enhancement action plan. These outputs
would in turn lead to better targeting of BISP beneficiaries and increased effectiveness and efficiency of tehsil
offices, leading overall to strengthening of the national social safety net system for the poor. This logic, as
well as the logic underpinning the other two objectives, assumed that modification in the BISP's core functions
and operational mechanisms would strengthen its capacity to serve as the federal social safety net platform,
that broad ownership of the program across political actors and civil society would be sustained, and that
continued analytical work would support the preservation of the government's pro-poor expenditures (ICR, p.
8).



Outputs and Intermediate results

The percentage of BISP beneficiary households from Phase 2 (national rollout) districts with updated PSC
information in the NSER increased from no households in 2016 to 80 percent of households in 2021, meeting
the target of 80 percent of households (DLI 1). The functionality of the BISP MIS targeting module was also
validated using the new PSC.

The percentage of BISP beneficiary households recertified in accordance with the new eligibility cutoff score
increased from no households in 2016 to 60 percent of households in 2022, exceeding the target of 50
percent of households.

The percentage of tehsil offices with adequate skills and performing redefined responsibilities in accordance
with operational guidelines increased from no offices in 2016 to 60 percent of offices in 2022, exceeding the
target of 40 percent of offices (DLI 2). According to a 2020 impact evaluation, there were mixed results in
terms of quality services provided to beneficiaries at the tehsil level, but the ICR (p. 13) noted that a "positive
tendency is visible," with administrative and payment services comparing favorably to past methods. The
BISP also demonstrates better cost efficiency than international benchmarks, measured by the proportion of
total expenditure related to administration.

An MIS enhancement action plan was developed and implemented, meeting the target of an action being fully
implemented (DLI 3). Enhancements covered data integrity, security, and operational effectiveness.

Support was provided as planned under the program's TA component toward achievement of DLIs; support
for capacity building of staff (especially field staff); audits and fiduciary reviews; M&E activities; Error, Fraud,
and Corruption action plans; Environmental and Social Systems Assessment (ESSA) action plans; and
supporting consultancies. A comprehensive training needs assessment led to development of a training
module for field staff on the new operational guidelines, training via that module for 75 percent of tehsil office
staff, and implementation of 31 other training courses on technical, management, and organizational skills.



Outcomes

The percentage of BISP beneficiary households from the bottom two expenditure quintiles increased from 75
percent of households in 2016 to 85 percent of households in 2022, exceeding the target of 80 percent of
households.


                                                                                                       Page 9 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   PK National Social Protection Program (P158643)



The number of WeT districts with tehsil offices using integrated MIS to handle case management of basic
income support and WeT programs increased from no districts in 2016 to 160 districts in 2022, exceeding the
target of 50 districts.



In addition to the outcome targets having been overachieved, the ICR (p. 14) offers additional evidence
demonstrating high achievement of this objective. At the time of heavy monsoon rains that caused enormous
human and material losses in Pakistan between June and September 2022, the program enabled the
government to implement successfully a cash transfer through the BISP of approximately US$112 for 2.7
million affected families.



Rating
High


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Enhance the poor's human capital

Rationale
The theory of change for this objective held that consolidating and expanding WeT, as well as implementing
activities that would increase access to complementary social and productive services, would lead to a
revision of operational guidelines for WeT-related functions and an increase in the number of beneficiary
families complying with school attendance co-responsibilities. These outputs in turn would lead to an increase
in the number of children of WeT beneficiary families attending school and receiving benefits, which would
enhance the human capital of the poor, in this case defined as sustained children's attending of primary
school.



Outputs and Intermediate results

The number of beneficiary families enrolled in WeT increased from 530,000 families in 2016 to 3.14 million
families in 2022, exceeding the target of 1.1 million families.

The number of WeT districts where WeT-related functions are carried out by provincial and tehsil offices in
accordance with revised operational guidelines increased from no districts in 2016 to 160 districts in 2022,
exceeding the target of 50 districts (DLI 4).



Outcomes




                                                                                                 Page 10 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   PK National Social Protection Program (P158643)



The number of children of WeT beneficiary families paid for at least two consecutive quarters based on
compliance with primary school attendance co-responsibilities increased from 0.5 million children in 2016 to
1.5 million children in 2022, meeting the target of 1.5 million children (DLI 5).



In addition to the outcome target having been fully achieved, the ICR (p. 14) offers additional evidence
demonstrating high achievement of this objective. Since it was launched, WeT has expanded from five
districts in 2012 to all districts in the country in July 2020, and has begun to cover not only primary but
secondary and higher secondary education in all districts. According to the 2020 impact evaluation, more than
6.75 million children have benefited, increasing boys' and girls' school enrollment by 13 percent and 15
percent, respectively. School enrollment rates among BISP families who received the CCT were 21
percentage points higher than among BISP families who did not receive the CCT, and grade repetition was
reduced by 11 percentage points for children benefiting from CCTs.



Rating
High


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
Enhance the poor's access to complementary services

Rationale
The theory of change for this objective held that consolidating and expanding WeT, as well as implementing
activities that would increase access to complementary social and productive services, would lead to the
formation and effective use of BBCs, and improved information on aggregated characteristics of BISP
beneficiaries to support access to and enrollment in complementary services. These outputs in turn would
lead to an increase in the number of BISP beneficiaries enrolling in complementary services, and with
improved BISP targeting, thereby improving access of the poor to these services.



Outputs and Intermediate results

BISP signed 24 memoranda of understanding (MOUs) with public and private sector entities for the provision
of complementary services for specific vulnerable groups. These MOUs allowed BISP to link beneficiaries to
relevant services after profiling and identifying their needs. Services were wide-ranging, including those
supporting children with disabilities, family planning, people with physical and intellectual disabilities, access
stationary care facilities for the poor, and others.

The number of Union Councils in WeT districts that have at least one BBC formed and respective mother
leader trained on core WeT functions increased from 1,600 Union Councils in 2016 to 2,500 Union Councils
in 2022, meeting the target of 2,500 Union Councils (DLI 6).



                                                                                                    Page 11 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PK National Social Protection Program (P158643)



  The percentage of Union Councils with information on aggregated characteristics of BISP beneficiaries
  available at all administrative levels for provision of complementary services increased from no Union
  Councils in 2016 to 60 percent of Union Councils in 2022, meeting the target of 60 percent of Union Councils
  (DLI 7).



  Outcomes

  The number of BISP beneficiary households with at least one member enrolled in at least one complementary
  service increased from 34,736 households in 2016 to 655,720 households in 2022, exceeding the target of
  400,000 households (DLI 8).




  Rating
  High




 OVERALL EFFICACY
 Rationale
 Most DLis targets, other output or intermediate outcome targets, and outcome targets were exceeded, some
 by a significant margin. The program catalyzed continued scaling up of government social safety net
 programs through its support for development of operational guidelines for clarity and harmonization, strong
 M&E platforms, and improvements in efficiency of administration. Based on high achievement of all three
 objectives, overall efficacy is rated High.



 Rating
 High


5. Outcome

The program's objectives were relevant, the DLIs were highly relevant, and all three objectives were highly
achieved. The PforR's incentives for systems development contributed to strengthening of systems and
capacity, improvements in transparency and accountability, and expanded outreach, ultimately leading to
increased access for the poor to a range of social and productive services and enhanced human capital
development in the form of improved access to primary education. The program instrument -- PforR with an IPF
TA component -- proved effective in reaching and exceeding planned outcomes. The ICR's evidence and
analysis point to essentially no shortcomings in the program's preparation, implementation, or achievement,
producing an Outcome rating of Highly Satisfactory.


                                                                                                 Page 12 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PK National Social Protection Program (P158643)




    Outcome Rating
    Highly Satisfactory


6. Risk to Development Outcome

The longevity and positive track record of collaboration between the government and the Bank in social
protection point to minimal risks to development outcomes. Government and stakeholder ownership and
commitment are high and robust. Government financing continues to support rigorous implementation of
systems and processes supported under the program. A follow-on US$600 million Bank-financed PforR
(Crisis-Resilient Social Protection, FY21-FY25), building on the achievements of this program, was approved
in March 2021. Institutional strengthening, likely to be sustained, was significant. The ICR (p. 17) cited a
study confirming that the program's TA helped modernize implementation systems and frameworks in a way
that improved access, payments, efficiency, transparency, resolution of grievances, and implementation
speed.




7. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  With the exception of the vague formulation of the human capital objective, the program's objectives,
  results chain, outcome indicators, and DLIs were clearly stated and underpinned by analytic work. The
  ICR (pp. 23-24) highlights the overall importance of the Bank's analytic work and technical support,
  contributing to program design that is seen as "a gold standard in the region." Program design, combining
  PforR and TA components, was relatively simple and appropriate to support BISP as a platform for
  targeted service delivery to the poor. The government was familiar with the results-based approach, and
  the TA supported strategic, complementary investments in technical, fiduciary, and M&E capacity.
  Program design learned lessons from the Bank's previous experience in the sector, including the
  importance of common platforms for service delivery to support better coordination, enhanced coverage,
  and reduced fragmentation; the program therefore focused on an updated NSER as its foundation. The
  required PforR assessments were undertaken (technical, fiduciary, and environmental and social), a
  grievance redress mechanism was in place, and the program was in an advanced stage of readiness for
  implementation. Risk assessment at appraisal pointed to substantial political risk due to the volatility of
  Pakistan's political environment, particularly with elections scheduled for 2018; mitigation measures
  highlighted broad ownership of the program across political actors and civil society, calling for a
  continued consultative process with stakeholders to maintain wide ownership of reforms and consistent
  sharing of results to sustain the program's credibility. The risk assessment also highlighted substantial
  macroeconomic risk stemming from large fiscal deficits and continued vulnerability to external shocks,
  mitigated through continued high-level dialogue on macro, tax collection, and subsidy reforms under a
  coordinated response with the International Monetary Fund and other development partners. Federal and




                                                                                                  Page 13 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PK National Social Protection Program (P158643)



  provincial stakeholders were engaged at all levels to ensure clear definition of institutional roles during
  implementation.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Highly Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Supervision was hands-on and proactive throughout the program's lifetime. The field-based task team
 facilitated continued and sustained dialogue, which the ICR (p. 23) cited as "key to resolving bottlenecks."
 Task team leadership was stable, with smooth transitions between task team leaders. Implementation
 Status and Results Reports were candid and of high quality. Adjustments during the COVID-19 pandemic
 were quick and effective, including the restructuring to extend the program's closing date. Technical
 assistance facilitated quick resolution of implementation challenges that arose, including delays in
 disbursements and poor communication to beneficiaries regarding the release of payments, data collection
 errors (addressed through a shift to GIS-based digital data collection), the impacts of the COVID-19
 pandemic, and erosion of the real value of cash transfers over time due to high rates of inflation. Although
 there is no evidence that the size of the transfers influenced program outcomes, the Bank supported the
 government in analyzing these trends and developing an indexation mechanism that became operational in
 July of 2021.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Highly Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Highly Satisfactory


8. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 For the most part, the program's objectives and indicators were clearly stated, although the human capital
 objective, as noted earlier, was vague. Monitoring indicators and DLIs had baselines, annual targets, and
 data sources. BISP was responsible for monitoring results and activities under the program. Its M&E
 systems included a dedicated M&E Unit under its Research, Evaluation, and MIS Wing. Evidence on
 achievement of DLIs was to be triangulated from multiple sources, including BISP MIS modules, by an
 independent verification agency (IVA). The PAD (pp. 28-29) included a comprehensive DLI Verification
 Protocol Table; the protocols were technically sound and credible but not difficult to implement in practice.
 External sources of verification were to include operational reviews (spot checks and process evaluations)
 and the validation reports of the payment service provider. Tehsil offices were to be integrated into
 information flows, contributing to overall M&E design by ensuring data availability and collection at all levels
 of implementation. According to the PAD (p. 12), the program was to invest substantial resources to directly
 engage beneficiaries and use their feedback to strengthen program design and implementation as

                                                                                                     Page 14 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PK National Social Protection Program (P158643)



 necessary. In addition to usual Bank supervision, the program was to conduct a regular biannual
 implementation review jointly with BISP management, including projections for achievement of DLI targets.



b. M&E Implementation
  M&E was implemented as planned, including consistent work by BISP to strengthen data quality and the
  security and operational soundness of the MIS. Beneficiary feedback contributed to strengthened M&E
  implementation, including through the grievance redress process. The BISP M&E Unit was restructured
  as the Evidence, M&E, and Risk Management Department to encompass the strengthened role of field
  offices. This department regularly commissioned and undertook assessment of performance, process,
  and compliance monitoring; operations reviews; tracer studies; beneficiary feedback surveys; risk
  management and assurance studies; and third-party impact evaluations. The main planned evaluation
  studies, as well as additional analytic work, were conducted.



c. M&E Utilization
  Data on program indicators were regularly collected, reported, and used for decision-making,
  adjustments, and planning (ICR, p. 21). M&E findings were widely shared and communicated to various
  stakeholders. Work plans at all levels were reviewed every six months, covering targets that revolved
  around major departmental activities and periodic monitoring reports. Progress on DLIs and results
  indicators was used to test the links in the results chain and provide input for decision makers to
  determine appropriate national government actions.



  M&E Quality Rating
  High

9. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The program was classified as environmental assessment category C. An ESSA was conducted at
   appraisal, concluding that the program posed no environmental risks and that it would lead to positive social
   benefits for poor households, especially women (PAD, p. 16 and Annex 5). BISP submitted regular quarterly
   progress reports to the Bank under the ESSA framework throughout the program implementation period. A
   program grievance redress mechanism was in place to receive and act on complaints submitted by
   individuals or communities who believed that they were adversely affected as a result of the program.
   Focused primarily on issues related to targeting of the transfers, the mechanism and associated case
   management system were available at all tehsil offices. The MIS recorded, tracked, and reviewed
   grievances for resolution. Over three million complaints were received and processed.




                                                                                                  Page 15 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PK National Social Protection Program (P158643)



b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Overall fiduciary (procurement and financial management) risk was assessed at appraisal as moderate
   (PAD, p. 44). BISP's Procurement Unit was responsible for all procurement activities under the program
   using Federal Public Procurement Rules. Procurement performance was rated Satisfactory throughout
   implementation. All public procurement-related information was shared on the BISP website to ensure
   transparency and accountability. BISP's Finance and Accounts Unit supported all financial matters.
   Financial management performance was rated Satisfactory throughout implementation. The program's TA
   component included support to strengthen BISP's fiduciary capacity, including annual fiduciary
   performance reviews. Periodic financial reports were shared regularly with the Bank in a timely manner. An
   independent BISP Audit Unit, reporting directly to the BISP Board, submitted audit reports annually on the
   effectiveness of risk management, internal controls, and governance processes. The ICR did not state
   whether audits were clean and on time.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None reported.



d. Other
   ---

10. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Highly Satisfactory    Highly Satisfactory
                                                                                The ICR does not point to
Bank Performance                Satisfactory           Highly Satisfactory      shortcomings in Quality at Entry
                                                                                or Supervision.
                                                                                The ICR does not point to
Quality of M&E                  Substantial            High                     shortcomings in M&E design,
                                                                                implementation, or utilization.
Quality of ICR                  ---                    High


11. Lessons

The ICR (pp. 24-25) cited a range of lessons and recommendations, some of which are restated
here:

Developing and sustaining an effective social safety net can contribute to timely and
effective shock response. In this case, the digital capabilities and safety net systems that were




                                                                                                    Page 16 of 17
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       PK National Social Protection Program (P158643)



developed as part of the BISP agenda were efficiently and effectively deployed during the COVID-19
crisis and 2022 floods.

Ownership and leadership at both the central and local levels of a comprehensive social
safety nets program are critical to success. In this case, creation of beneficiary community
committee groups facilitated engagement with key local stakeholders.

Combining the Program for Results instrument with technical assistance can promote
smooth and timely implementation. In this case, the well-defined programmatic framework
ensured consistent focus on results, promoted in-depth sectoral dialogue, built capacity when and
where it was most needed, and both catalyzed and harmonized additional sources of funding.

Transparency can promote dialogue and identify emerging issues. In this case, making
program administrative data available on an external website allowed for full transparency and the
use of data for studies by external groups.




12. Assessment Recommended?

  No

13. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR was well written, concise, and candid. It adhered to established guidelines. Its quality of data and
analysis were excellent. The ICR effectively reconstructed the program's theory of change based on the results
areas, activities, outputs, and outcomes as stated in the PAD. It contained a clear, focused analysis of the
program's results chain, including the incentives created by the DLIs to move along the results chain for each
objective. It situated the program effectively within the context of prior and ongoing Bank investments in the
sector, as well as the contributions of other development partners. It highlighted the benefits of the program's
design, combining the PforR instrument with technical assistance. Its lessons were insightful and well crafted.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       High




                                                                                                   Page 17 of 17
