     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Landscape Approach to Forest Rest/Conser (P131464)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0023092

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P131464                                    Landscape Approach to Forest Rest/Conser

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Rwanda                                     Environment, Natural Resources & the Blue Economy


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-17782,TF-17783                          31-Dec-2019                                           9,532,000.00

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 27-Aug-2014                                30-Sep-2021

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            9,532,000.00                                     9,532,000.00

 Revised Commitment                             9,532,000.00                                     9,532,000.00

 Actual                                         9,532,000.00                                     9,532,000.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Katharina Ferl             Vibecke Dixon                 Christopher David Nelson       IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Project Appraisal Document (PAD) (p. viii) and the Financing Agreement of October 1, 2014
   (p. 7) the objective of the project was “to demonstrate landscape management for enhanced environmental
   services and climate resilience in one priority landscape”.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?

                                                                                                  Page 1 of 13
        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
        Landscape Approach to Forest Rest/Conser (P131464)



  ---

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   ---

d. Components
   The project included two components:

   Component 1: Forest-friendly and climate-resilient restoration of Gishwati-Mukura landscape
   (appraisal estimate US$8.23 million, actual USD$8.22 million): This component was to finance four sub-
   components:

   Sub-Component 1a: Upgrading and sustainable management of Gishwati and Mukura Forest Reserves:
   This sub-component was to finance the planned upgrading of the remnant Gishwati natural forest area (the
   remaining natural forest area within the former Gishwati Forest Reserve) and the Mukura Forest Reserve to
   a single protected area. Activities were to be financed in the following areas: i) Physical demarcation of the
   reserves: consultation meetings and costs of physical demarcation for completion of this process; ii)
   Restoration of degraded natural habitats: in both reserves, assisted regeneration of degraded portions will
   be carried out involving planting of native species, and where necessary removal of exotics; iii)
   Development (and updating) of management plans for both reserves; iv) Training and equipping of local
   eco-guards; v) Installation of basic infrastructure such as the construction of visitor centers, a park
   headquarters, viewing platforms, signed nature trails, and patrol posts; and vi) Environmental education for
   local communities and environmental clubs in schools was to be continued in the area surrounding the
   remnant Gishwati natural forest and extended to Mukura to explain the need for biodiversity protection and
   the specific responsibilities of local residents.

   Sub-component 1b: Forest restoration and land husbandry in the Gishwati-Mukura landscape: This sub-
   component was to finance: i) Sustainable land management with corridor communities; ii) Silvo-pastoralism
   in Gishwati rangelands; iii) Agroforestry and forest restoration support to the Ministry of Agriculture and 8
   Animal Resources (MINAGRI) and the Forests Department; and iv) Joint land use planning for the Gishwati
   landscape.

   Sub-component 1c: Sustainable and resilient livelihoods: This sub-component was to support demand-
   driven income-generating activities in order to increase: i) the breadth of the economic options and security
   of the livelihoods base of the population within the Gishwati-Mukura landscape, thereby improving climate
   resilience; and ii) the sustainability of land and forest management investments within the landscape.

   Sub-component 1d: Flood forecasting and preparedness: This sub-component was to finance the
   improvement of technical capacity of flood forecasting institutions and complementing identified important
   milestones required to have a fully integrated early warning system (EWS).

   Component 2: Research, monitoring and management (appraisal estimate US$1.30, actual US$1.31):
   This component included two sub-components:

   Sub-Component 2a: Applied research and impact monitoring: This sub-component was to support two key
   activities: i) impact monitoring: a) establishing a national modeling platform to map indicators of landscape
   health, and identify landscape management priorities, based on hotspots of degradation, and the
   feasibility and benefits of restoring lost environmental and economic functions; and b) comparative field-

                                                                                                    Page 2 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Landscape Approach to Forest Rest/Conser (P131464)



   based monitoring of a range of environmental and associated economic functions, to demonstrate the
   effectiveness of land rehabilitation techniques; and ii) conducting applied research: the establishment of
   partnerships with key research and knowledge institutions to improve management knowledge of the
   Gishwati-Mukura landscape, and to improve restoration techniques, particularly in relation to scope for
   incorporation of native species.

   Sub-component 2b: Project Management: This sub-component was to finance routine administrative
   overheads, such as coordination between project implementing partners, work-planning, procurement and
   contract management, accounting and audit costs, field supervision, maintaining an internal project M&E
   system, and reporting.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project Cost: The project was estimated to cost US$9.53 million which was also the actual cost.

   Financing: The project was financed by two Trust Funds (TFs): TF-17783 (Global Environment Facility) in
   the amount of US$5.48 million and TF-17782 (Least Developed Countries Fund) in the amount of US$4.04
   million. Both TFs fully disbursed.

   Borrower Contribution: The Borrower was not to make any financial contributions.

   Dates: The project was restructured twice:

         On August 21, 2019, the project was restructured to extend the closing by 12 months from
          December 31, 2019 to December 31, 2020 to allow for finalizing the development of a Flood Early
          Warning System (FEWS), setting up community livelihood projects and ecosystem restoration
          activities. Delays in the FEWS development were caused by technical problems in obtaining
          topographic survey data, which subsequently delayed the development of flood models (hydrological
          and hydraulic) and the necessary flood hazard maps.
         On November 13, 2020, the project was restructured to extend the closing date by nine months from
          December 3, 2020 to September 31, 2021 to allow for the completion of ecosystem restoration
          activities, testing of the FEWS, completion of community livelihood projects, and of the trail that
          connects Gishwati with Mukura. These activities had been delayed due to workforce reduction as a
          result of the COVID-19 pandemic.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
According to the PAD (p. 1), Rwanda, a country of 11 million inhabitants, was under highest demographic
pressure of all the sub-Saharan countries due to a population growth rate of 2.6 percent per annum and
only 52 percent of its land being arable. Despite strong economic growth (7.2 percent between 2008 and
2013) during the decade before project appraisal, Rwanda remained one of Africa’s poorest countries.
Much of Rwanda’s economy depended directly upon land, water and biodiversity resources. Steep terrain


                                                                                                    Page 3 of 13
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Landscape Approach to Forest Rest/Conser (P131464)



               and the highest population density in sub-Saharan Africa made sustainable landscape management strict
               necessities for Rwanda’s natural-resource dependent sectors. In 2012, two years before project appraisal,
               the agricultural sector accounted for about 32.7 percent of the country’s Gross Domestic Product (GDP)
               and 80 percent of employment. It was also the main source of income for 87 percent of the population.
               Also, Rwanda experienced low agricultural productivity, with yields of several key crops lagging behind
               other sub-Saharan African countries. At the time of project appraisal, about 28.3 percent of the country
               were covered by forests providing wood fuel, food, construction materials and medicinal herbs to local
               communities. Forests also supported a series of economic activities in the agriculture, tourism and energy
               industries. They were primarily contained within protected areas such as the Gishwati and Mukura Forest
               Reserves.

               Rwanda had become highly vulnerable to the impacts of climate change. Heavy rainfall and floods as well
               as droughts and soil erosion had significant consequences on the environment, society, food security and
               the overall economy. Especially, the livelihoods of the poor and vulnerable and the country’s economic
               growth and development were threatened.

               The government developed a strategy, Vision 2020, to reverse deforestation to achieve 30 percent forest
               cover by 2020. Vision 2050 is the government’s most recent strategy, which aims to achieve economic
               growth, prosperity, and high living standards in accordance with a sustainable use and management of
               natural resources. The strategy also envisions to build resilience against climate change. The objective of
               the project supported the government’s strategies in place at project appraisal and at closing. According to
               the PAD (p. 2) Rwanda’s National Adaptation Plan of Action (NAPA, 2006) identified the Northern and
               Western provinces in Rwanda as priority areas due to risks of floods and landslides. Therefore, the project
               focused on the Gishwati-Mukura landscape.

               The objective of the project was in line with the Bank’s most recent Country Partnership Framework (CPF)
               (FY21-26) which identifies the reduction in forest cover driven by demand for agricultural land and biomass
               as well as the destruction of critical watersheds and problems related to rural poverty compounded by
               weather shocks as key challenges for Rwanda. The CPF aims to develop sustainable and stable landscape
               investments. Furthermore, the objective of the project also supported the 2019 Systematic Country
               Diagnostic which identified the need to build resilience through investing in stable and sustainable
               landscapes and effective environmental management. The objective was also in line with the Bank’s
               Climate Change Action Plan 2021-2025 (WBGCCAP) which aims to support high-quality forecasts, Early
               Warning Systems (EWSs), and climate information services for better preparation, planning and
               management of climate related events.

               Taking everything together, the relevance of the objective is rated High.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                                                                                                                         Page 4 of 13
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Landscape Approach to Forest Rest/Conser (P131464)




OBJECTIVE 1
Objective
To demonstrate landscape management for enhanced environmental services and climate resilience in one
priority landscape

Rationale
Theory of change: The project’s theory of change envisioned that project activities such as upgrading and
sustainably managing the Gishwati and Mukura Forest reserves, forest restoration and land husbandry in the
Gishwati-Mukira landscape, and capacity building for farmers to diversify livelihoods were to result in outputs
such as restored and reforested natural habitats management plans and joint land-use plans developed,
basic park infrastructure in place, and UNESCO biosphere reserve proposal developed in addition to the
establishment of a forest corridor and land-users adopting sustainable lang management (SLM) techniques
including silvo-pastoralism and agro-forestry. These outputs were expected to result in medium term
outcomes such as functional landscape management for enhanced environmental services and climate
resilience demonstrated in this priority landscape. This was to be demonstrated by the forest-friendly and
climate-resilient restoration of the Gishwati-Mukara landscape, greater areas under enhanced biodiversity
protection and greater areas considered biodiversity-friendly. This in turn would lead to higher level objectives
such as strengthened integrated multisectoral forest and land restoration and conservation, greater
participation by communities in the management of nature resources, improved and diversified livelihoods,
reduced pressure on the natural resources and biodiversity and reduced vulnerability of communities to
climate change and extreme weather events. The ToC is clear and convincing.

Furthermore, the project’s theory of change envisioned that project activities such as establishing an early
warning system (ESW) as a pilot through small/medium size watershed, support flood forecasting and
preparedness as well as expanding and increasing economic options and security of the livelihoods base of
the population within the Gishwati-Mukura landscape and strengthening their climate resilience were to result
in outputs such as flood risk maps and hydrological models of one priority watershed being developed and
livelihood projects generating profits. These outputs were to result in the outcome of demonstrated landscape
management for enhanced climate resilience in one priority landscape.

Outputs:

Project’s achievements that included targets:

      2,675.3 hectares of area were restored or re/afforested, exceeding the target of 2,500 hectares.
      18,464 land users adopted sustainable land management practices as a result of the project,
       exceeding the target of 10,000 land users.
      The project also produced 23 knowledge products on landscape management which were
       disseminated to a target audience, exceeding the target of 12 knowledge products.

In addition to the achievements stated above, the ICR reported on the following achievements that did
not have any targets:

      Three park management plans were developed including: i) a general park management plan; ii) a
       tourism development master plan; and iii) a biodiversity plan.


                                                                                                   Page 5 of 13
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  Landscape Approach to Forest Rest/Conser (P131464)




    A proposal for the UNESCO Biosphere reserve status for Gishwati-Mukura was submitted, achieving
       the target. The park received the status in October 2020, giving the Gishwati-Mukuru landscape
       international recognition and opening up new opportunities for tourism, funding and investments.
      A park headquarters and basecamps as well as two patrol posts were established.
      25 park rangers and guides were recruited and trained.
      A National Early Warning Platform (NEWP) and a Flood Early Warning System (FEWS) were
       developed and staff from stakeholder institutions were trained in using the NEWP. The NEWP serves
       for data sharing, visualization, and triggers warnings which are critical for protecting the communities
       in the flood prone Sebeya catchment.
      14 hydrometeorological stations (four automatic and 10 hydrometeorology stations) were installed to
       support the NEWP.
      Lightening protection systems have been installed on 13 public institutions in the project are to
       reinforce safety against disasters.
      A National Early Warning Platform (NEWP) and a Flood Early Warning System (FEWS) were
       developed and staff from stakeholder institutions were trained in using the NEWP. The NEWP serves
       for data sharing, visualization, and triggers warnings which are critical for protecting the communities
       in the flood prone Sebeya catchment.
      14 hydrometeorological stations (four automatic and 10 hydrometeorology stations) were installed to
       support the NEWP.
      Lightening protection systems have been installed on 13 public institutions in the project are to
       reinforce safety against disasters.
      The project financed a Geographical Information System (GIS) and remote sensing diagnostic
       baseline study that was complimented by a baseline video documentary to support knowledge sharing
       and dissemination, achieving the target of an impact monitoring study on land rehabilitation
       techniques being produced.
      81 sub-projects generated profits from new or enhanced livelihoods, exceeding the target of 70 sub-
       projects. A detailed plan to incentivize communities to adopt forest-friendly activities supported the
       identification of options and delivery of alternative economic activities to over 2,849 households.

Outcomes:

    3,428 hectares of area were brought under enhanced biodiversity protection, achieving the target of
       3,428 hectares.
    For 3,215 hectares of land sustainable land management practices were adopted as a result of the
       project, exceeding the target of 3,000 hectares.
    1,314 hectares of new areas outside the protected areas were managed as biodiversity friendly,
     exceeding the target of 1,200 hectares.
    The Management Effectiveness Tracking Tool (METT), an international assessment framework used
     to measure the management of protected areas. Areas covered by the framework include legal status,
     existence of management plans as well as human and financial resources. A baseline assessment
     was conducted at the beginning of the project resulting in a METT score of 20. A final
     assessment provided a METT score of 89, exceeding the target of 50. This indicates that the
     management of the Gishwati-Mukuru National Park was good.
    90 percent of households in the project area had access to advanced warning of individual major
     rainfall or flood events, achieving the target of 90 percent.


                                                                                                 Page 6 of 13
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Landscape Approach to Forest Rest/Conser (P131464)




                                    Overall, the project benefitted 40,482 beneficiaries, exceeding the target of 12,000. 53 percent of
                                     these beneficiaries were female, exceeding the target of 50 percent.

                                     All project output- and outcome targets were exceeded. As a result, the efficacy rating is High.



                            Rating
                            High


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The project was able to exceed all its output and outcome targets and was able to improve biodiversity
                            protection through establishing a functioning management system as well as providing households with
                            access to advanced warning of individual major rainfall or flood events. The achievement of the objective is
                            rated High.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            High



   5. Efficiency
   Economic efficiency:

   The PAD (p. 19) conducted a cost-benefit analysis. The following benefits were identified: i) increased tourism
   revenues from the upgrading of the Gishwati and Mukura Forest Reserves to national park status; ii) increase
   in agricultural productivity; iii) reduced soil erosion; iv) diversified and improved livelihoods; v) reduced
   vulnerability to flooding; and vi) conservation of biodiversity resources and carbon sequestration. Applying a
   discount rate of 7 percent, the analysis calculated an Economic Rate of Return (ERR) of 35 percent (over a 20-
   year period) and a Net Present Value of US$25.47 million.

   The ICR (p. 24) conducted an analysis based on the same benefits as stated above. The analysis defined
   ecosystem values and grouped them by type of service (cultural, supporting, regulating, and provisioning).
   Cultural services were the nonmaterial benefits people obtain from ecosystems including spiritual and aesthetic
   values, indigenous practice. Supporting services included genetic diversity, pollination, and maintenance of soil
   fertility. Regulating services were benefits obtained from the regulation of ecosystem processes such as air
   quality, climate mitigation and waste treatment. Provisioning services were products obtained from ecosystems
   such as food, water and raw materials.



                                                                                                                                Page 7 of 13
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Landscape Approach to Forest Rest/Conser (P131464)



The analysis estimated the flow of ecosystem services using value/benefit transfer approach. In this approach
values from previous studies were used to estimate the economic value of ecosystem services. These values
were applied for a project period of seven years. The analysis focused on the newly established national park
and surrounding areas that were subject to investments in sustainable land management practices. Also
applying a discount rate of 7 percent, the analysis calculated a Net Present Value (NPV) of US$32.7 million
indicating that the project was a worthwhile investment.

Operational efficiency:

The project was financed by a GEF grant (US$5.49 million) and a Least Developed Countries Fund (US$4.05
million) that were completely disbursed. The project’s implementation period was extended twice to a total of 21
months to accommodate delays in the development of flood models and the necessary flood hazard maps as
well as due to a COVID-19 related workforce reduction.

Taking everything together, the project’s efficiency is rated Substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?              Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      0
 Appraisal                                                    0
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      0
 ICR Estimate                                                 0
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of the objective was High given its alignment with the Bank’s most recent CPF (FY21-26) which aims
to develop sustainable and stable landscape investments. Efficacy was High, and Efficiency was Substantial.
Taking everything together, the project’s outcome rating is Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome


                                                                                                      Page 8 of 13
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Landscape Approach to Forest Rest/Conser (P131464)



Financial risk: According to the ICR (p. 19) with the closing of the project the government will be
responsible for the operation and maintenance (O&M) of the 14 hydrometeorological stations. However, due
to the COVID-19 pandemic resources and investment priorities have been directed away from landscape
management, environment, and climate change. Therefore, it is likely that there will be insufficient funding for
O&M of the hydrometeorological stations as well as any other project investments such as lightening
protection systems installed, and bridges being built.

Technical risk: According to the ICR (p. 25) the project was able to build capacity in land use and land
degradation, sustainable forest and land management, and climate adaptation measures in local-level and
central-level institutions. Furthermore, the project was able to build capacity rangeland management, park
management, landscape restoration, and business development. Finally, government staff’s capacity was
also increased in regard to safeguards, procurement, and financial management. The technical risk is
therefore considered to be low.

Government risk: There is little risk to development outcomes related to government commitment since.
according to the ICR (p. 28), the government was committed to the achievement of the objective throughout
project implementation as demonstrated through its engagement and close monitoring of the project.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  According to the PAD (p. 13) the project was built on lessons learned from previous Bank projects in this
  area. The lessons included: i) integrating forest, pasture and agriculture management with strong
  involvement of local communities can result in whole landscapes recovering with dramatic results; ii) the
  importance of having clearly defined criteria to guide the selection of sites targeted for silvo-pastoralism
  on pasture lands; and iii) Single Projects Implementation Units (SPIUs) being effective mechanisms for
  implementation of donor projects in a number of government agencies in Rwanda.

  The PAD (p. 18) identified the following risk factors as Substantial including stakeholder, capacity, and
  design, since the main risks were associated with the intrinsic complexity of a landscape management
  approach involving elements of planning and implementation touching on biodiversity conservation,
  forestry, agriculture, rural livelihoods and disaster management. According to the ICR (p. 27) mitigation
  measures included the creation of a multi stakeholder steering committee which reinforced national
  ownership and improved collaboration with the Bank’s team. The mitigation measures were adequate
  and the identified risks did not materialize.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision


                                                                                                     Page 9 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Landscape Approach to Forest Rest/Conser (P131464)



 According to the ICR (p. 33) the project benefitted from having had only one Task Team Leader (TTL)
 throughout implementation. Also, the Bank team conducted regular supervision missions on a bi-annual
 basis, and a local consultant regularly attended Steering Committee meetings to ensure the completion of
 project activities and identify implementation bottlenecks and address them promptly.

 The project did not encounter any FM related issues. The ICR did not state how the Bank team addressed
 procurement related issues.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The selected indicators were adequate to capture the contribution of the project outputs. Also, the selected
 indicators were sufficiently specific, and included targets. However, the project produced several
 achievements on the output level that were not captured in the Results Framework and thus no targets had
 been set. The project would have benefitted from reflecting these achievements in the Results Framework.

 According to the PAD (p. 16) the project was to use simple, spreadsheet-based monitoring system to guide
 project implementation. The Management Information System (MIS) was to be based on the project results
 framework and M&E plan. An M&E officer was to be recruited within the Single Project Implementation Unit
 (SPIU) to support the coordination of project monitoring activities.



b. M&E Implementation
  According to the ICR (p. 30) implementation progress was monitored on a continuous basis and reported
  in Implementation Status and Results Reports (ISRs). The Results Framework remained in place
  throughout implementation and did not require any modification.



c. M&E Utilization
  According to the ICR (p. 30) the project’s M&E was used to inform decision making and allow to
  implement corrective measures. The ICR did not specify for which decisions the M&E data was used.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

                                                                                                  Page 10 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Landscape Approach to Forest Rest/Conser (P131464)




10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as category B and triggered the Bank’s safeguard policies OP/BP 4.01
   (Environmental Assessment), OP/BP 4.04 (Natural Habitats), OP/BP 4.09 (Pest Management), OP/BP 4.36
   (Forests), OP/BP 4.12 (Involuntary Resettlement), OP/BP 4.11 (Physical Cultural Resources), and Projects
   on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50). According to the ICR (p. 31) the project prepared an
   Environmental and Social Impact Assessment, Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF),
   Environmental and Social Management Plan, Operational Risk Assessment Framework, Resettlement
   Action Plan, Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF), and Process Framework.

   According to the ICR (p. 31) the ESMF was prepared and used for the implementation and monitoring of
   mitigation measures for negative environmental and social impacts of the project. Also, the project used the
   Integrated Pest Management Plan of the Lake Victoria Environmental Management Project Phase 2
   (LVEMP II) which covered most of the pest problems and was used to train the local population to use non-
   toxic pesticides.

   The ICR (p. 29) stated that the project did not have a safeguard specialist in place from March 2020 to
   March 2021 resulting in the project not being in compliance with the safeguard policies until a safeguard
   specialist was appointed producing required safeguard reports. At closure, the project’s compliance with all
   the safeguard policies stated above was rated Satisfactory.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management:

   According to the ICR (p. 32) the project complied with the Bank’s Financial Management (FM) covenants
   and had adequate FM arrangements in place and recorded all transactions and balances
   adequately, supported the preparation of regular and reliable financial statements and maintained
   adequate auditing statements throughout implementation. At closure, the project’s FM rating was
   Satisfactory.

   Procurement:

   According to the ICR (p. 32) the Rwanda Environment Management Authority (REMA) developed a simple
   procurement plan that was accepted by the Bank. Throughout implementation, the procurement plan was
   updated to reflect improvements made in strengthening institutional capacity and implementation needs.
   The project hired two procurement officers with experience in Bank procurement procedures who
   supported the head of procurement of REMA- Single Project implementation Unit (SPIU). The ICR (p. 32)
   stated that all tenders were executed according to plan and in compliance with the Bank’s procurement
   guidelines. According to the ICR (p. 29) when the project faced issues of several tenders not being
   properly registered in the system, the Bank team provided procurement training to government staff to
   enter tenders in the Bank’s Systematic Tracking of Exchanges in Procurement (STEP) system.


                                                                                                  Page 11 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Landscape Approach to Forest Rest/Conser (P131464)



   At project closing, the project’s procurement rating was Moderately Satisfactory.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   NA



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                   IEG
                                                                                Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Satisfactory         Satisfactory

Bank Performance                Satisfactory         Satisfactory
                                                                                The project’s Results
                                                                                Framework would have
Quality of M&E                  High                 Substantial                benefitted from reflecting the
                                                                                large number of achievements
                                                                                financed by the project.
Quality of ICR                  ---                  Modest


12. Lessons

The ICR (p. 34-35) provided several lessons learned, which were adapted by IEG:

      Promoting protected areas to the status of biosphere reserves and involving local
       communities in their management and conservation may contribute to sustainable
       development. In this project, the accreditation by UNESCO of the Gishwati-Mukura Forest
       Reserves was capitalized on by local community producers, which improved the
       marketability of local products and access to regional, national and global markets.
      When a Bank project involves different entities across the government, it is critical to
       allocate ownership of the project activities to the appropriate authorities. In this project,
       the Rwanda Meteorological Agency was not given sufficiently an oversight role even though
       its role is critical for the sustainability of the Flood Early Warning System (FEWS). Even
       though the project was extended twice to complete activities for the handover from the
       Rwanda Environmental management Agency to the Rwanda Meteorological Agency, the
       handover has not taken place yet.
      Collaborating with local education institutions can contribute to long-term
       sustainability of the landscape approach. This project collaborated with the University of
       Rwanda to through the education and research component, which built national capacity to

                                                                                                 Page 12 of 13
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Landscape Approach to Forest Rest/Conser (P131464)



         support this and other programs in the future since graduates from the University might work
         for the government one day.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provided an adequate overview of implementation and included an appropriate Economic analysis.
Also, the ICR included useful lessons learned that can be applied to future projects in this area. The ICR would
have benefitted from being more precise. For example, it stated that the project’s design was built on lessons
learned but did not specify which ones. Also, the ICR did not specify why it chose to assess the project in terms
of “enhancing environmental services and climate resilience through forest-friendly and climate restoration of
the Gishwati-Mukura landscape” and “demonstrating the approach through research, monitoring, and
management” rather than the PDO. Furthermore, the ICR did not state if the project complied with the Bank’s
safeguard policies. Also, the ICR rated FM and procurement as “good” which is not an adequate ICR rating.
Finally, the ICR lacked conciseness and was sometimes repetitive (such as in the M&E section) and did not
state any potential risks to development outcomes such as government commitment.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Modest




                                                                                                   Page 13 of 13
