     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     JM Youth Employment Digital Anima MST (P148013)



                                                                                   Report Number: ICRR0022980

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P148013                                    JM Youth Employment Digital Anima MST

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Jamaica                                    Social Sustainability and Inclusion


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                 Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-84050                                 31-Jan-2020                                           11,983,809.26

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 18-Jul-2014                                30-Jul-2021

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                       Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            20,000,000.00                                                0.00

 Revised Commitment                             20,000,000.00                                                0.00

 Actual                                         12,199,716.50                                                0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator           Group
 Alejandra Eguiluz           Ebru Karamete                Christopher David Nelson         IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) of the Jamaica Youth Employment Digital and Animation
   Industries Project, (YEDAI), as articulated in the Loan Agreement (page 5) was almost identical (except where
   underlined) to the one in the PAD (paragraph 21, page 7) and aimed to: "Support youth employment in the
   digital and animation industries in the Borrower's territory¨. In the PAD the underscore is replaced by the text:
   ¨in Jamaica¨.



                                                                                                    Page 1 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     JM Youth Employment Digital Anima MST (P148013)




b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  21-Dec-2021

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   Component 1: Skills and Capacity to Enhance Employability and Entrepreneurship (at appraisal:
   US$ 10 million; at first restructuring: US$ 9.05 million; at 2nd restructuring: US$ 7.04 million; at
   project closing: US$ 3.77 million).This component aimed to build capacity and skills of Jamaican youth to
   improve their employability in the growing animation industry and in the global online labor market, and
   provide critical skills to young tech entrepreneurs to bring ideas to market. In particular, the following
   activities were to be financed: a) expanding the existing 2D Animation Training Program at selected
   vocational and tertiary educational institutions; b) establishing 2D and/or 3D Animation Training Programs at
   selected secondary, vocational and tertiary educational institutions; c) establishing an accredited university
   degree program for professional animators; d) developing a business acceleration program for animation
   studios whereby companies undergo an intensive selection process and surrender some of the equity in
   their companies in return for seed capital, training and mentorship ("Acceleration Program"); e) developing a
   training program to increase the quantity and quality of software programmers and product designers; f)
   organizing competitions to identify youth with the best talents in the digital and animation fields; g) providing
   need-based scholarships to enable youth from lower-income families, and vulnerable communities to
   participate in the training activities provided by the Project; and h) developing a policy framework and
   strategic plan for the animation industry.

   Component 2: Establishment of Startup Jamaica (at appraisal: US$ 5.6 million; at first restructuring:
   US$ 0.275 million; at 2nd restructuring: US$ 0.28 million; at project closing: US$ 0.28 million). This
   component planned to make provisions for the establishment of a physical hub to strengthen a viable tech
   entrepreneurship ecosystem. The physical structure and the connectivity aspects of Startup Jamaica was
   planned to be provided by private sector companies that have offered these contributions free of charge. In
   addition, this component would be implemented in partnership with Oasis500 - an accelerator based in
   Amman, Jordan – that would provide seed capital for startups accepted into the accelerator program. This
   component would finance: a) carrying out communication and outreach campaigns to target youth with
   business ideas to join the Acceleration Program; b) designing and providing in-depth technical and business
   training to selected youth, including hands-on service provider support and external speakers/faculty
   training; c) designing and implementing the Acceleration Program for tech startups (including boot camps,
   pitching events, demo-days); and d) recruiting relevant technical staff to manage the Acceleration Program
   and other training initiatives.


                                                                                                      Page 2 of 20
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  JM Youth Employment Digital Anima MST (P148013)



Component 3: Early Stage Investment for Tech Startups (at appraisal: US$ 1.6 million). At first
restructuring the component was dropped and replaced by a new one .This component aimed to double the
annual amount of private sector investment in early stage growth companies by: a) establishing and
supporting the growth of a vibrant angel investor network; b) studying, promoting, and possibly leverage
diaspora investors to establish a royalty-based equity loan fund10; c) studying and supporting the
establishment of pre-purchase and equity crowdfunding platforms; d) a public awareness campaign on early
stage investments; and e) a targeted program to build trust networks among investors and early stage
companies.

Component 4: Support to Science, Technology and Innovation (at appraisal: US$ 0.8 million; after
1st restructuring: US$1.05 million; after 2nd restructuring: US$ 0.42; at project closing: US$ 0.10
million). Activities aimed to focus on supporting researchers with entrepreneurial aspirations who have
developed R&D+i applications that have commercial potential. This support would be provided by
identifying the potential entrepreneurs through calls for innovations and by incorporating the selected
applicants into the incubation and acceleration services (Stages 2& 3) of Startup Jamaica.

Component 5: Project Administration (at appraisal: US$ 2.0 million; after 1st restructuring US$1.425
million; after 2nd restructuring: US$ 1.82 million; at project closing: US$ 1.52 million. This component
planned to support program management through inter alia: a) financing the carrying out the financial
management and procurement requirements under the project; b) financing the monitoring and evaluation
of project activities; c) providing equipment and training for the Project Implementation Unit (PIU); d) hiring a
dedicated management team that includes a project manager, and two technical specialists (animation and
tech entrepreneurship); and e) financing operating costs.

Revision of components

The first restructuring on January 6, 2018 reflected the change in political leadership in Jamaica, who
had a different vision on how to achieve the PDO, focusing on job creation through the HOPE program,
which focused on vulnerable youth (NEET, not in education, employment or training) and away from a focus
on job creation through animation and online work. With the change in vision, the rationale for Components
2, 3 and 4 as originally designed, was significantly undercut. The dialogue and partnership with the private
sector that was behind the establishment of StartUp Jamaica (component 2) languished. The restructuring
involved changes in the Project components and their scope and the reallocation of loan resources (US$8.5
million out of US$20 million).

• Component 2: Activities under this component were discontinued. This affected the activities under
Components 3 and 4, as originally conceived, as they were intertwined. Removing Start Up Jamaica implied
closing the incubator hub meant to generate content for investment development by the private sector.

• Component 3: This component was completely re-designed moving from supporting early-stage
Investment for Tech Startups to supporting the HOPE initiative established in 2017 to provide skills training,
especially for NEET youth. The revised component included: (3.1) youth training on document management
and digitization and apprenticeship activities to improve the delivery of the training and apprenticeship
program and (3.2) upgrading 12 community centers to act as digital/tech centers, providing equipment and
furniture.

• Component 4: The component evolved to (1) supporting digital market and job fairs; (2) strengthening an
existing youth inventor/innovator competition in Jamaica; and (3) strengthening the national STI system, led


                                                                                                   Page 3 of 20
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    JM Youth Employment Digital Anima MST (P148013)



  by the National Commission on Science and Technology (NCST), to conduct consultations for STI policy
  with stakeholders and (4) fund the hosting of the National Innovation Awards.

  The second restructuring in January 2020 brought the following changes to the project
  components:

  • Component 1: Online global work training activities were discontinued as the private sector had started to
  offer the same courses. An Animation Studio Apprenticeship Program (ASAP) was included to improve the
  technical skills of local animators through practical hands-on focus in response to feedback from studios on
  the quality of animation graduates.

  • Component 3: Subcomponent 3.2, technical assistance and advisory services, was dropped as it lost
  relevance in light of the impact of the training and apprenticeship programs.

  • Component 4: The STI policy consultations were discontinued by the government and the Development
  Bank of Jamaica (DBJ) also dropped financing for the ecosystem mapping and design of a G-APP for
  navigating support.

  The third restructuring in December 2020 came in response to the implementation challenges caused by
  the COVID-19 pandemic. The restructuring introduced changes to the modalities of training and transitioned
  delivery of training and the KingstOOn festival from face-to-face to virtual events, to ensure the completion
  of as many activities as feasible, to achieve the PDO before project closing.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost. The total project cost at appraisal was estimated at US$20.00 million. Completion
  costs amounted to US$11,983,809.26 or 59,92 % of what was approved in the legal agreement (ICR,
  paragraph 4 page 44 and paragraph 10 page 45)

  Financing. The project was financed through an IBRD Loan that totaled US$20.00 million, via an
  Investment Project Financing instrument, to the Government of Jamaica.

  Borrower Contribution. No contribution from borrower was expected.

  Dates. The project was approved on September 2014 and became effective in November 2014. The Mid-
  Term Review (MTR) was conducted on about 3.5 years into effectiveness. The project closed on July 30,
  2021 (the original closing date was January 31, 2020). The additional time were to compensate for delays in
  effectiveness.

  Restructuring: The project was restructured 3 times, all of which were Level 2 restructuring, described as
  follows:

        The first one was in January 2018 and involved changes in components, executing agency, budget
         distribution among components and results framework (outcome and intermediary indicators and
         targets). This restructuring happened in order to follow the governments change of priorities, at a
         time when 3,5 years had gone by and the project had a very low disbursement and implementation
         rate. The changes followed the new government’s decisions, prioritizing training and dropping the

                                                                                                  Page 4 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     JM Youth Employment Digital Anima MST (P148013)



          entrepreneurship initiatives (components 2 and 3), and with a new focus on a NEET (not in
          education, employment or training) youth as beneficiaries.
         The second restructuring took place in January of 2020, added a 18-month extension and made
          changes to components, indicators and budgets. This extension allowed to compensate for the low
          effectiveness in previous years. The main changes on activities: component 1, the online global
          work training was discontinued and an Animation Studio Apprenticeship Program (ASAP) was
          included to improve the technical skills of local animators. In component 3 the technical assistance
          and advisory services, was dropped and in component 4 the policy consultations were discontinued.
         The third was in December 2020, COVID-related, changing training activities to adapt them online
          and adding a new budget line for scholarships.

   Split Rating: This review will follow the split rating process, as there were substantial revisions in the
   results framework, canceling components and PDO indicators, as well as reducing indicator targets. While
   there were three restructurings, the split rating will take the following periods to apply weighted average
   ratings for the Efficacy ratings: (i) the period from beginning of implementation until first restructuring (2014-
   jan 2018); (ii) the period since first restructuring until project completion (Jan 2018-July 2021). It makes
   sense to pick first restructuring as the dividing point of project implementation, because it marked the
   change of government priority towards a target population of youth that were more disadvantaged, focused
   the nature of the training on a specific content and delivery method, discontinued the innovative start-up
   and investment activities (components 2 and 3) and made important changes on the outcome indicators.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Context at Appraisal. At the time of appraisal, Jamaica had been one of the slowest growing nations in the
world for three decades, affecting disproportionately the bottom 40% of the population. Around 38% percent
of young women and 25% of young men ages 15–30 were unemployed (page 11 of PAD). The animation
industry, the online labor market, and the virtual economy were perceived as potential generators of
significant employment opportunities for well-educated Jamaican youth who were unemployed or
underemployed. Despite the international financial crisis, the animation industry had been growing steadily
at the global level and the Jamaican industry had been attracting attention from global players. Foreign
investors expressed interest in putting together a network of “angel investors” to provide capital for tech
startups and development of a viable ecosystem in the tech entrepreneurship world in Jamaica. Jamaica
needed to create more links between investors and research and development actors to leverage the
commercial potential of innovations. The establishment of Start Up Jamaica (SUJ) to grow the tech
ecosystem and support innovation was linked to exploring the opportunities needed to materialize
achievements in science and technology by supporting entrepreneurship and focusing on commercializing
innovations.

Previous Bank Experience. According to the ICR, this was a first project of its kind for the bank
(paragraph 55, page 21), and categorizes the project as ¨pilot¨ for that reason. On the PAD there is mention
of the bank’s previous participation in the event Digital Jam 3.0, an app development competition in the


                                                                                                        Page 5 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     JM Youth Employment Digital Anima MST (P148013)



region, and a roundtable discussion. The WB added value is stated on PAD as follows: ¨ The World Bank’s
added value stems from its ability to bring together the myriad of partners necessary to achieve success –
from animation software producers, to angel investor, to global incubator managers – and to help with the
difficult task of “rebranding” the country as a center of animation and mobile app technology¨ (paragraph 3,
page 61).

Consistency with Bank Strategies.

At appraisal the overall aim for FY14-17 stated on the CPS was to support Jamaican efforts to help build
the conditions for sustained and inclusive growth. The CPS program concentrated in three strategic
thematic areas: (i) public sector modernization; (ii) enabling environment for private sector growth; and, (iii)
social and climate resilience. (paragraph 6, page ii of CPS 2014-2017). The PDO is consistent mainly with
area (ii), given the high participation required of the private sector at all levels, and also partly with area (iii),
in what regards the aim of youth that are economically inserted in society, with jobs.

At completion, the PDO is in line with the Bank’s dual goals of eliminating extreme poverty and boosting
shared prosperity. It remains in line with its focus on strengthening competitive industries and developing an
enabling environment for growth. There is no updated CPS since the time of appraisal (2014) that can be
used as reference at completion. When looking at the Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD) for Jamaica
(from October 2022), we can see that the first of the three main development challenges identified is
harnessing the unfulfilled productive potential of youth, that is aligned with the PDO. In the same report, the
global digital sector is mentioned as a key potential industry for growth (on page 32: ¨ The country can lead
the Caribbean as a regional logistics hub. It can serve as a platform for the development of its tourism,
orange, and global digital and outsourcing services and serve as a base for other industries to develop). No
similr mention is done for the animation sector ( it is addressed on a note as a long-term possibility - see
end note on page 32: ¨ Services in animation, gaming, advertising, and design could be pursued in the long
term¨).

Consistency with Country Strategy.

At appraisal, the PDO was consistent with the Jamaica National Development Plan – Vision 2030 Medium
Term Socio-Economic Policy Framework (MTEF), in which goal 1 is that Jamaicans are empowered to
achieve their full potential and goal #3 is that Jamaica’s economy is prosperous. In addition, the Vision
2030 Jamaica sees the Information and Communication Technologies (ICTs) sector as playing a central
role in the transformation of Jamaica over the next two decades from being “consumers” to “producers” of
ICTs. This vision has been inscribed in the ICT Roadmap prepared by the Ministry of Science, Technology
and Mining

At completion the consistency remains, given that the Vision is 2030 is ongoing today (see
https://www.vision2030.gov.jm).

The PDO was pitched at a level that seems beyond what was manageable by the country’s institutional and
technical capacity, in a too fragile context, and beyond what was reasonable for the bank’s level of
expertise. The highly complex nature of the operations required the existence of a strong institutional tissue,
a stable and capable project management unit within the government and a culture of private-public
partnerships regarding entrepreneurship. These conditions were not in place in the country, despite the
dynamism and enthusiasm that the digital/animation events had fostered punctually among the participants
and the willingness of the private sector and academic institutions.


                                                                                                           Page 6 of 20
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      JM Youth Employment Digital Anima MST (P148013)



               Summary of Relevance of Objectives Assessment. The PDO statement was clear, but as it was beyond
               the country capacity and the World Bank's expertise, it was overly ambitious. Although piloting activities
               with limited scope, budget and/or geographical area are often necessary to try out innovative interventions
               and learn from the experience, in this case the project structure was not that of a pilot as the size and scope
               of interventions were quite large.

               Due to the above mentioned reasons the relevance of the objectives is rated Modest


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Modest


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Support youth employment in the digital and animation industries in Jamaica

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change (ToC):

                             The ToC of the project (although not specifically described as such in PAD) can be easily and logically
                             deducted from the project description and is clearly explained in the ICR (paragraph 7 page 7). Briefly: if we
                             address the skill gap of youth in the digital and animation sectors with appropriate training and we put the
                             mechanisms in place that promote entrepreneurship (start-up incubator, investment attraction and
                             innovation), the end result will be that more youth will either be employed or will have started their companies.
                             Although the logic seems evident, the level of in-country capacity and expertise needed to make it happen
                             were underestimated at appraisal, as well as the length of time needed to achieve the entrepreneurial aspects
                             when starting from scratch. The project’s duration did not match the causal timeline of all the the interventions
                             leading to the achievement of the PDO. While it could reasonably be expected that the training activities
                             would lead to more skilled and thus employable youth in the 4-year project implementation, it was more
                             doubtful that the setup of innovative entrepreneurial and investment mechanisms in two new sectors, leading
                             to a number of startups promoted, created and receiving investments could all be achieved during the time of
                             project implementation.

                             In addition to the underestimation of the time and effort needed for components 2,3 and 4, there is also the
                             question of the complexity of the nature of the interventions, which seems overambitious for the conditions of
                             the country at appraisal, as regulatory framework for implementation of components 2, 3 and 4 did not
                             exist. In addition, there was a key assumption in the project that the government would promote and nurture
                             many partnerships with the private sector (training stakeholders and entrepreneurship promotion partners,
                             universities etc.), but this proved unrealistic during implementation (the ICR states that the private sector felt
                             abandoned by the government after a while).


                                                                                                                                  Page 7 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   JM Youth Employment Digital Anima MST (P148013)



Overall, the set of original indicators is adequate to measure the PDO. However, one of the indicators
addresses investment levels, which is only indirectly related to job creation.

Outcomes:

The achievement measured using the project’s original PDO indicators show significantly low achievement.
The ICR presents, (page 15, paragraph 31), the following percentages of achievement of these indicators:
13% for indicator 1 (¨Number of additional young people earning foreign exchange through global online
work, using platforms that are partnering with the project¨); 13,5% for indicator 2.a ( ¨Number of young people
employed by the animation industry in the short/medium term); 50% for indicator 2.b (Including percentage of
front-line 2D animators from inner city (“bottom 40%”) communities); 1.2% for indicator 3 (Amount of private
capital mobilized (in seed and follow-on funding) for Jamaican startups); and 16% for indicator 4 (Number of
Startup companies established through StartUp Jamaica). Indicators 1, 2 and 4 address directly the PDO, as
they measure jobs created in both the digital and animation industries, either through employment or
entrepreneurship. The third is a measure of investment mobilized (not directly measuring jobs).

The ICR did not discuss the reason for the low achievement levels. In addition, it was reported by the ICR that
there was 200% accomplishment with the intermediate indicator, ‘percentage of startups accepted into SUJ
originating from Jamaica and the Caribbean’. It would have been valuable to extract a lesson by the ICR as to
why that one particular aspect worked so well when compared to the rest (it is mentioned in the ICR that no
M&E system was put in place, and that most information on achievements has been extracted from a country
implementation report). The rating on this first period is Negligible, based on the above.



Rating
Negligible


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
Support youth employment in the digital and animation industries in Jamaica

Revised Rationale
TOC:

The PDO remained the same. The original ToC relied on the 2 areas of intervention in order to achieve jobs
for youth in the identified sectors: the employability (via adequate training) and the entrepreneurship
promotion (via incubation and investment attraction). At first restructuring, components 2 and 3, which were
directly related to entrepreneurship promotion were dropped. This meant that one of the two main areas of
intervention in the ToC as a means to reach more jobs, disappeared, leaving all the causal responsibility of
reaching the PDO to the training intervention only. While causal linkage did not completely disappear with the
changes (appropriate training can in fact lead to higher employability and more hiring), it weakened the ToC.
The fact that the target group of youth also changed after first restructuring (NEET youth of ages 18-24
became the government’s priority) also had an effect on the ToC: NEET youth require more substantial
interventions to increase their employability, as their knowledge and skill base at start is weaker (ICR page 7,



                                                                                                  Page 8 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   JM Youth Employment Digital Anima MST (P148013)



paragraph 3). Also, the government’s priority towards doing specific training on document management and
digitization diverted efforts from the original planned contents of training.

The project results framework was revised at first restructuring in January 2018, as follows:

Changes on main outcome indicators:

     i. Number of youth earning foreign exchange through global online work. The target was reduced
        at first restructuring, and the indicator was dropped at 2nd restructuring, since private sector was
        offering same courses). This indicator relates to component 1
    ii. Number of youth who participate in one of the animation training program and become
        employed by the animation industry. This indicator pertains to component 1. It was modified to
        adapt it to the government’s training program HOPE, targeting vulnerable youth. It translates the new
        government’s priority towards a certain target population (different from what was originally formulated
        in project design) and a certain type of training delivery.
   iii. Total number of youth trained in document management and digitization (50% women). This is
        a new indicator. This indicator was modified to adapt to the government’s training priorities, targeting
        vulnerable youth.
   iv. Percentage increase in participation in innovation competition (new indicator, reflecting the
        changes in component 4).

The dropping of components 2 and 3 and 4 implied dropping of the following outcome indicators:

      Amount of private capital mobilized (in seed and follow-on funding) for Jamaican startups;
      Number of Startup companies established through StartUp Jamaica

The changes to the main indicators reflect the changes on focus and priority in the project: the start-up and
investment promotion were dropped (components 2 and 3); and were substituted by indicators that reflect
more participation in training and, for one of them, internships acquired after training. One of these new
indicators about training incorporates a specific training content (document management and digitization).
The targets of the indicators were also modified. For instance, the target of the indicator on training in
animation went from 1400 to 250, as there was the realization that the training in animation required more
time and content to upgrade the youth’s skills so that they became more employable.

The second restructuring dropped PDO1 “Number of youth earning foreign exchange through global online
work”. The target for PDO 3 “Total number of youth trained in document management and digitization” was
increased from 6,000 to 8000, and added a gender indicator of percentage of women trained, with a target of
50%. The aim for PDO 4, “Percentage increase in participation in innovation competition”, was increased to
75%.

By the second restructuring many of the indicators that could have measured job creation (PDO) had been
dropped, and replaced by the ones assessing training participation, and thus employability rather than
jobs. The new indicators, although more adapted to the project reality and possibilities, distanced themselves
from the PDO, which was to promote jobs.

According to the ICR, outcome indicators were reached 97.6%, with four of the IRIs surpassed, one of the
IRIs was achieved, and one was 50.0 percent achieved. However, this high percentage concerns mostly
participation in training programs (and internships after training only for one of the outcome indicators).

                                                                                                  Page 9 of 20
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                JM Youth Employment Digital Anima MST (P148013)



                            Therefore, the achievement of the outcome indicators cannot be considered as a measure of achievement of
                            the PDO.

                            The ICR describes the main achievements: (ICR, page 21). The summary of the achievements is as follows:

                                  1,534 young Jamaicans formally acquired animation skills through their participation in an animation
                                     certification program. Skills building programs were delivered by: (i) the seven teaching institutions
                                     offering animation degrees; (ii) the Animation Scholarship Program for 2D and 3D animation; and (iii)
                                     the Business of Sustainability for Studios (BOSS) program. Delivery was improved with inputs from
                                     the project, specifically curriculum review and training of instructors.
                                    The Project succeeded in building skills in document management and digitization for a cohort of
                                     young Jamaican NEETs between the ages of 18 and 24. By Project closing, a cohort of 6,848 such
                                     youths had participated in technical training and received a certificate (original target was 6,000, then
                                     increased to 8000 but not achieved because of COVID). The target were the NEET youth belonging to
                                     communities affected by gang violence and social hardships or from rural areas of Jamaica.
                                    A total of five community centers received equipment, hardware, and software packages to ensure
                                     these could function as digital and technical centers to support quality training. At completion only two
                                     of the five selected centers were completely refurbished.
                                    The number of trained youths who had a 4-month apprenticeship/internship (mostly in government
                                     agencies) reached 4,265 (62 percent of those were women) and 3,216 were recommended for
                                     professional certification.
                                    2,215 youth had participated in STI training.

                            These achievements concern mainly the training activities. There is no measure of how these trainings have
                            actually made the youth more employable and have helped them find jobs (other than the 4265 that had a 4-
                            month internship). The ICR states the impossibility of assessing job creation (PDO), given the lack of an
                            M&E system.

                            The efficacy of the revised project period is rated Modest, given the lack of evidence on employment but
                            some positive results on the level of achievement for the training programs.



                            Revised Rating
                            Modest


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            While there were positive results on training activities supported by the Project, particularly after the first
                            restructuring, there were also important shortcomings. As the indicators measuring the employment levels
                            were dropped after the restructuring, there was lack of evidence on employment. In addition, the impact of the
                            achievements was weakened by the late and limited-in-scope implementation of some of the Project
                            supported interventions (such as the lack of provision of hardware and software for training, limited size of
                            animation training and studio experience, small number of community/youth centers refurbished as

                                                                                                                               Page 10 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      JM Youth Employment Digital Anima MST (P148013)



  technological centers) and the pending completion of key activities (such as the approval into policy of the
  animation sector concept paper and the refurbishing of three community centers) after loan closing. COVID
  also had a negative impact on the project’s achievements.



  Overall Efficacy Rating                                     Primary Reason
  Modest                                                      Insufficient evidence


 5. Efficiency
Cost-benefit analysis. At appraisal a cost-benefit analysis was drafted and included in the PAD. An Internal
Economic Return was estimated at 39% for animation component and 280% for the accelerator
program. However, the projections and assumptions were too far from the project’s reality at completion for it to
be a reference of comparison: the accelerator component was dropped after first restructuring; the animation
estimations were based upon the revenue, in foreign currency, that the employed youth would receive after
training and offered jobs, which is something that the project didn’t measure. There is not enough information on
the actual cost and benefit of project achievements to do a comparison of the IERs (investment economic
return) at appraisal and project completion. As stated in the ICR: it can be assumed that the returns on the
Project’s investments were not as sizable as projected originally in the PAD (ICR, paragraph 46, page 23).

Operational/administrative efficiency:

Delays in procurement. These were stated by the project team as one of the main project constraints that led
to poor achievement of results (meeting with the project team on April 4th). Closing date extensions were
greatly motivated by this factor (restructurings 2 and 3). In spite of the supervision and assistance provided by
the bank team, procurement remained a critical limiting factor during project implementation.

Project management. Project management was problematic throughout the life of the project, in spite of the
initial dynamism of the private sector. It did not improve with the change of executing agency (at first
restructuring, when it was the Office of the Prime Minister that took over). This points at a lack of capacity within
the government to manage a complex project of this nature.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?              Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                       0
 Appraisal                                                    0
                                                                                        Not Applicable



                                                                                                       Page 11 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      JM Youth Employment Digital Anima MST (P148013)



                                                                                       0
ICR Estimate                                                0
                                                                                        Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The outcome rating is Unsatisfactory, which is the result of the calculations below:



                              Before 1st restructuring After 1st restructuring
Relevance                                         Modest
Efficacy                              Negligible          Modest
Efficiency                                        Modest
Outcome rating                    Unsatisfactory          Unsatisfactory
Outcome rating value                     2                       2
Disbursement % (of total
project funds disbursed,
                                          26%                    74%
which was 62% of total
project cost)
Weight value                             0.52                    1.48
Overall outcome rating
                                                     2
(calculation)
                                                Unsatisfactory
a. Outcome Rating
   Unsatisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The ICR has revealed the following as risks to the sustainability of the achievements (ICR, page 28):

      A lack of clear leadership for the animation sector
      A lack of sustained commitment and partnership with the private sector, that affects both the group of
       private companies supporting startups in technology and animation, and the universities and
       teaching/training facilities.
      The need for equipment in training institutions to setup labs that ensure the acquisition of skills and
       competencies by the end of training.
      Also, Jamaica needs to focus on overcoming connectivity problems, improving access to 4G and 5G,
       and making the acquisition of adequate hardware and software for animation and digital industries to
       develop.




                                                                                                    Page 12 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     JM Youth Employment Digital Anima MST (P148013)




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The ICR summarizes thoroughly the problems that affected quality at entry: (i) an overly optimistic vision
  on expected public-private partnerships; (ii) an institutional framework that was not ready at approval; (iii)
  an inadequate risk identification process; (iv) inadequate M&E system and excessive complexity of
  procurement plan (number of contracts)(ICR, page 28).

  The complexity of the nature of the project was not matched with the necessary pre-conditions in the
  country. Many of the pre-requisites weren’t there to allow for components 2, 3 and 4 to take place. For
  instance, no regulatory framework was in place for the investment mechanisms that the project wanted to
  promote, such as the crowdfunding platforms or the investment angels’ networks, or the investment of the
  diaspora that the project was supposed to leverage. An incomplete risk analysis failed to reveal that the
  basic conditions were not in place to sustain such level of complexity. At appraisal, key information on
  how the new and complex investment and business acceleration setups would be implemented, were left
  to be detailed in the Manual of Operations, but this Manual was not drafted when supposed to (the audit
  report of March 2027 points out at the fact that the Manual is still not available). Many of the partnerships
  that were meant to happen with the private sector (via MoUs) were left to be concretized after project
  start.

  In addition to these, the interventions proposed would have benefitted from more thorough analysis and
  studies that would support them. For example, an analytical exercise to justify the choice of the 2 sectors
  an not other sectors with potential for employment is missing. A more thorough assessment on the
  institutional framework would have helped to identify risks better, as well as appropriate mitigation
  measures. The investment dimension and business acceleration, given their novelty, would have
  benefitted from a more profound assessment. The way such novel interventions would be implemented is
  also missing; a significant part of the laying out how these complex and very novel interventions would
  take place was left to be detailed in the Manual of Operations (which seems to have been produced late
  during implementation).

  Additional inputs provided by the project team point at a series of events (conferences on the
  animation/digital sectors) as the means used to assess the relevance at appraisal, proving the good
  momentum for the interventions, instead of a more customary approach of feasibility studies and other
  analytical work.

  Risk identification. The main implementation risk identified at appraisal was the capacity gap in project
  implementation, resulting from the novelty of the thematic areas and the innovative approach introduced
  by the project. The mitigation measure proposed was the establishment of strong partnerships and hiring
  the expertise externally. However, the partnerships were in themselves an uncertain variable, given that
  the private sector was described as fragmented and the risk of limited synergies had been identified. The
  proposed way to mitigate this fragmentation was to maintain a continuous dialogue among stakeholders,
  ensuring private sector engagement, but without a specific reference as to how this would happen and
  who would ensure it. It seems that the risks identified were high but that the mitigation measures
  proposed were also risks in themselves.

  In the case of the ecosystem in animation and digital industries (components 2, 3 and 4), the risk
  identified was a limited participation and contribution of relevant stakeholders to the design of the project;

                                                                                                      Page 13 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     JM Youth Employment Digital Anima MST (P148013)



  limited diaspora engagement, and the mitigation measure was to conduct an economic analysis that
  provides a thorough assessment of the challenges and opportunities of these two sectors in Jamaica. It
  would seem, however, that such an analysis was due during appraisal, in order to justify the choice of
  those 2 sectors. Finally, the macro risk of not having adequate legislation for IP protection and
  inadequate bankruptcy law, was meant to be mitigated by working closely with the relevant national
  institutions, with no further description of how this would be done and by whom.

  Based on the above the quality at entry is rated Unsatisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 According to the ICR, the bank’s supervision efforts increased towards project end, working more closely
 with the government of Jamaica to deliver critical activities. The Bank regularly carried well-staffed
 supervision missions and followed up with the GoJ to provide technical assistance. The WB worked with
 the government to restructure the Project three times to align project activities to the GoJ’s priorities. There
 was continuous dialogue as well as just-in-time clinics on safeguards and procurement. In the COVID-19
 pandemic, the WB supported the government efforts to move the execution of activities to a virtual mode,
 supporting reallocation of resources and providing additional resources and technical assistance for key
 activities such as the international event KingstOOn and all training under Component 1.

 Despite these efforts, the issue of monitoring was not addressed during the restructuring processes (to
 have an appropriate M&E system that could follow-up and measure indicators). Impact of activities
 remained unmonitored. There was a high turnover of task team leaders (TTL); four in total. While each TTL
 worked in coordination with the GoJ, the turnover rate probably had an impact on implementation. The WB
 provided support to address fiduciary issues. It provided additional procurement training and close
 interactions to overcome procurement bottlenecks. The bank supported the PIU in financial management,
 during the clarifications related to the use of resources by HEART Trust/NSTA; and collaborated with the
 PIU to comply with the environmental and social safeguard requirements when the refurbishing activities of
 the community centers became part of the Project activities.

 The bank also collaborated with the PIU to comply with the environmental and social safeguard
 requirements when the refurbishing activities of the community centers became part of the Project
 activities. As declared by procurement specialist in the team, from a procureement perspective, the Bank
 Task Team kept raising the challenges and the Implementation Support Missions (held at least twice a
 year), identified the bottlenecks: (i) lack of readiness of technical inputs required for the procurement
 processes to start off (Terms of Reference, Technical Specifications, Designs, etc.); (ii) unavailability of
 technical staff to get evaluation of Bids/Proposals/Expressions of Interest done timely; (iii) lengthy GOJ
 own internal approval process for project contracts to get awarded and signed; and (iv) weak procurement
 planning exercise (as the PIU changed mind often and amended the Project Procurement Plan 25 times).

 Based on the above, the quality of supervision is rated Moderately unsatisfactory.



                                                                                                      Page 14 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     JM Youth Employment Digital Anima MST (P148013)




  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Unsatisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The PAD assigned the responsibility of M&E to the Ministry of Science, Technology,
 Energy and Mining (MSTEM). It mentioned that the details of the system would be lay out in the Manual
 of Operations. It was expected that other participating institutions would assist the PIU in the M&E
 activities, but no specific M&E responsibilities were assigned to these other institutions on the PAD
 specifically. Given the complexity of the project and its expected implementation arrangements, it was clear
 that the institution responsible for M&E would need strong capacity. The indicators proposed to measure
 the PDO were adequate in the original design. The changes made in the results framework at first
 restructuring presented substantial changes in the outcome indicators, focusing on the goal of
 employability, distancing themselves from the original PDO (job creation). Only one of the new set of
 indicators still give a measure of the PDO, albeit partially (internships provided mostly by the government
 after a training period).



b. M&E Implementation
  M&E was a challenge throughout the life of the Project. M&E specialists were few and in high demand.
  The OPM PIU (second PIU, after first restructuring and after more than 3 years of implementation), tried
  to hire and retain an M&E specialist during implementation. Two were recruited but left after a short
  period. The PIU’s coordinator and the component heads carried a greater burden of the M&E activities.
  The PIU succeeded partially in its M&E activities (in-depth follow-up and evaluation of the impact of the
  Project’s interventions were not fulfilled thoroughly). For instance, employment/enterprise creation (main
  PDO) of beneficiaries was not captured systematically. The COVID-19 limited interactions with
  beneficiaries to gather first- hand information from the project’s activities. Following a 2019 audit of
  HEART, the Office of the Prime Minister (OPM) assigned a senior level manager to work with HEART to
  strengthen its M&E systems and address data gaps.




c. M&E Utilization
  M&E utilization was tributary to the shortcomings of not having an effective M&E system. However, the
  ICR points at some relevant changes in the project having been informed by the monitoring of activities,

                                                                                                   Page 15 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     JM Youth Employment Digital Anima MST (P148013)



  such as the change on the target for the digital training beneficiaries, that was increased based on the
  feedback that had been captured. The ICR mission was able to capture some impact of the project
  activities, which the M&E system has not been able to. In spite of the M&E system shortcomings, the
  data produced to assess achievements was triangulated and confirmed, as the ICR mission checked the
  evidence with the implementation reports produced by the heads of each component and by the many
  interviews that took place with relevant stakeholders and beneficiaries.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Environment safeguards. No environmental safeguards were triggered during original project design
   (classification of C). During the second Level II restructuring, Safeguard Policies OP4.01 and OP4.09 were
   triggered due to the need to refurbish the community centers to make the spaces secure to install and keep
   computers. Safeguard instruments were prepared, including two site-specific Environmental and Social
   Management Plans (ESMPs) for the major centers and a generic ESMP for the repairs in minor centers.
   These will be used to guide any additional construction. In addition, the project prepared an e-waste
   management plan shared with each center. There were no environmental and social safeguard issues
   during implementation. The refurbishing followed the Community Driven Development (CDD) approach. The
   PIU signed a memorandum of understanding (MOU) with the Jamaica Social Investment Fund (JSIF) to
   support the PIU construction manager during the refurbishing process for three of the five community
   centers. The ESMPs were supervised by the last TTL of the project (conversation of April 5th) and no
   specific issues were raised.

   Social safeguards. No social safeguards were triggered during original project design. The Borrower
   engaged with stakeholders, holding consultations in those communities where works were going to take
   place. The ESMPs were disclosed in the Project’s LinkedIn page, and hard copies of the ESMPs were also
   available at the community centers. The Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) was accessible to the
   community members where works occurred. Contact information to receive potential questions, feedback,
   and complaints was posted on the bulletin board of each community center. Beneficiaries and the public
   could raise queries and concerns to Project management through the OPM and the YEDAI web pages
   which have a telephone number, Facebook, and a web page for the OPM website:
   https://opm.gov.jm/participate/follow-us-on-social-media. The Borrower agreed to continue the
   environmental and social safeguards supervision in compliance with the WB policies and guidelines, as part
   of general supervision of the works until all works were completed and the supervision arrangements
   existing at completion were maintained, retaining the construction manager.(ICR paragraphs 68 and 69,
   page 24)




b. Fiduciary Compliance


                                                                                                 Page 16 of 20
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  JM Youth Employment Digital Anima MST (P148013)



Procurement. The ICR reveals a lack of capacity within the GoJ for the procurement activities required
during implementation. There was a very high workload and lack of adequate staffing in the PIU; a lengthy
approval process and the inability of the procurement system to be effective and procure the hardware
needed for the training (computers). The Procurement Plan provided for 295 contracts, at the end of the
project only 66 contracts were executed (of which 2 were terminated) and 229 were dropped (77.6% of the
total number of contracts). The more complex project procurement activities required many technical inputs
(i.e., terms of reference [TORs], technical specifications, bid evaluations, etc.) that were to come from
different technical units within the implementing agency. Whenever such technical inputs were not
provided in a timely manner, the procurement unit itself remained unable to move the procurement process
forward toward the contract award stage. These delays in procuring hardware and software were
significant and hampered the implementation of activities. For instance, the refurbishment of the
community centers took a lot of back and forth between the WB and the PIU to choose best procurement
method and underwent 2 failed procurement processes before opting for a different approach. While a total
of 12,199,716.50 of project funds were disbursed before completion, the actual Project expenditures after
the grace closing period up to November 30, 2021, were US$11,983,809.26. Acquisitions of key
equipment, hardware, and software were significantly delayed, and took place almost at the time of
completion. As declared by procurement specialist consulted: In the end, the PIU was unable to get project
procurement implemented timely even though (a) it was all about non-complex contracts (most of them
were to be procured through very simple Request for Quotation procedures); and (b) the Bank Task Team
had provided the PIU with procurement trainings and close implementation support

Financial Management. The ICR describes a situation of inaccurate or delayed reporting, unreconciled
differences, and the need to strengthen the financial management (FM) systems which were hampered at
times by low staff capacity. The audit report issued in March 2017 referred to the fact that the PIU had not
fulfilled part of its responsibilities (as required by the loan agreement): producing the operations manual
and submitting the periodical reports to the WB. It was also the opinion of the auditor that the project did
not maintain an adequate accounting system based on separate and clearly identifiable accounts which
enabled the recording, monitoring and reporting of the operations and costs under the program in
accordance with satisfactory accounting/financial/management practices and standards as required by
Schedule 11 Section 2 (B) of the Loan Agreement (see report on Financial Statements for the period April
1, 2016- March 31, 2017)

The audit report issued for the FY ended March 2018 was delayed by eight months due to challenges in
obtaining project files. Subsequently the audit report issued for the FY ended March 2020 had a qualified
audit opinion due to the inability to verify expenditures totaling US$2.3 million incurred by HEART. The
issues flagged were due to weak internal controls and weak reporting systems. These issues were
promptly dealt with in the spring of 2021 by the Borrower, with agile support of the WB FM team. Training
on upgrading and strengthening of HEART reporting systems contributed to overcoming the weaknesses
identified. A subsequent supplementary audit review for the period submitted in February 2021 provided
reasonable assurance that the expenditures were eligible. The pace of disbursements was irregular, with a
trend of one disbursement per year (except for the beginning of 2015, when three disbursement requests
were processed). At Project completion, the disbursement recorded was 59% of the total amount.

The ICR describes how the ISRs revealed a situation of inaccurate or delayed reporting, unreconciled
differences, and the need to strengthen the financial management (FM) systems which were hampered at
times by low staff capacity.




                                                                                               Page 17 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     JM Youth Employment Digital Anima MST (P148013)




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   The number of women who participated in training and apprenticeship was surpassed—64 percent versus
   a target of 50 percent.

   The ICR also describes how the project succeeded in supporting young males from challenging
   communities where young males are often more at risk of falling to the pressure of peers, dropping out of
   school, and engaging in gang and/or illegal activities. However, this was an expected direct impact of
   component 3 and not un unintended one.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
                                                                                  The downgrading of the
                                                                                  Relevance of the PDO from
                                                                                  Substantial to Modest and the
                                Moderately                                        downgrading of the Efficacy of
Outcome                                               Unsatisfactory
                                Unsatisfactory                                    objective 1 (original) from
                                                                                  Modest to Negligible lead to a
                                                                                  total outcome rating of
                                                                                  Unsatisfactory
                                Moderately
Bank Performance                                      Unsatisfactory              Unsatisfactory
                                Unsatisfactory
Quality of M&E                  Modest                Modest                      Modest

Quality of ICR                  ---                   Substantial                 Substantial


12. Lessons

IEG draws the following lessons:

Strong appraisal in innovative operations is key for success of the projects. This is always
important, but most essential when the nature of the operation is highly complex and innovative for
both the country and for the WB. In this project, strong appraisal involves sound technical analysis,
deep insight into the country's institutional framework and capacity in order to adequately assess
risks, and to propose M&E and procurement that is adapted to the existing country capacity and to
the project's needs.

Highly innovative activities call for adapted intervention tools. In this project, a pilot approach
would have ring-fenced the potential risks. A pilot operation with a more restricted scope (such as
one sub-sector, a manageable group of institutions, a specific geographical area, etc.), would have

                                                                                                    Page 18 of 20
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       JM Youth Employment Digital Anima MST (P148013)



allowed the learning experience in a monitored way, on how investments and training can lead
towards jobs thanks to a multi-partner participation.

The following lessons from the ICR is particularly relevant as well:

When setting the foundations of an ecosystem for a new industry it is critical to have an
enabling policy framework (with identification of institutional roles and responsibilities that best
support the sector’s growth needs) and a clear comprehension of the roles and dynamics of the
private and public sectors. In this project a pre-existing platform of private and public institutions
from the animation and digital industries would have allowed for the private sector to build a pipeline,
and for the Government to move forward the enabling environment actions that help (and do not
interfere with) the private sector dynamics (setting policies, frameworks and institutional
arrangements).

Fiscal planning of governments can impact implementation, regardless of the existence of a
borrower's contribution. In this project there was no contribution from the borrower, but the fiscal
space still needed to be planned for disbursements to happen. The constraints Jamaica faced in its
fiscal planning hindered the pace of project implementation.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

Quality of Evidence. It would have been helpful for the reader of the ICR to clearly see the references to the
evidence of achievements.

Lessons. Lessons reflected the project experience and were based on evidence and analysis.

Results Orientation. The discussion on the achievement of the PDO would have benefited from further analysis
and comparison between the reported data and what was actually achieved, given the many changes to the
components that distanced the project from the original PDO (job creation). The ICR timidly points at this issue,
but without further analysis on how the chain results-PDO has been deeply changed during implementation.

Consistency with guidelines. The ToC is well depicted. as originally applied implicitly in the design of the
operation. The ICR used the available data to justify most of the assigned ratings, although the evidence is
not clearly referred to in the narrative to facilitate the linkage between narrative-results-achievements. In
particular, the efficiency analysis provided good justification for the shortcomings experienced by the project in
this criteria. The discussion on Efficacy could have included a more critical analysis on the linkage between the
results and PDO, as well as the changes to the ToC.




                                                                                                    Page 19 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     JM Youth Employment Digital Anima MST (P148013)



Conciseness. The ICR provided comprehensive coverage of a complex project, and candidly reported on
shortcomings. The ICR also included information rich Annexes that covered different aspects of the project,
enriching the impact section thanks to the direct observation during the ICR mission.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                 Page 20 of 20
