     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Lckd. Romania Cat DDO (P166303)



                                                                               Report Number: ICRR0023326

1. Operation Information



 Operation ID                             Operation Name
 P166303                                  Lckd. Romania Cat DDO

 Country                                  Practice Area (Lead)
 Romania                                  Urban, Resilience and Land



 Non-Programmatic DPF

 L/C/TF Number(s)                         Closing Date (Original)                  Total Financing (USD)
 IBRD-88790                               31-Dec-2021                                        437,050,000.00

 Bank Approval Date                       Closing Date (Actual)
 26-Jun-2018                              31-Dec-2021

                                          IBRD/IDA (USD)                              Co-financing (USD)

 Original Commitment                        493,060,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                         493,060,000.00                                               0.00

 Actual                                     437,050,000.00                                               0.00




 Prepared by               Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Ranga Rajan               Chikako Miwa                 Kavita Mathur                  IEGSD
 Krishnamani



2. Program Objectives and Pillars/Policy Areas
DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives

The Program Development Objective (PDO) of this Development Policy Loan (DPL) with a Catastrophe
Deferred Drawdown Option (Cat - DDO) as stated in the Program Document (PD, page 3) is: "To strengthen




                                                                                                Page 1 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Lckd. Romania Cat DDO (P166303)



Romania's institutional and legal framework to effectively manage the physical, social and fiscal
impacts of natural disasters and climate change".

For the purpose of this review, the PDO is unpacked as follows:

      To strengthen Romania's institutional and legal framework to effectively manage the physical
       impacts of natural hazards and climate change.
      To strengthen Romania's institutional and legal framework to effectively manage the social impacts of
       natural hazards and climate change.
      To strengthen Romania's institutional and legal framework to effectively manage the fiscal impacts of
       natural hazards and climate change.


b. Pillars/Policy Areas
The PDOs were to be achieved through reforms in two pillars/policy areas (PD, page 20):

Pillar # 1. Strengthen the Borrower's national framework for disaster risk management (DRM).

Pillar # 2. Strengthen the Borrower's capacity to systematically identify and reduce disaster and climate risks
and to manage the financial impact of disasters.


c. Comments on Program Cost, Financing and Dates

Financing. The operation was financed by an IBRD loan of US$493.06 million. The amount disbursed was
US$437.05 million. The team clarified that the difference between the appraisal loan amount and amount
disbursed was due to exchange rate changes between Euro and the US$ during implementation.

Dates. This operation was approved on June 26, 2018, became effective on December 20, 2018, and closed as
scheduled on December 31, 2021.

Drawdown of Cat DDO instrument.

      On February 7, 2020, the Government requested a first partial withdrawal of EUR200 million
       (approximately US$216.75 million) due to an imminent public health emergency. The funds were used to
       increase the intervention capacity for preventing and fighting infections related to the COVID - 19
       pandemic, including procurement of necessary medical materials and equipment and conducting
       activities such as mobilizing medical staff and preparing quarantine spaces.
      On March 19, 2020, the Government requested a second partial drawdown of EUR 200 million
       (approximately US$220.30 million) for taking measures to prepare and mitigate the impacts of the COVID
       - 19 pandemic.


3. Relevance of Design

a. Relevance of Objectives

                                                                                                     Page 2 of 15
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Lckd. Romania Cat DDO (P166303)




Country context. Romania is prone to natural disasters, such as earthquakes, floods, droughts and extreme
weather conditions. Furthermore, the effects of climate change were manifesting in increased frequency of
such disasters. Given that disasters disproportionately impacted the poor, access to immediate post-disaster
liquidity for meeting emergency needs and strengthening the institutional and legal framework to manage the
physical, social and fiscal impacts of natural disasters and climate change were important to the Government
strategy.

Government strategy. In the years before appraisal, Romania made a major transition towards reorganizing
the disaster and emergency response structure. In 2014, the Government updated the legal framework to
establish the Department for Emergency Situations (DES) in the Ministry of Interior Affairs (MOIA), The DES
was in charge of taking emergency prevention actions and providing human, material and financial resources
for restoring normality in the wake of a disaster. Under the coordination of the DES and General Inspectorate
of Emergency Situations (GIES), Romania completed a multi-hazard risk assessment (RO-RISK). The
Government endorsed the United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction (DRR) Sendai Framework for
DRR 2015 - 2030. This framework underscored the need to "build back better" in disaster recovery and
reconstruction.

The National Action Plan on Climate Change for 2016 - 2020 specified key areas of focus for climate change
adaptation. This operation supported the following plan areas: (i) Strengthening the emergency management
system through policy and regulatory reforms; (ii) developing a national Disaster Risk Reduction (DRR)
strategy to reduce disaster vulnerability in earthquake prone areas; (iii) raising public awareness of climate
change impacts; and (iv) updating the national building codes to address seismic disaster risks; The PDO was
consistent with the current Romania National Climate Change and Low Carbon Green Growth Strategy (2016-
2030). This strategy highlighted the need for adopting programs for reducing climate change impacts.

Bank strategy. The PDO was aligned with the Bank strategy for Romania. At appraisal, the PDO was aligned
with the objectives of the Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) which broadly articulated the need for reducing
poverty in Romania and fostering sustainable income growth of bottom 40% of its population. The PDO was
fully aligned with the third focus area of the Bank's current Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for 2019 -
2023: "Building Resilience to Shocks" through improving preparedness to natural disasters and strengthening
adaptation to climate change.

Bank experience. The World Bank has financed DRM projects in Romania. In 2003, the Bank financed the
Hazard Risk Mitigation and Emergency Preparedness Project aimed at reducing the environmental and social
risks of natural disasters. The World Bank through an Investment Project Financing (IPF) project which closed
in 2012, initiated the process for creating a national information system for emergency situations. Alongside
this operation, the Bank was preparing a parallel IPF Project "Strengthening Disaster Risk Management
Project". According to the team, the parallel IPF was approved in July 2018 and is ongoing. While the IPF
project focused on seismic risks and a single agency to establish a platform to initiate risk reduction in building
sector, this Cat DDO aimed to strengthening disaster risk governance to manage disaster risks ex-ante and
ex-post and ensure the country's access to quick financing to manage fiscal risks from natural disasters.

This operation was the first DPL with a Cat DDO in Romania. The chosen lending instrument was
appropriate. As a quick source of financing, the Cat - DDO would provide the necessary financing until other
sources of financing (such as from the European Union (EU) Solidarity Fund, concessional funding, and
emergency reconstruction loans) would become available and this would help in avoiding diversion of budget
resources from other development programs. As a DPL instrument, the operation would aid in advancing the

                                                                                                      Page 3 of 15
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Lckd. Romania Cat DDO (P166303)



policy reforms that would in the longer term enhance predictable and structured financing for disaster risk
prevention, preparedness, response and post-disaster reconstruction. At appraisal, the Bank concluded that
Romania's macroeconomic outlook was adequate for supporting the DPL operation.


b. Relevance of Prior Actions

Rationale

Pillar # 1. Strengthen the Borrower's national framework for disaster risk management (DRM). Reforms
in this pillar aimed to strengthen the systems for managing emergencies, raising public awareness, and
information sharing before, during and after natural disasters. There were two prior actions (PAs) (PD, page
38).

PA # 1. The Government established the National Platform for DRR in 2016 and the platform is effective.

Although managing natural disasters and climate risks requires action from all segments of society (such as
Government action across ministries and national and subnational sectors and civil society) in the past DRM in
Romania was viewed mainly as the sole responsibility of the Department for Emergency Situation (DES). As a
result, disaster and climate risks were rarely considered in short- and long-term development planning.

This prior action sought to establish the National Platform for DRM as recommended by the Sendai Framework
for DRM and the Romania 2016 - 2020 National Action Plan on climate change. This prior action would help in
setting the institutional and legal framework for DRR monitoring and communication of disaster impacts and
increase public awareness on preparedness and response strategies. Establishing a platform would also
enable the Government to meet its commitment under the Sendai framework for reporting on disaster and
climate change risks.

The analytical underpinnings for this prior action were based on: (i) World Bank (2016). Romania 2016 - 2020
National Action Plan on Climate Change. This report highlighted the need for participation of stakeholders in
developing and implementing the DRM action plan and establishing a national platform for implementing
the action plan; and (ii) International Federation for Red Cross and Red Crescent (2011). Public Awareness and
Public Education for Disaster Risk Reduction. This report underscored the importance of raising public
awareness in galvanizing DRM actions.

PA # 2. The Government adopted the national emergency management system for emergency and disaster
response (SMISU) and the system was effective nationwide.

This prior action sought to establish a system that collected information on emergencies in real or near-real time
for providing emergency responders with data on the response assets available in the vicinity. Systematic data
on the disaster parameters - event, location, number of affected people and damage to infrastructure enable
quantitative measurement of the long-term impacts of disasters and climate change and aid in national and
international dialogue around damage and loss under the Paris Agreement and the Sendai framework.

The analytical underpinnings of this prior action were based on: (i) World Bank (2016). Romania 2016 - 2020
National Action Plan on Climate Change. A key action recommended by this document was to ensure that
mechanisms are in place to compensate for economic losses associated with weather related events through


                                                                                                   Page 4 of 15
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Lckd. Romania Cat DDO (P166303)



access to information; and (ii) Government of Romania (2017). Sendai Framework Data Readiness Report.
This report specified the data that the Government needs to collect to better manage disasters.

Pillar # 2. Strengthen the Borrower's capacity to systematically identify and reduce disaster and climate
risks and to manage the financial impact of disasters. Reforms under this pillar aimed at supporting the
Government to promote risk-informed planning and financial management to public authorities. There were two
PAs (PD, pages 38 - 39).

PA # 3. The Government, through the National Commission for Earthquake Engineering, Technical
Commissions for Action on Buildings and Technical Commission for structural Systems revised the national
building design code for addressing seismic risk in existing buildings.

When this operation was being prepared, over 3,000 residential buildings in Romania were identified as
needing structural strengthening and many public buildings were identified as high risk of partial or complete
collapse because of earthquakes. The buildings in Bucharest built before the first official seismic code of 1963
were particularly susceptible to seismic risks. Buildings constructed between 1964 and 1977 were also
vulnerable, due to the weakness of the existing building code regarding seismic risk. For buildings constructed
with the 2013 building code, the likelihood of severe damage or earthquake was low, as this code was
harmonized with the EUROCODE 8 (discussed below). This prior action sought to upgrade the building code for
seismic risk reduction in all buildings.

The analytical underpinnings of this prior action based on: (i) World Bank (2016): Unbreakable: Building the
Resilience of the Poor in the face of Natural disasters. This report underscored the importance of reducing
exposure and vulnerability of buildings to reduce the risks to the poor and the near poor; (ii) World Bank (2015):
Housing in Romania: Towards a National Housing Strategy: This report highlighted the risks from earthquakes
to existing apartment buildings and the need for steps to be taken by the Government to reduce seismic risks -
including linking seismic strengthening to energy efficiency programs; and (iii) European Union (EU) (1998).
EUROCODE 8. This report provided guidelines for designing structures for earthquake resistance.

PA # 4. The Government: (i) in line with the EU Regulation No 1303/2013, submitted to the European
Commission, the national assessment of disaster risks in order to access funds under the European Structural
Investment Funds (2014 - 2020) for enhanced emergency response; and (ii) made available to the public the
RO-Risk Platform data and reports on disaster risk assessment.

Before appraisal, the Government completed a national risk assessment process known as RO-RISK, which
articulated the risks from ten natural, technical and biological hazards. The RO-RISK report, data and
information was uploaded and made available to different stakeholders. This report met EU standards and the
sharing of the data supported the Government's commitment to the EU-INSPIRE directive.

The assessment of disaster and climate risk at the national level was a critical first step for quantifying disaster
and climate risk, prioritizing them and developing actions in different sectors to improve resilience to identified
risks. The analytical underpinnings of this prior action were based on: (i) World Bank (2010): Natural Hazards,
Unnatural Disasters: The Economics of Effective Prevention. This report assessed the economics of disaster
prevention and noted the different kinds of preventive actions that could be considered by governments; and (ii)
Romanian Government (2017): Risk Assessment (RO-RISK). This document provided national assessments of
ten disasters facing Romania.

The causal links between the prior actions under the pillars, the intended program results and the long-
term outcomes were clear, direct and logical. The first prior action aimed to strengthen the institutional and

                                                                                                     Page 5 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Lckd. Romania Cat DDO (P166303)



 legal framework for DRR through setting a National Platform for monitoring and communicating disaster
 impacts, enhance public awareness on effective preparedness and response strategies. The second prior
 action supported the monitoring of disaster impacts and coordination of disaster impacts in the case of a
 disaster through operationalizing a national emergency management system for emergency and disaster
 response. The third prior action aimed to provide the legal foundation for disaster resilience of physical
 infrastructure and strengthen the national building code for seismic risk reduction. The fourth prior action aimed
 to develop DRM plans for fiscal and budgetary strategies. Overall, the prior actions were likely to contribute to
 the PDO of strengthening Romana's institutional and legal framework to manage the physical, social and fiscal
 impacts of natural disasters and climate change. The prior actions were based on sound analytical
 underpinnings. The prior actions are rated as highly satisfactory.

 Therefore, the relevance of design is rated as highly satisfactory.



Rating

Highly Satisfactory


4. Relevance of Results Indicators

Rationale

Pillar # 1. Strengthen the Borrower's national framework for disaster risk management. There were
three results indicators (RIs) (PD, page 38)

RI # 1. The Government submitted annual reports on progress under the Sendai Framework for DRR.

RI # 2. The Government initiated citizen awareness campaigns to ensure that they understand the
potential impact of disasters and how they can prevent, prepare and respond to disasters.

RI # 3. The Government submitted annual reports on the number of people affected by disasters each
year, disaggregated by gender and age and damage to buildings and infrastructure.

The indicators discussed above measured progress towards the PDO of strengthening Romania's
institutional and legal framework to effectively manage the physical and social impacts of natural disasters
and climate change. The indicators were appropriate for measuring the development outcome and were
verifiable.

Pillar # 2. Strengthen the Borrower's capacity to systematically identify and reduce disaster and
climate risks and to manage the financial impact of disasters. There were three RIs (PD, pages 38 -
39).

RI # 4. The Government adopts the revised building code of seismic risk in existing buildings in the Official
Gazette; (ii) the number of engineers certified as experts on the revised code; and (iii) the number of new
buildings designed and built using the new regulations, and the number of old buildings refurbished on the
basis of the revised design code for seismic for the existing building.


                                                                                                     Page 6 of 15
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Lckd. Romania Cat DDO (P166303)



RI # 5. Disaster risk reduction action plans are prepared and approved by the relevant authorities.

RI # 6. The fiscal and budgetary strategy is informed by main disaster risks and their potential fiscal
impacts based on the RO - RISK assessment data.

The indicators measured progress towards the PDO of strengthening Romania's institutional and legal
framework to effectively manage the physical and fiscal impacts of natural hazards and climate change.
The indicators which were directly attributable to the prior actions, were appropriate and could be verified.
The baseline, targets and the data sources for monitoring performance were specified at appraisal.
Therefore, the relevance of results indicators is rated as satisfactory.

Table: Results Indicators (RIs), the Prior Actions they support, baseline and target values, actual
change in RI relative to target and RI achievement rating.

                                                                                      Actual
                                                Baseline    Target                  change in
                                                                                                    RI
                       Associated     RI      (including (including Actual value target
           RIs                                                                                 achievement
                          PAs     Relevance units and units and of target relative to
                                                                                                  rating
                                                  dates)    dates)                   targeted
                                                                                      change
PDO. To strengthen Romania’s institutional and legal framework to effectively manage the physical,
social and fiscal impacts of natural disasters and climate change.
Pillar # 1. Strengthen Romania’s national framework for DRM.
RI # 1. The                                                 Target
Government reports                              Baseline    (2021):       Four
progress achieved                              (2018):No      One       progress       Target
                         PA # 1. Satisfactory                                                   Substantial
under the                                       progress progress        reports    exceeded.
International Sendai                             reports.    report    Submitted.
Framework for DRR.                                        submitted.
RI # 2. Number of
citizen awareness
campaigns
conducted to ensure                             Baseline    Target
that citizens are                             (2018): No (2021): Six Six public
                                                                                       Target
better informed of the   PA # 1 Satisfactory public          public    awareness                Substantial
                                                                                     realized.
potential impacts of                          awareness awareness campaigns
disasters and how                             campaigns. campaigns
they can prevent,
prepare and respond
to disasters.
                                                            Target
                                                            (2021): Four reports
RI # 3. Reports                                 Baseline
                                                             Three    available for
available annually on                         (2018): No                               Target
                         PA # 2 Satisfactory                annual 2018, 2019,                  Substantial
the impact of                                     annual                            exceeded.
                                                          reports (for 2020 and
disasters.                                       reports.
                                                          2018, 2019      2021.
                                                           and 2020.


                                                                                                      Page 7 of 15
                   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                   Lckd. Romania Cat DDO (P166303)



               Pillar # 2. Strengthen the Borrower's capacity to systematically identify and reduce disaster and
               climate risks and to manage the financial impact of disasters.
                                                                             Target
                                                                                           National
                                                                             (2021):
                                                              Baseline                 building code
                                                                            National
               RI # 4. The national                         (2018): No                   for seismic
                                                                            building                    Target
               building code            PA # 3 Satisfactory national                          risk               Substantial
                                                                            code for                   realized.
               published.                                      building                   approved
                                                                             seismic
                                                                code                          and
                                                                               risk
                                                                                         published.
                                                                           approved.
               RI # 5. Disaster risk                          Baseline       Target
                                                                                            Seven
               reduction plans are                           (2018): No (2021):
                                                                                        disaster risk
               prepared and                                    disaster       Three                     Target
                                        PA # 4 Satisfactory                               reduction              Substantial
               approved by the                                   risk         action                  exceeded.
                                                                                             plans
               relevant responsible                           reduction       plans
                                                                                          approved.
               authorities.                                     plans.     approved.
                                                                                           The draft
                                                              Baseline                    fiscal and
                                                                             Target
                                                               (2018):                    budgetary
                                                                             (2021):
               RI # 6. The fiscal and                          Disaster                strategy, info
                                                                            Disaster
               budgetary strategy is                             risk                      rmed by
                                                                               risk
               informed by potential                        information                    disaster
                                                                         information                    Target
               impact of disasters,     PA # 4 Satisfactory       not                     risks, was             Substantial
                                                                          is included                  realized.
               with the publicly                            included in                 approved in
                                                                         in the fiscal
               available RO-RISK                              the fiscal                  2022 and
                                                                               and
               data.                                             and                    published in
                                                                           budgetary
                                                             budgetary                  the Ministry
                                                                            strategy.
                                                              strategy.                  of Finance
                                                                                           website.

   Rating

   Satisfactory

   5. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
EFFICACY_TBL




                OBJECTIVE 1
                Objective
                To strengthen Romania's institutional and legal framework to effectively manage the physical impacts of
                natural hazards and climate change.

                PA # 1 and 2. RI # 1 and 3

                Rationale
                Outcomes.



                                                                                                                 Page 8 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Lckd. Romania Cat DDO (P166303)




      The National Platform for Disaster Risk Reduction (NPDRR) provided a basis for consultations on the
       diagnostic of the state of DRM in Romania. Four reports (2018, 2019, 2020 and 2021) were produced
       by experts from the General Inspectorate for Emergency Situations (GIES) and the Department for
       Emergency Situations (DES) on the progress achieved under the Sendai International Framework for
       DRR, exceeding the target of one report. In parallel, the Government through the NPDRR and with EU
       support, also started taking major steps for implementing the DesInventar database for enhancing the
       quality of reporting on the Sendai International Framework for DRR and validating data and
       information from progress reports as expected by the United Nations Office for Disaster Risk
       Reduction (UNDRR).
      Four reports were produced (2018, 2019, 2020 and 2021) by the System for Emergency and Disaster
       Response (SMISU) on loss and damage data due to natural disasters, exceeding the target of three.
       The reports were publicly available. In addition to data on emergencies, the analytical reports on
       operations included indicators on efficiency of emergency response which included rescue time
       required, persons assisted and persons saved disaggregated by gender and age, event type and
       agency responsible. The ICR (para 47) noted that the report from 2021 showed that in the wake of the
       COVID - 19 pandemic, the number of people assisted medically by the teams per minute increased
       between 2018 and 2021, with a much higher number during 2020 (6972 persons per minute)
       compared to 2018 (6445 persons per minute).



Rating

Satisfactory

OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To strengthen Romania's institutional and legal framework to effectively manage the social impacts of natural
hazards and climate change.
PA # 1. RI # 2.

Rationale
Outcomes.

      The Government initiated several national strategic frameworks for improving the effectiveness of
       disaster preparedness and response and concrete objectives on risk communications through
       campaigns for raising public awareness, capacity building for emergency responders and
       operationalizing information and warning systems. This included six dedicated government awareness
       campaigns as targeted. The campaigns were disseminated through various communication channels
       (television, radio, 4,675 public emergency drills and through digital media tools). The number of
       downloads of the Department for Emergency Situations (DES) mobile app and the number of citizens
       accessing the "Be Prepared" digital platform doubled and tripled between 2018 and 2021, reaching
       over one million downloads and 805,000 users in 2021.
      Results of two public awareness surveys implemented in 2018 and 2021, showed that citizens
       awareness of earthquake as a major disaster risk increased from 26% to 39% between 2018 and
       2021. About 74% of respondents were interested in receiving first aid training in 2021 and citizens


                                                                                                Page 9 of 15
                         Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                         Lckd. Romania Cat DDO (P166303)



                             having actively joined prevention or relief actions increased from 28% to 41% between 2018 and
                             2021.

                      As discussed in section 2c, the Government requested a first partial withdrawal on February 7, 2020, and a
                      second partial withdrawal in the wake of the COVID - 19 pandemic (also discussed in section 8b and 9a).



                      Rating

                      Satisfactory

                      OBJECTIVE 3
                      Objective
                      To strengthen Romania's institutional and legal framework to effectively manage the fiscal impacts of natural
                      hazards and climate change.
                      PA # 3 - 4. RI # 4 - 6.

                      Rationale
                      Outcomes.

                            The revised national building code for seismic risk reduction for all buildings was approved in
                             December 2019, as targeted. The revised code updated standards for inspection of existing buildings,
                             their retrofit and upgrade. This code was aligned with the structure of the European Norm Eurocode 8.
                             The provisions in the code established the criteria and procedures for the seismic evaluation of
                             existing buildings to determine their susceptibility of damage to severe seismic actions, and where
                             appropriate, the substantiation of interventions works to reduce seismic vulnerability. The engineers in
                             the Ministry of Internal Affairs (MoIA) were trained for assessing building structural vulnerability and
                             undertaking verification of works for alignment with the regulation.
                            Seven sector- specific DRR action plans were approved since 2018 to provide specific emergency
                             management, exceeding the target of three plans. These action plans were for forest fires in August
                             2018, hydrometeorological events in 2019, droughts in 2020, chemical, biological and radiological
                             incidents in 2020, earthquakes in November 2021, overall emergency in June 2022 and epidemics in
                             2022.
                            The Fiscal and budgetary strategy informed by potential impact of disasters with a multi-hazard risk
                             assessment (RO-RISK) data was approved in February 2022. This strategy provided a basis for
                             considering several financial instruments to manage fiscal impacts towards a comprehensive disaster
                             risk financing strategy.



                      Rating

                      Satisfactory


OVERALL EFF TBL OLD




                                                                                                                       Page 10 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Lckd. Romania Cat DDO (P166303)



Overall Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
Rationale

Given that the intended outcomes were realized, overall outcome is rated as satisfactory.



Overall Efficacy Rating
Satisfactory


6. Outcome

Rationale

The PDO was highly relevant to the Government strategy and the current Bank strategy for Romania. There is
an explicit, comprehensive and convincing results chain linking the prior actions to the achievement of the PDO,
grounded in credible analytical work at the country level. Credible data were available to measure achievement
of the target. Achievement of results indicators was rated substantial. Therefore, overall outcome is rated as
satisfactory.


a. Rating

Satisfactory

7. Risk to Development Outcome

Government commitment. The risk that development outcomes will not be sustained due to inadequate
Government commitment is low. The ICR (para 69) notes that the Government is highly committed to
advancing specific DRM activities under the EU programming period. The Government is also implementing
several programs for seismic upgrading and retrofitting and enhancing sustainability and energy efficiency of
infrastructure, including through four IPFs focusing on emergency response and educational assets. The ICR
observes that the role of the disaster and emergency sector became even clearer during the COVID - 19
pandemic and in the wake of the pandemic, there is greater appreciation across the Government of investing
in building resilience.

Macroeconomic risk. There is moderate risk to development outcomes due to the ongoing Russia's
invasion of Ukraine and ensuing impacts risks on global supply chains that can impact the fiscal situation in
Romania and thereby undermine resources of the DRM agencies.

Institutional risk. The ICR (para 72) notes that there are still some gaps in the legal and institutional
framework to ensure sufficient and timely implementation of DRR programs. The ICR also notes that
although Romania had made progress in terms of general awareness, DRM outreach activities from the
Government could be specifically tailored and designed to reach the lower income groups.



                                                                                                   Page 11 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Lckd. Romania Cat DDO (P166303)



8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Bank Performance – Design

Rationale


The Bank prepared this operation in coordination with Government stakeholders and in consultation with
civil society and vulnerable groups such as the Roma community, as well as the EU and international
organizations. The operation was based on the experiences from the previous Bank-financed 2003 - 2012
multi-sectoral hazard risk mitigation project in Romania and from the 12 Bank financed Cat DDO's
operations implemented globally by the Bank since 2008. The lessons incorporated at design were: (i)
disasters need to be managed as opposed to treating them as exogenous shocks that cannot be
proactively addressed; (ii) efficiency of DRM is likely to be enhanced when it is based on adequate risk
identification; (iii) an ex-ante strategy to finance response, recovery and reconstruction for faster recovery
after a disaster event; (iv) recognizing that Governments can take preventive actions for reducing risks
without incurring additional costs; and (v) securing flexible source of funding to cover early disaster
response and recovery (PD, para 53).

The prior actions of this operation were based on sound analytical underpinnings (discussed in section
three). The baseline and targets for the results indicators and the data sources for monitoring performance
were appropriately specified at appraisal.

The Bank identified several risks at appraisal, including substantial political and governance
risks, moderate risks with macroeconomic and fiduciary management and low risks relating to the technical
design of the program. The mitigation measures incorporated proved to be appropriate for managing the
operation's risks (ICR, paras 64 and 65). The ICR notes that although the COVID -19 pandemic could have
posed a substantial risk to divert attention from DRM reforms, the Bank's parallel engagements with the
Government and the possibility to utilize liquidity from the Cat DDO to support early response to the
pandemic helped to keep the visibility of DRM reforms.



Rating

Satisfactory

b. Bank Performance – Implementation

Rationale

The Bank conducted twice a year supervision missions, with a multidisciplinary team consisting of DRM and
financial specialists (ICR, para 66). The in-country presence of the Bank team facilitated in tracking the
progress of reforms, coordinating between the Government and other development partners and engaging in
high-level policy dialogue. The Bank also mobilized additional resources for TA to advance complementary
reforms. The Bank also expeditiously addressed the two withdrawal requests for disbursement of Cat DDO


                                                                                                     Page 12 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Lckd. Romania Cat DDO (P166303)



funds in the wake of the COVID - 19 pandemic. This enabled timely transfer of funds to the Government and
providing assistance to the citizens in the aftermath of the public health crisis.



Rating

Satisfactory

c. Overall Bank Performance

Rationale

Overall Bank performance is rated as satisfactory reflecting the Bank performance both at design and during
implementation.


Overall Bank Performance Rating

Satisfactory

9. Other Impacts

a. Social and Poverty

This operation supported Romania's vulnerable populations by providing immediate liquidity to the Government
that was critical in avoiding disruptions to social assistance during the COVID - 19 pandemic in 2020 and 2021
respectively (ICR, para 58).



b. Environmental

The ICR (para 59) noted that specific actions under this DPL were not expected to have adverse environmental
impacts. The ICR observed that as an EU member, Romania has strong environmental protection standards and
the national strategies and reforms supported by the DPL were aligned with the National Climate Change and Low
Carbon Green Growth Strategy's 2016 - 2030 sector specific goals for protecting natural resources.



c. Gender

There was no gender-specific impacts.




                                                                                                Page 13 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Lckd. Romania Cat DDO (P166303)



d. Other

Not applicable (ICR, para 61).




10. Quality of ICR

Rationale

The ICR is well-written, and the quality of evidence provided in the ICR is adequate for monitoring the
operation's performance. The ICR appropriately discusses the analytical underpinnings of the prior actions. The
theory of change provided in the ICR is clear and convincingly articulates the causal links between the prior
actions, the results indicators and the intended outcomes. The ICR clearly provides justification for why a
Development Policy Lending (DPL) with a Catastrophic Deferred Drawdown Option (Cat -DDO) was used for
this operation and draws good lessons from the experience of implementing this operation. The ICR is concise
and for the most part, adheres to the recommended length.



a. Rating

Substantial

11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                   IEG
                                                                                 Disagreement/Comments
Outcome                          Satisfactory         Satisfactory

Bank Performance                 Satisfactory         Satisfactory
Relevance of Results
                                 ---                  Satisfactory
Indicators
Quality of ICR                   ---                  Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR draws four main lessons from the experience of implementing this operation. Three of them are
presented below, with some adaptation of language.

1. A national disaster risk management (DRM) platform with strong convening power across institutions
and sectors help in ensuring cooperation and coordination of actors. The lesson is while the coordination
and division of tasks with limited resources worked well at the central level, capacity and collaboration needs to
be strengthened at the local level for improving disaster risk reduction.


                                                                                                    Page 14 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Lckd. Romania Cat DDO (P166303)



2. Strong institutional champions and a platform for dialogue help in advancing complex reforms and
ensuring effective implementation of a Development Policy Operation (DPO) with Catastrophe Deferred
Drawdown Option (Cat DDO). Institutional partners with understanding of the program and other engagements
with the World Bank such as the Ministry of Finance in this operation helped in advocating the financial
mechanisms that were instrumental for developing and implementing the Cat DDO. Having champions at a high
decision-making level also proved to be critical for the triggering and withdrawal of funds from the Cat DDO.

3. The Cat DDO can be effective and timely instrument for high impact events. The Cat DDO in this
operation supported the Government through two separate withdrawals in the wake of the COVID - 19
pandemic. This allowed to mitigate the impacts of the pandemic through prepositioning human resources,
equipment and quarantine spaces such as supporting citizens in home-based isolation.


13. Project Performance Assessment Report (PPAR) Recommended?

No




                                                                                               Page 15 of 15
