     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ZA-Land Bank Financial Intermediation Pr (P150008)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0023393

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P150008                                    ZA-Land Bank Financial Intermediation Pr

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 South Africa                               Finance, Competitiveness and Innovation


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-86860                                 01-Apr-2022                                         10,942,615.71

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 23-Jan-2017                                01-Apr-2022

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            93,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                             10,942,615.71                                              0.00

 Actual                                         10,942,615.71                                              0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Burcin Pamuksuz             Ebru Karamete                Christopher David Nelson       IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to both Schedule 1 of the Loan Agreement (p.6) and the Project Appraisal Document (p.11), the
   project objective was “to “sustainably scale up the Borrower’s financing specifically to benefit emerging
   farmers”. The Borrower is defined as the Land and Agricultural Development Bank of South Africa (Land
   Bank).




                                                                                                  Page 1 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ZA-Land Bank Financial Intermediation Pr (P150008)



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project was designed as a financing intermediary loan for the Land Bank. It was to be implemented
   through a line of credit (LOC) of US$ 93 million.

   The project had a single component (Component 1: Line of Credit for Agricultural Financing) with two
   windows:

   Window 1 Wholesale finance to commercial and emerging farmers (Estimated Cost: Approx. US$
   65.1 million, Actual Cost: None): This window was to extend LOC to the Land Bank and support the Land
   Bank on wholesale lending. The Land Bank was to on-lend funds to participating financial intermediaries
   (PFIs) which comply with eligibility criteria agreed with the World Bank. The PFIs were to on-lend funds to
   eligible agriculture enterprises, commercial and emerging farmers, communal property associations and
   other eligible borrowers supported under the Land Bank’s corporate banking (CB), and commercial
   development banking (CDB) business lines. Funding for Land Bank was to on-lend funds to PFIs under CB
   for commercial farmers, at interest rates that consider at minimum Land Bank’s cost of funding, operating
   costs and an appropriate credit risk margin. On the other hand, under CDB, the Land Bank was to on-lend
   funds to intermediaries at interest rates that would allow the bank to at least cover its average costs of
   funds. The wholesale lending was to help the Land Bank to leverage a network of financial intermediaries
   without incurring significant operating costs.

   Window 2 Financing to integrate emerging farmers into established value chains (Estimated Cost:
   Approx. US$ 27.9 million, Actual Cost: US$ 8 million): Under this window, a line of credit was extended
   to Land Bank to provide direct lending to emerging farmers for integrated value chain finance. The Land
   Bank was to finance eligible emerging farmers and agriculture enterprises in collaboration with large
   agriculture corporates and/or technical partners in a targeted value chain. The high-potential value chain
   projects were to be identified in a given geographic region and securing buy-in from large agriculture
   corporates or technical partners that would support emerging farmers’ integration into the chain. The
   agriculture corporates were to provide technical support (directly or indirectly) to the emerging farmers,
   building up their capacity to be sustainable suppliers to the chain. The pricing for direct lending by the Land
   Bank to integrate emerging farmers in established value chains was to be market based.

   Revised Components: Following the mid-term review (MTR) on 11 December 2019, the World Bank (WB)
   and the Land Bank agreed to restructure the project with an aim to particularly facilitate the utilization of the
   wholesale lending window (Window 1). However, this restructuring could not be materialized as the Land
   Bank experienced liquidity crises and defaulted to some of its commercial lenders which were triggered by
   downgrading of the Land Bank by one of the credit rating agencies. Two years after the MTR, the Land
   Bank requested cancellation of undisbursed loan amounts through a level 2 restructuring. Accordingly,
   undisbursed amount of US$ 66,124,638.88 was cancelled.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates

                                                                                                       Page 2 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ZA-Land Bank Financial Intermediation Pr (P150008)



   Project Cost: The project cost estimated at appraisal was US$ 93 million. The total estimated cost was
   revised down to US$ 26.9 million at the First Restructuring cancelling the undisbursed amount of US$ 66.12
   million. The cancellation was mainly due the Land Bank’s default status and the Land Bank suspending its
   new loan originations. The actual cost at closing was US$ 10.9 million (12 percent of the total amount). The
   US$ 8 million was utilized for sub-projects. The difference between the total cost and the actual
   disbursements was because of the currency exchange rates.

   Financing: The project was financed through an IBRD loan in the amount of US$ 93 million. Land Bank
   was the Borrower and the implementing agency. The Ministry of Finance was the Guarantor acting as the
   primary obligor for due and punctual payments of the loan to the WB. The Bank’s financing was revised
   down to US$ 26.9 million at First Restructuring. At project closing actual disbursements from the IBRD loan
   was US$ 10.9 million.

   Borrower’s Contribution: The ICR did not report any planned borrower contribution amount. While the
   project’s task team consequently reported that there was Borrower’s contribution at the sub-loan level, the
   exact amount was not provided.

   Restructurings: The project had one Level 2 restructuring on December 21, 2021.

   The WB conducted an MTR in December 2019. At the time of the MTR only 6% of the funds were utilized
   (only under Window 2) due to delays in upgrading the Land Bank’s Environmental and Social Management
   System (ESMS), and delays in implementing Environmental and Social Action plans with intermediaries. In
   addition, no funds were utilized under Window 1 because of design shortcomings. Although the Land Bank
   and the WB agreed on a restructuring to improve implementation, this restructuring could not be completed,
   as in early 2020, the Land Bank faced financial difficulties and was downgraded by Moodys' to below
   investment grade in January 2020. In April, the Land Bank defaulted on one of its commercial credit
   obligations and cross-defaults with most of its lenders followed. Origination of new loans was suspended
   and lending to its existing customers was reduced significantly. The situation could not be resolved and
   upon the request of the Land Bank, undisbursed portion of the loan was cancelled. However, the ICR
   reports that the project was not closed earlier than the original closing date, as the WB intended to provide
   the maximum opportunity to the Government of South Africa (GoSA) and the Land Bank to resolve the
   default status and fully utilize the funds available under the project (ICR, p.12).

   Dates: The project was approved on December 13, 2017, and became effective on September 29, 2017.
   The project was closed on the originally envisaged day, on April 1, 2022.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country Context: South Africa has one of the highest inequality rates in the world. Land distribution in
particular, is one of the most unequal. Although the rural share of poverty fell over the years partly due to
migration of the poor to larger towns and informal settlements around urban centers, by 2011 rural areas
remained to be characterized by greater poverty and inequality compared to urban areas. South Africa’s
National Development plan identified agricultural development and successful land reform as key the
elements for combatting poverty and achieving integrated, inclusive growth. Among the main challenges for

                                                                                                   Page 3 of 13
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                       Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      ZA-Land Bank Financial Intermediation Pr (P150008)



               rural and agricultural development in South Africa, were affordable access to working capital for
               emerging farmers and medium to long term finance for small and medium sized agricultural enterprises. In
               this context the project objective was highly relevant both at appraisal and closing to the GoSA’s priorities of
               eliminating poverty and reducing inequality. Through Land Bank’s enabling function for access to finance,
               the project directly targeted farmers and farm workers and aimed to achieve poverty reduction.

               Bank Strategy: At appraisal, the project was fully aligned with Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for
               South Africa for the period of FY14-17. The CPS had three pillars (Pillar 1: Reducing Inequality, Pillar 2:
               Promoting Investments, and Pillar 3: Strengthening Institutions). The project aimed to support the reduction
               of inequality by increasing access to finance for specifically emerging farmers. It also foresaw facilitation of
               private investment in rural development and agriculture through financing solutions provided by the Land
               Bank. The project remained highly relevant to 2018 Systematic Country Diagnostic and the CPS for FY22-
               26. Focus Area 2 of the CPS aims at achieving an inclusive private sector that creates jobs and
               opportunities. To reach that objective strengthening value chain solutions, access to early-stage finance
               and deepening financial markets intermediation are identified among the priority areas for support. The
               project was also in line with the Twin Goals of the World Bank Group to eradicate extreme poverty and
               increase shared prosperity.

               Previous Sector Experience: The project design benefited from international experience as well as WB’s
               own previous experience in various countries such as Turkey, Mexico, Bolivia, and Colombia in relation to
               development finance institutions (DFIs). The design of the project which included wholesale lending model,
               allowing flexibility for LOC terms, and designing LOC on commercial principals was built on these
               experiences. In addition, project design used private sector-led relationships for integration of emerging
               farmers into supply chains instead of government-led grant programs which was proven to be less effective
               in South Africa. The project complemented WB’s previous engagement with the GoSA on rural
               development and financial inclusion. Through the reimbursable advisory program, the WB provided
               advisory services on implementation of the land reform program. In addition, a WB executed Trust Fund,
               enables financing of analytical and advisory services to the GoSA on financial inclusion and strengthening
               financial stability.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Objective 1: To sustainably scale up the Borrower’s financing specifically to benefit emerging farmers.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change: According to the theory of change (ToC), the WB would disburse the LOC of US$ 93
                             million to the Land Bank which would channel funds for utilization through two windows. Under Window 1, the

                                                                                                                              Page 4 of 13
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   ZA-Land Bank Financial Intermediation Pr (P150008)



Land Bank would on-lend funds to PFIs and as output they would then on-lend them to eligible agriculture
enterprises, commercial and emerging farmers, communal property associations and other eligible borrowers
supported under the Land Bank’s CB or CDB business lines. Through this approach, the Land Bank would
avoid costs associated with retail lending such a maintaining a large branch network and would leverage the
networks already built by the PFIs. As outcome, the Land Bank would strengthen and scale-up its wholesale
business and would enable access of small emerging farmers to finance while creating jobs. As an impact the
project is expected to contribute to reduction of poverty and inequality. On the other hand, under Window 2,
direct lending by the Land Bank to emerging farmers would encourage collaboration with large
companies/technical partners and as outcome, result in not only increase their access to finance but also
increase technical skills and financing capacities.

While the ToC's causal links and full results chain were clear, a TA and a project management component
(proposed by the project team but rejected by the Borrower) was missing; these would complement the
financing element and ease implementation. In addition, the weaknesses in the institutional structure of Land
Bank (although briefly assessed in the PAD) and lack of robust national financial supervision framework for
DFIs were not taken into account in project design. The critical assumptions for the project were that there
would be appetite for the products extended through LOC and the Land Bank would continue to commit to its
new strategy. During the implementation of the project, the Land Bank remained committed to its new
strategy. However, the assumption on the demand for LOC’s products proven to be wrong. The new scheme
introduced through LoC, replaced a subsidized lending which had financed the cost of providing agricultural
advisory and market access services via using a grant from the Department of Agriculture, Forestry and
Fisheries, creating motivation for the intermediaries to provide such services. In the absence of the subsidy
element, the demand for LoC products remained low.

By the time of restructuring (and project closing) the project did not disburse any funds allocated under the
Window 1 and supported only two sub-projects under its direct lending window (Window 2). While the project
disbursed US$ 26.9 million, it utilized only US$8 million, and the balance was refunded.

Outputs:

The project had seven intermediate indicators. Five of the indicators could not be achieved due to the Land
Bank’s declining financial condition, which began to deteriorate at the begging of 2020, followed by a
downgrading below investment grade and eventually Land Bank’s suspension of new lending operations. Two
of the intermediate indicators (Return on Average Assets, Return on Average Equity) exceeded the targets.
However, they were misleading, and targets were achieved only because the Land Bank wrote-off a
significant volume of loans (ICR, p. 14).

Outcomes:

Disbursement of wholesale loans: No achievement could be reported as no disbursements could be made.
Target of US$ 65.1 million could not be achieved. Reasons for lack of achievement were delays in upgrading
the Land Bank’s own ESMS, delays in implementing the required environmental and social framework (E&S)
for intermediaries. In addition, the new scheme for wholesale loans did not have a subsidy element which had
allowed the Land Bank to offer wholesale loans at sub-market rates. These favorable rates had motivated
intermediaries to provide non-financial services to beneficiaries cost-free. The absence of a subsidy element
decreased the appetite and demand for loans and the project was not able to disburse any wholesale loans
prior to the Land Bank suspending origination of new loans in mid-2020 due to its liquidity crises. This


                                                                                                Page 5 of 13
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                ZA-Land Bank Financial Intermediation Pr (P150008)



                            indicates that viability of wholesale financing in the country and the approach were not tested enough at
                            appraisal stage.

                            Disbursement of value chain loans: The project disbursed US$ 8.0 million but the target of US$ 27.9million
                            could not be achieved. Through the disbursed funds the project supported two value chain sub-loans: The
                            first black majority-owned pork producer of significant size in the country and a black majority owned farm to
                            develop grape and citrus orchards.

                            Number of beneficiaries: The project had 350 beneficiaries but the target of 1,100 beneficiaries could not be
                            met. The supported 350 beneficiaries represent new jobs generated as result of disbursement of two sub-
                            loans financed under Window 2 and do not represent small-scale farmers benefitting from the finance
                            provided.

                            Total Non-Performing Loan (NPL) rate under credit line: The target was to achieve a rate below 10%. The
                            ICR reports that at the time of writing the ICR, the larger of the two sub-loans under the credit line were in
                            NPL status. This resulted in a total NPL rate of 74 percent (ICR, p.14). The ICR team interviewed the sub-
                            borrower of the sub-loan in NPL status. The managers reported that while the sub-project was forced to
                            default on its obligations to the Land Bank due to cash-flow challenges associated with COVID-19 (high
                            freight charges) and extended drought conditions, the sub-project continued to be operational and was
                            generating a positive cash-flow (ICR, p.14).



                            Overall, the Land Bank’s liquidity crisis, and its defaulting to some of its commercial lenders and eventually
                            ceasing new loan originations were the main reason which impeded project’s reaching its objectives.
                            However, a number of shortcomings at the project design and underestimated risks at appraisal also
                            constituted as major elements affecting project’s performance. Lack of a technical assistance element to
                            support Land Bank’s implementation of its strategy and the project, lack of a solid project management and
                            monitoring structure, not accurate risk assessment and identification of appropriate mitigation measures
                            constrained project implementation.



                            Rating
                            Negligible


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Overall, the project’s efficacy in achieving its objective is rated Negligible. None of the PDO indicators could
                            be achieved. Under Window 1, on-lending activities could not be performed due to Land Bank’s financial
                            situation. Under Window 2, achievements are negligible.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating                                    Primary Reason
                                                                                                                                 Page 6 of 13
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      ZA-Land Bank Financial Intermediation Pr (P150008)



  Negligible                                                 Low achievement


5. Efficiency
Economic and Financial Analysis:

At appraisal an economic analysis for Window 1 (wholesale lending) was conducted. However, no analysis was
made for direct lending window. The ICR reports that as no disbursement was made under Window 1 during
implementation, there is no basis for comparing ex-ante analysis in the Project Appraisal Document with the
actual project results. On the other hand, when the utilization rate of project funds (less than10 percent) and the
NLP status of the one of the only two projects are considered, the efficiency is assessed to be very low. It is the
view of the ICR that the costs to the Borrower and the World Bank in implementing the project were substantial
in comparison to the US$8 million in funds that financed the sub-projects. The costs to the World Bank for
preparation and supervision exceeded US$1.5 million during FY14-22 (ICR, p.15).

Administrative and Operational Efficiency:

The first disbursement was delayed by more than a year mainly due to the delays in the Land Bank’s upgrading
its ESMS and implementation of Environmental and Social Action plans with the intermediaries. Both Land
Bank’s and intermediaries’ capacities necessary to make required changes were overestimated during
appraisal. Project did not have designated project implementation unit within the Land Bank until the MTR. The
overall responsibility was with the Chief Financing Officer not with the Chief Operating Officer or equivalent. All
of these led to sub-optimal project implementation. The WB’s task team at appraisal had identified some
shortcomings (legal and institutional) in the financial supervision of the Land Bank. Despite these shortcomings,
the project had been approved and the implementation commenced. It is the view of the ICR that if a more
robust national financial supervisory framework for DFIs were in place, the task team could have identified
financial problems with the Land Bank early-on and could have helped taking remedial measures avoiding the
liquidity crisis. At appraisal several risks were identified. However, regarding majority of the risk factors (i.e.,
Land Bank’s and PFIs capacity, absence of technical assistance component, problems with the Land Bank’s
business model) the task team was over optimistic and assumed that the mitigation measures would be
sufficient which have proven to be the contrary during the implementation.


Efficiency Rating
Negligible


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?              Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                       0
 Appraisal                                                   0
                                                                                        Not Applicable
                                                                                       0
 ICR Estimate                                                0
                                                                                        Not Applicable


                                                                                                       Page 7 of 13
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      ZA-Land Bank Financial Intermediation Pr (P150008)




* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The relevance of objective is rated High. The project’s efficacy is rated Negligible as it did not achieve the PDO
because of very low utilization of funds by the Land Bank. The project’s efficiency is also rated Negligible since
the costs for the WB and the Borrower in comparison to the benefits achieved through the utilization of the funds
are much larger. Therefore, the overall outcome rating is Highly Unsatisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Highly Unsatisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The achievements under the project are rather limited as there were only two sub-loans financed under the
Window 2. One of the of the sub-loans was in the status of NPL constituting risk to achieved jobs creation
through this loan. On the other hand, the continued dialogue between the WB and the Borrower contributed
to capacity building in the field of strengthening ESMS at the Land Bank. It updated its ESMS policy and put
in place a qualified E&S team. The E&S specialists were responsible for carrying out comprehensive
environmental due diligence of ESMS of Land Bank’s Intermediaries and of its direct borrowers. This
contribution to the capacity building of the Land Bank is likely to be sustained as it will continue to its role as
the primary DFI in agricultural and rural development.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project had a strategic relevance as it addressed rural and agricultural development by facilitating
  access of emerging farmers and land reform beneficiaries to finance through a line of credit. Affordable
  access to working capital for emerging farmers and medium to long term finance for small and medium
  agricultural enterprises are among the main challenges for rural and agricultural development in South
  Africa.

  The wholesale model was the chosen approach for the project in line with the international experience.
  However, its viability for South Africa was not tested enough. The model introduced was based on
  commercial principles and did not involve a subsidy element. Whereas the Land Bank’s previous model
  involved a subsidy element which facilitated the intermediaries to provide cost-free technical advice to
  beneficiary farmers. Without the subsidy element, the intermediaries were reluctant to provide such
  services and did not have the appetite for the loans offered by the Land Bank.




                                                                                                         Page 8 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ZA-Land Bank Financial Intermediation Pr (P150008)



  The Implementation arrangements were inadequate. The Land Bank did not have a dedicated unit for
  project management during the early years of implementation. CFO, instead of COO or
  equivalent oversaw management of the project. At appraisal, the PAD identified absence of a TA
  component as a source of risk for implementation of the project. It was assumed that the risk could be
  mitigated if technical assistance needs of the Land Bank as well as operating expenses would be
  covered through external technical assistance resources. However, this had proven to be insufficient and
  project experienced difficulties in implementation.

  From the institutional aspect, although the project team identified gaps in institutional and legal
  framework for the supervision of the Land Bank at appraisal, implementation of the project commenced
  before addressing these gaps. The weaknesses in the supervision framework (not having an independent
  supervisory body separate from the owner) negatively impacted identifying and addressing Land Bank’s
  financial weaknesses and its implementation of the project.

  The project triggered the World Bank’s Performance Standards for the Private Sector (PO/BP 4.03). At
  appraisal capacities of both the Land Bank and its intermediaries for the management of E&S risks were
  over estimated. The necessary improvements in the Land Bank’s ESMS which would support
  implementation of the required safeguards could not be completed on time and this delayed the first
  disbursement by more than a year. As for intermediaries, although ESMS systems could not be
  approved, a gap analysis study conducted during the later years of implementation reveled that, E&S risk
  management capacities were in fact generally absent.

  M&E arrangements were made generally sufficient and reflected the theory of change. The lack of clarity
  on the definition of beneficiaries and lack of indicators regarding the intermediaries were the noted
  shortcomings.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Throughout project implementation, the World Bank’s performance reporting was candid and detailed in the
 ISRs and during MTR. The Bank team’s focus on development impact was demonstrated by their effort to
 address design shortcomings of the project. The involvement of two co-TTLs (one from the Agriculture and
 Food Global Practice, who was assigned later) contributed to the efforts to improve project design through
 restructuring. Even though the restructuring was not materialized, the scope of the restructuring was
 agreed by the Borrower. The project team provided close and continuous support to the Borrower beyond
 the project objective after it had faced financial difficulty.

 The project team provided intensive support to Land Bank for upgrading its ESMS. Even though this
 process took longer than anticipated and delayed the first disbursement, this support helped development
 of an updated ESMS policy, establishment of a qualified E&S team at the Land Bank. In addition, following
 the MTR’s findings a Partnership Management Unit was established at the Land Bank. With the
 suspension of Land Bank’s lending activities and its default to its commercial lenders, the effectiveness of
 such unit in project’s implementation, could not be tested.


                                                                                                   Page 9 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ZA-Land Bank Financial Intermediation Pr (P150008)



 However, the risks associated with the Land Bank’s business model as well as the problems with the
 viability of the wholesale financing approach identified at the appraisal could not be foreseen and avoided
 by the World Bank during implementation. In addition, due to the weak supervision framework which was
 underestimated at appraisal, increasing financial risks and approach of a credit rating downgrade could not
 be diagnosed early. According to the ICR, additional resources and expertise focused on the risks of Land
 Bank financial and business model could have potentially helped to support Land Bank in implementing
 needed reforms prior to the default in 2020 (ICR, p.22).




  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 In line with the PDO, the indicators were defined to measure change is the Land Bank’s business towards
 wholesale financing as well as the contribution of the project to the Land Bank’s overall portfolio and its
 asset-liability management framework. The four results indicators were direct. However, it did not include
 any indicator related to PFIs. Although the theory of change did not establish a direct link between the
 impact of the project and the PFIs, they are integral to wholesale financing. Therefore, the results
 framework could have benefitted from indicators providing evidence on an established and a functioning
 network between the PFIs and the Land Bank. One of the PDO indicators (direct project beneficiaries) was
 not defined clearly. The definition implied by the PDO and the one in the results framework were not
 aligned. Land Bank was responsible from monitoring and evaluating progress against the proposed
 indicators through regular reports. The data were to come from Land Bank’s internal reports and from
 information provided by the PFIs.



b. M&E Implementation
  M&E implementation was very limited due to limited disbursement of funds and project implementation.
  The Land Bank provided required reports in accordance with the M&E framework until the time of its
  liquidity crisis. No formal reporting took place from thereon in this regard.



c. M&E Utilization
  Only two sub-loans totaling slightly more than US$8 million were utilized under Window 2. The utilization
  of the M&E information on project design was minimal.


                                                                                                  Page 10 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ZA-Land Bank Financial Intermediation Pr (P150008)




  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was categorized as a Financial Intermediary Loan (FI-2) at appraisal with moderate
   environmental and social risks and impacts according to WB’s Performance Standards for Private Sector
   Projects (OP/BP 4.03). The Land Bank was required to manage the environmental and social risks of the
   supported activities consistent with the OP/BP 4.03 and applicable national environmental and social laws
   and regulations. On the other hand, the PFIs were also responsible from screening loan applications for
   environmental and social risks and impacts and manage the risks and impacts in a manner consistent with
   the procedures stipulated in the ESMS. According to the ICR, the Land Bank was to put in place an ESMS
   compliant with the WB’s performance standards. However, Land Bank’s upgraded ESMS was approved by
   the WB only in 2018, while delaying the first disbursement significantly. Although this process took longer
   than anticipated it contributed to development of an updated ESMS policy, establishment of a qualified E&S
   team at the Land Bank. The two sub-loans under the direct lending window were approved in compliance
   with Land Bank’s ESMS system (ICR, p.20). As for the PFIs, the Land Bank conducted a gap analysis to
   assess environmental and social risk management capacities of the five PFIs. The analysis showed that
   such capacities and structures were in general absent and needed to be established. During
   implementation, no PFI ESMSs were approved and no wholesale lending was disbursed.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   During implementation, the application of the project financial management reporting was consistent with
   the fiduciary compliance protocols. Land Bank’s accounting system provided required reports for
   monitoring the financial performance of the project. The annual financial reports were audited by the
   Auditor General in accordance with international standards on auditing and were submitted to the World
   Bank in a timely manner.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None.



d. Other
   None.



                                                                                                Page 11 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ZA-Land Bank Financial Intermediation Pr (P150008)




11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                       IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
                                Highly
Outcome                                               Highly Unsatisfactory
                                Unsatisfactory
                                Moderately            Moderately
Bank Performance
                                Unsatisfactory        Unsatisfactory
Quality of M&E                  Modest                Modest

Quality of ICR                  ---                   High


12. Lessons

The following are lessons learned from the ICR (paragraphs 62 to 67) with some paraphrasing:

      Projects with line of credits would benefit from having components that cover
       technical assistance and operating expenses to support implementation of new
       products offered by the credit line as well as the implementation of the project. In the
       case of the project, no resources were allocated to support the implementation of Land
       Bank’s new strategy and products, although the WB offered to include such funding in the
       project. This would have helped help with better implementation of the project. These funds
       would have also supported the capacity building in the field of ESMS systems in the PFIs.
      For projects that support DFIs, addressing the legal and institutional shortcomings
       associated with DFI supervision before project approval, can help mitigating key risks
       during implementation. The project preparation team identified supervision weakness for
       Land Bank, however the project commenced before addressing these gaps. If the necessary
       measures were introduced such as, oversight of national DFIs by the National Treasury’s
       financial sector policy division in the short term and in the medium-term the South African
       Reserve Bank taking on the role of prudential supervision of these entities, the financial
       problems that the Land Bank had encountered could have been diagnosed in advance.
      Replacing subsidized lending instruments with full cost recovery ones requires a
       through market analysis at project design to help assess the real demand for these
       products without subsidy and to include effective financing structures for other
       associated advisory services. In the case of the project, when the Land Bank decided to
       replace the subsidized lending product with the one on commercial terms, it faced challenges
       in generating sufficient demand from financial intermediaries. The subsidized lending was
       indirectly financing the cost of providing agricultural advisory and market access services via
       using a grant from the Department of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries. However, it was not
       considered how these services would be provided if there was no subsidy. At appraisal a
       thorough analysis, which would assess the consequences of such change in the lending
       structure, could improve project design.
      Design and implementation of credit lines focusing on specific sectors can be
       improved by involving TTLs from both the relevant sector as well as Finance,
       Competitiveness and Innovation GP. During the design stage, having a co-TTL from the
       Agriculture GP may have helped avoid some of the shortcomings that negatively impacted

                                                                                                    Page 12 of 13
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       ZA-Land Bank Financial Intermediation Pr (P150008)



         the project implementation. The ICR comments that a similar approach on the Borrower’s
         side by involving the Department of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries in the project
         implementation arrangements and benefitting from its guidance may also have helped
         address some of the challenges the project faced in scaling up financing, particularly under
         the wholesale window.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is high quality. It provides a detailed overview of the project. It is candid in explaining the issues
encountered at design and implementation phases. The report is concise and follows the guidelines. It is
internally consistent and there is a logical linking of the various parts of the report (i.e., efficacy with bank
performance and efficiency). The report follows the Bank guidance with regards to the ratings and adequately
describes the reasons. The ICR is to be especially commented for openly discussing the reasons with impeded
the performance and implementation of the project. Although the main driver for the PDO not being achieved
was Land Bank’s default to commercial lenders, the ICR goes beyond this and clearly articulates on factors
related to project design and bank performance while drawing useful lessons out of these. The discussion in the
Lessons and Recommendations section are clear, useful, and based on the evidence outlined in the ICR.
However, they are more in the form of findings and recommendations rather than lessons, but overall, the ICR
is a very sound document.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       High




                                                                                                   Page 13 of 13
