     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DANUBE REGION WATER AND WASTE WATER SECT (P128416)



                                                                              Report Number: ICRR0023447

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P128416                                   DANUBE REGION WATER AND WASTE WATER SECT

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Europe and Central Asia                   Water


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)             Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-12722,TF-A9427                         31-Dec-2021                                         8,642,291.59

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 29-Jun-2012                               30-Jun-2022

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                   Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           8,702,890.50                                   8,702,890.50

 Revised Commitment                            7,834,488.75                                   8,702,890.50

 Actual                                        8,642,291.59                                   8,642,291.59




 Prepared by               Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator       Group
 Hassan Wally              Vibecke Dixon                 Ramachandra Jammi            IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Program Development Objective (PDO) of the Danube Region Water and Waste Water Sector Capacity
   Building Program (DWP) as articulated in the Grant Agreement (page 3) was identical to the one in the
   Project Appraisal Document (PAD, paragraph 10) and aimed to:

   "support institutional capacity building and the development of regulatory and policy instruments in
   the water supply and wastewater sector in participating countries in the Danube Region."


                                                                                               Page 1 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DANUBE REGION WATER AND WASTE WATER SECT (P128416)



   In 2015, the program received its first additional financing as part of phase II and the PDO was revised to:

   "support the improvement of: (i) the water sector-related institutions, policies, and regulations in
   participating countries from the Danube region; and (ii) the sustainability of DWP developed
   activities."

   Parsing the PDO. The PDO will be parsed according to the following two objectives:

   1. To support the improvement of the water sector-related institutions, policies, and regulations in participating
   countries from the Danube region.

   2. To support the sustainability of DWP developed activities.

   The PDO for Phase III remained the same except for the inclusion of the new water security activities under
   its extended scope.

   While the PDO was revised, the Theory of Change (ToC) and outcomes targets remained the same (ICR,
   paragraph 37). Therefore, this Review will not apply a split rating evaluation.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  31-Aug-2015

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The PDO was supported by the following two components:

    1. Provision of Policy and Regulatory Support to National Level Authorities and Support to Program
   Implementation (appraisal cost: up to US$2.10 million, actual cost: US$5.93 million). This component
   would support activities to provide policy and regulatory support, including through analytical and advisory
   work predominantly targeted at the national level. This part of the partnership would be administered and
   executed by the World Bank. This component would also cover the cost of the program supervision and
   preparation, including consultants, travel and Bank staff. It included two sub-components:

   1.1. Financing of Sector-specific Technical Assistance, Analytical, and Advisory Work. This sub-
   component would finance policy and regulatory support activities in three main areas: (i) tariff regulations;
   (ii) conditions and options for private sector participation in the water supply and wastewater sector; and (iii)
   efficiency improvement advisory support and assessments, including energy audits. This component would
   also include benchmarking of water utilities performance and collection of baseline data for monitoring and

                                                                                                       Page 2 of 17
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    DANUBE REGION WATER AND WASTE WATER SECT (P128416)



  evaluation. Up to two Bank staff, to be based in the Bank's Vienna office, would be financed under this sub-
  component.

  1.2. Provision of Program Implementation Support and Supervision Activities. This sub-component
  would finance activities to provide implementation support and supervision during program implementation,
  including Bank staff time and travel cost. The sub-component would also cover cost associated with
  program preparation.

  2. Capacity Building for Water Supply and Wastewater Utilities (appraisal cost: US$3.90 million,
  actual cost: US$8.23 million). This component would support capacity building activities for senior
  technical and managerial staff of water and wastewater utilities and national utility associations, including
  training courses, exposure visits, knowledge exchanges, coaching, on-the-job training, and other capacity
  building activities. The component would be implemented by the International Association of Water Supply
  Companies in the Danube River Catchment Area (IAWD). It included the following three sub-components:

  2.1. Implementation of Regional Capacity Building and Training Activities for Water Supply and
  Wastewater Utilities. This would support regional, cross-country activities for capacity building, coaching,
  and on-the-job training structured along specific thematic lines (thematic window), including, but not limited
  to: business planning, operational performance improvements, institutional design and organizational
  structure.

  2.2. Financing of Country-specific Activities for Utility Management and Operational Practices
  Improvement Support. This would provide support to country-specific activities selected competitively on a
  rolling basis (competitive grants window). Selection criteria would be developed and outlined in detail in the
  Operational Manual to be agreed with the Bank, but include at a minimum (i) government endorsement of
  the activity; (ii) counterpart contribution; and (iii) clear commitment to publish performance data.

  2.3. Project Management and Coordination of Program Implementation. This would support
  establishing and maintaining the Secretariat function at IAWD responsible for program implementation and
  coordination.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost. The total project cost at appraisal was estimated at US$6.10 million including US$0.1 million
  trust fund fee. The actual cost according to the ICR Annex 3 was US$14.48 million. The higher amount at
  completion was a result of two additional financings that the project received (see below).

  Financing. The program was financed through a Multi-Donor Trust Fund (MDTF) managed by the World
  Bank, with an initial contribution in the amount of US$8.64 million equivalent from the Government of
  Austria. The program received two additional financings from the Government of Austria, the first was in
  2015, in the amount of US$5.60 million equivalent, and the second was in 2018, in the amount of US$1.67
  million equivalent. Total MDTF financing was US$15.91 million equivalent. According to the ICR (Annex 3)
  the actual amount disbursed was US$14.48 million. The ICR (Annex 3) noted that program costs and AF
  operations showed some variations due to fluctuations in the exchange rate between the EUR and US$.
  The program also leveraged additional resources totaling EUR 2.1 million, including EUR 0.9 million from
  the Open Regional Fund for Southeast Europe (GIZ and Swiss Cooperation).



                                                                                                    Page 3 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DANUBE REGION WATER AND WASTE WATER SECT (P128416)



   Borrower Contribution. An additional US$1.2 million equivalent of beneficiary counterpart funding was
   contributed.

   Dates. The project was approved on June 29, 2012, and became effective on November 13, 2012. The
   Mid-Term Review (MTR) was conducted on May 15, 2014, about 1.5 years into effectiveness. The PAD did
   not state a specific date for the MTR, however, relative to other Bank-funded operations conducting the
   MTR 1.5 years after effectiveness is considered early. That said, in the context of this three phase TA
   program, the MTR was timely conducted. The project was expected to close on April 30, 2016. The actual
   closing date was six years later on June 30, 2022. The project was restructured twice and received two
   additional financings as follows:

   1. Level 2 Restructuring: On March 13, 2013, when the amount disbursed was zero, in order to revise its
   expenditure categories. According to the ICR (paragraph 40) this revision was necessary to ensure
   consistency between the Administrative Agreement (TF071876) and the Grant Agreement (TF012722),
   prior to effectiveness of the Recipient-executed (RE) grant.

   2. Additional Financing: On August 31, 2015, when the amount disbursed was US$3.01, in order to approve
   the first additional financing in the amount of US$5.60 million for Phase II, with an extension of the closing
   date from December 31, 2015, to December 31, 2018, change the Project Development Objectives, change
   in Results Framework, change in components and cost, change in disbursements arrangements, change in
   financial management, and change in procurement. The AF was issued for Phase II of the DWP following
   the "midterm review (MTR) in May of 2014, and an extensive survey of its beneficiaries both pointing to
   strong demand of the program’s activities in the first phase of its implementation (ICR, paragraph 41)."

   3. Additional Financing: On December 10, 2018, when the amount disbursed was US$6.81 million, in order
   to approve the second additional financing in the amount of US$1.67 million for Phase III, extend the
   closing date from December 31, 2018, to December 31, 2021, modify the PDO to: (i) emphasize its
   sustainability and to (ii) include new water security activities, which affected the scope of DWP, and
   change the RF to include the additional results to be attained through the new and scaled-up activities. The
   AF for Phase III in 2018 was to expand the scope of the program to include water security aspects to
   remain relevant for the region’s countries’ challenges (ICR, paragraph 43).

   4. Level 2 Restructuring: On October 19, 2021, when the amount disbursed was US$8.62 million, in order
   to extend the closing date from December 31, 2021 to June 30, 2022. This extension was needed to
   "provide the time needed for the satisfactory completion of all DWP activities, ensure high-quality products,
   and meet the objectives as outlined in the RF (ICR, paragraph 46)."




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Context at Appraisal. The water supply and sanitation utilities in the countries that form part of the Danube
basin were located in one of Europe's largest cross- boundary river catchment area spanning over 19
different countries with strong transnational regional ties. While knowledge exchanges between upstream
and downstream countries was developed and maintained, particularly between Austria and the South-East
European (SEE) countries, technical, operational, and managerial skills vary broadly among those

                                                                                                    Page 4 of 17
                       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                       DANUBE REGION WATER AND WASTE WATER SECT (P128416)



countries, along with differing levels of institutional and regulatory capacity. This program aimed
to contribute to improving the efficiency and quality of water supply and wastewater service delivery in the
Danube region.

Previous Bank Experience. The Program design of the Danube Region Capacity Building Program draws
from water and wastewater sector capacity building experience in other regions, e.g., the Arab Water
Academy (AWA) and the International Water Academy (IWA) for countries of Eastern Europe, Caucasus,
and Central Asia (EECCA). AWA was established as a regional training and knowledge center in Abu Dhabi
to build water management capacity in the Middle East and North Africa (MENA) region. Lessons learned
from IWA were reflected in the governance structure of the Danube Region Capacity Building Program. The
DWP was financed through a multi-donor Trust Fund (MDTF) managed by the World Bank.

Consistency with Bank Strategies. At appraisal, the program's objectives were in line with ECA’s
Regional Strategy and supported expanding regional and sub-regional approaches, deepening the
partnership with the EU, and aligning knowledge services to support country priorities. The
program's higher objective directly contributed to one of the key pillars in many national-level CPS,
namely, to improve the quality of Government spending and the delivery of public services. The proposed
water supply and wastewater utility capacity building program would also complement other regional
activities focused on water resource management supporting implementation of the EU Danube Regional
Strategy.

At completion, the project objectives were in line with the CPFs of seven countries (Albania, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Croatia, Kosovo, Moldova, and Ukraine) participating in the program. For the
conciseness of this Review, please refer to the ICR Annex 8, where more details are provided.

Consistency with Government Strategies. There was limited information on this in the PAD and the
ICR. At appraisal, the PAD (paragraph 3) reported that "representatives from water and wastewater utilities
in the target countries have expressed the need for institutional strengthening and capacity building."

At completion, the ICR (paragraph 47) stated that "the program addressed the higher-level objectives for
the sector in the beneficiary countries."



Summary of Relevance of Objectives Assessment. The original and revised PDO statements were both
pitched at an adequate level of ambition given the Bank's global experience and the implementation
environment in EU countries. The PDO was in line with the country strategies. While there was limited
information available on the alignment with Government Strategies and priorities, the fact that the program
was expanded to three phases (and a fourth was under preparation) pointed out to demand from client
countries. Overall, Relevance of Objectives is rated High.


Rating Relevance TBL




Rating
High


4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

                                                                                                          Page 5 of 17
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  DANUBE REGION WATER AND WASTE WATER SECT (P128416)




EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               To support the improvement of the water sector-related institutions, policies, and regulations in participating
               countries from the Danube region.

               Rationale
               Theory of Change (ToC). To achieve the stated objective, the project would support activities to provide
               policy and regulatory support including: analytical and advisory work predominantly targeted at the national
               level, finance sector-specific technical assistance; and support capacity building for water supply and
               wastewater utilities. The project would also feature a Competitive Grant Window of the DWP to support
               innovative and creative ideas from organizations throughout the region to address the various challenges
               faced by the sector. Intermediate outcomes for these activities would include: the collection and analysis of
               water sector data to develop evidence and identify gaps for action; and development of recommendations to
               address water security aspects for key stakeholders. Also, key stakeholders were expected to learn from best
               international practices relevant to the region, and the Danube Learning Partnership (D-LEAP) would be
               established as a model for capacity building activities in the region. The expected outcomes were: 1.
               Ministries and regulatory agencies would realize potential benefits of addressing water security sector gaps
               and make decisions for improvement; and 2. Water utilities and water utility associations would strengthen
               their capacities on priority topics for the sector. This combined would result in the improvement of the water
               sector related institutions, policies and regulations in participating countries from the Danube region. Higher
               level sustainability targets included the adoption of smart policies and establishing strong utilities for
               sustainable water for people, the economy and the environment.

               The achievement of the stated PDO was underpinned by two critical assumptions: 1. Ongoing financial
               support, and 2. Adequate capacity on the part of beneficiaries to absorb the information provided through the
               program.

               The stated activities in the ToC were connected to the intermediate outcomes and outcomes in a plausible
               causal chain. The critical assumptions were realistic.

               Outputs and Intermediate Results

               1. 39 participating utilities improved their operational performance as a result of a capacity-building program
               under D-LEAP (compared to the baseline of 0 and target of 20, with 195% of the target achieved).
               2. 10 participating countries implemented and were using a sector information system to track utility
               performance, (compared to the baseline of 3 countries and the target of 10, with 100% of the target
               achieved).
               3. 9 participating utility associations established a hub and were delivering capacity development programs
               under D-LEAP (compared to the baseline of 0 and target of 7, with 129% of the target achieved).
               4. Regulatory and policy recommendations for the water sector were discussed and endorsed and were being
               implemented in 9 of the target countries (compared to the baseline of 0 and target of 7, with 129% of the
               target achieved).




                                                                                                                  Page 6 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   DANUBE REGION WATER AND WASTE WATER SECT (P128416)



5. 45 Water Supply and Sanitation (WSS) sector regulation and policy reviews were conducted (compared to
the baseline of 0 and target of 40).
6. 415 policy makers, higher-level technical, and managerial staff from participating countries benefited from
cross-country capacity-building activities on water security topics (compared to the baseline of 0 and target of
40).
7. 7 sector regulation and policy reviews were conducted in water security topics (compared to the baseline of
1 and target of 5).
8. 5,420 utility records were reported to the International Benchmarking Network (IBNET/DANUBIS) from the
participating countries (compared to the baseline of 2,711 and target of 5,300).

Outcome

By project completion, 39 of the participating utilities improved their operational performance through
implementing D-LEAP capacity-building program (against the target of 20 utilities - PDO Indicator 1).
Additionally, 10 participating countries implemented and were using a sector information system to track utility
performance (against the baseline of 3 countries and a target of 10, PDO indicator 2). Moreover, 9
participating utility associations established a hub and were delivering capacity development programs under
the D-LEAP exceeding the target of 7 (PDO indicator 3). Furthermore, regulatory and policy
recommendations for the water sector were discussed, endorsed, and were being implemented in 9 of the
target countries compared to the baseline of 0 and a target of 7 (PDO indicator 4).

Summary of Efficacy Assessment. The program was successful in improving the water sector-related
institutions, policies, and regulations in participating countries from the Danube region. The project met or
exceeded its four outcome indicators as stated above. Therefore, the efficacy with which this objective was
achieved is rated Substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To support the sustainability of DWP developed activities.

Rationale
Theory of Change (ToC). Since both PDO1 and PDO2 were interdependent, the same ToC discussed
above under PDO1 applies here.

Outputs and Intermediate Results

1. 161 participating utilities completed an operational performance improvement program under D-LEAP
exceeding the target of 120 (134% of the target achieved).
2. 1,194 policy makers, higher-level technical and managerial staff from participating countries benefited from
cross-country capacity-building activities (compared to the baseline of 0 and target of 750, with 159% of the
target achieved).


                                                                                                  Page 7 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   DANUBE REGION WATER AND WASTE WATER SECT (P128416)



3. 529 female representatives benefited from capacity-building activities (compared to the baseline of 0 and
target of 280, with 189% of the target achieved).
4. 8 curricula were developed and offered under D-LEAP (compared to the baseline of 0 and target of 8, with
100% of the target achieved).
5. 8 participating utility associations are implementing their business plans (compared to the baseline of 0 and
target of 8, with 100% of the target achieved).
6. 238 water utilities were supported by the project (compared to the baseline of 0 and target of 230, with
104% of the target achieved).
7. 21 competitive grants were completed as planned (compared to the baseline of 0 and target of 20, with
105% of the target achieved).
8. 12 new members joined IAWD (compared to the baseline of 0 and target of 9, with 133% of the target
achieved).
9. IAWD revised its membership categories and adopted a revised fee structure (with 100% of the target
achieved).

Outcome

      By project completion, EUR142,697 of cumulative income was generated by IAWD from the
       implementation of DWP activities, as compared to the target of EUR165,000 (ICR, paragraph 51).
       While the achieved amount was 86% of the target, the ICR (paragraph 51) noted that the final amount
       did not account for in-kind and indirect support from participating and hosting WSS utilities. This
       shortcoming was also partially due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and associated
       restrictions which prevented conducting in-person D-LEAP trainings that required physical attendance
       of utility representatives (ICR, paragraph 52). Trainings and events represented important income-
       generating activities for IAWD.
      In addition to the intermediate results discussed above, the program managed to build strong
       community of practice which serves as the foundation for sustainable water services for all countries
       in the region. IAWD was positioned as a facilitator of this network, as most of the
       stakeholders/beneficiaries of the program were its members.
      IAWD with other partners developed and offered three types of on-the-job capacity-building
       programs Energy Efficiency (EE), Asset Management (AM), and Commercial Efficiency (CE).
       According to the ICR (paragraph 56) "these programs resulted in concrete results for many of the 135
       participating utilities." For example, EUR10 million of EE investments were identified yielding 35% in
       energy savings, thereby impacting 36 utilities (out of which 18 submitted an energy audit report). Also,
       17 utility asset management registers were established, and 21 utilities improved their commercial
       efficiency and business plans were prepared for 19 utility companies.
      Notable achievements by the program included: conducting 38 WSS policy reviews and provision of
       support for the regulation of water services provision in 10 of the Danube countries, establishment of
       knowledge-sharing and networking events, including the Danube Water Conference and Danube
       Water Forum, reaching over 1,200 sector professionals and policy makers, establishment of the UBP
       and development of the IAWD UBP, with participation from 50 of the region’s utilities, development
       and rollout of the DANUBIS Data Collection and Management (DCM) platform, and the development
       of the DANUBIS.org website as a platform with complete repository of resources.

Summary of Efficacy Assessment. The program supported the sustainability of DWP developed activities.
It helped utilities in becoming more efficient which was expected to make utilities operationally and financially
more sustainable in the long run. It also enabled the participating utilities to carry out key investments by

                                                                                                    Page 8 of 17
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               DANUBE REGION WATER AND WASTE WATER SECT (P128416)



                            imparting the necessary knowledge and skills. Lastly, the program was able to bring utilities across the region
                            together to be able to learn by example through the two-way flow of information established among the
                            program beneficiaries. While the program fell short of achieving its PDO indicator, the ICR provided a logical
                            explanation for this shortcoming. Finally, the program met or exceeded it targets on most of its intermediate
                            outcome indicators. Therefore, the efficacy with which this objective was achieved is rated Substantial.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Overall Efficacy is rated Substantial. The project was successful in improving the water sector-related
                            institutions, policies, and regulations in participating countries from the Danube region (Objective 1). The
                            project met or exceeded its four outcome indicators pertaining to Objective 1. The program also supported the
                            sustainability of DWP developed activities (Objective 2). It helped utilities in becoming more efficient,
                            which was expected to make utilities operationally and financially more sustainable in the long run. It also
                            enabled the participating utilities to carry out key investments by imparting the necessary knowledge and
                            skills. Finally, the program met or exceeded it targets on most of its intermediate outcome indicators
                            pertaining to Objective 2.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



   5. Efficiency
   Economic and Financial Efficiency

   ex ante

   The PAD did not include an economic and financial analysis (EFA).

   ex post

                               The efficiency assessment for the program was conducted based on qualitative approach to discuss
                                potential benefits as weighed against the program’s costs rather than by using a numerical cost-benefit
                                analysis because the DWP was a TA program (ICR, paragraph 64).
                               The following points were noted by the ICR as signs of efficiency: 1. Achieving and/or exceeding most of
                                the original targets; 2. Higher participation of relevant staff in the learning events was an indication of
                                potential increase in managerial skills in the participating WSS utilities and their associations, resulting in

                                                                                                                                  Page 9 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      DANUBE REGION WATER AND WASTE WATER SECT (P128416)



       improved utility performance; 3. A client satisfaction surveys of the D-LEAP conducted in 2019, 2020,
       and 2021 suggested that the program proved to be useful to its participants, with a weighted average of
       61% of respondents considering it significant or very significant, 37.5% as useful, and only 1.6% as not
       significant; and 4. The competitive selection of the country-specific activities ensured that the limited
       funding available was used to meet the highest demand first, while important but lower priority activities
       were implemented at later stages.
      Implementation Efficiency. While the project had three extensions of the closing date and two AFs, there
       were no project implementation delays nor higher-than-projected costs, which would have had a negative
       impact on implementation efficiency (ICR, paragraph 72).

Summary of Efficiency Assessment. The DWP was a TA program that did not allow the application of a
typical economic and financial analysis as conducted under investment projects. That said, the evidence
provided in the ICR point to efficient implementation of the program activities. Therefore, efficiency is rated
Substantial.




Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?              Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                       0
 Appraisal                                                    0
                                                                                        Not Applicable
                                                                                       0
 ICR Estimate                                                 0
                                                                                        Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of Objectives was rated High. Overall Efficacy was rated Substantial. The evidence provided in the
ICR point to the success of the program in supporting institutional capacity building in the water supply and
wastewater sector in participating countries in the Danube Region (Objective 1). Also, the program improved the
knowledge and capacity of the participating utilities and their associations, and helped utilities in becoming more
efficient. This was expected to support the sustainability of DWP developed activities (Objective 2). Efficiency
was rated Substantial. The DWP was a TA program that did allow the application of a typical economic and
financial analysis. That said, evidence provided in the ICR point to efficient implementation of the program
activities.




                                                                                                       Page 10 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      DANUBE REGION WATER AND WASTE WATER SECT (P128416)



Based on the assigned ratings, Outcome is rated Satisfactory.




a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The following risks could potentially impact the sustainability of the Development Outcome:

1. Social related risk. This relates to the relevance of training activities provided to final beneficiaries. The
capacity-building needs were updated through needs assessments of the capacity development activities
offered by maintaining feedback loops with beneficiaries and identifying relevant change agents (champions)
in the participating countries during the implementation period. Relatedly, IAWD (as an association of
utilities) continues its efforts to establish and maintain long-term relationships with and among program
participants, aside from conducting one-off trainings or learning exchanges. The training provided will also
need to remain flexible and continually be tailored to local contexts in which it is provided (ICR, paragraph
112).

2. Other stakeholders ownership risk. This relates to IAWD’s capability to build and maintain a community of
practice among program participants in the long-term. Strengthening the partnerships between the national
utility associations, IAWD, and Government counterparts in the countries will continue to be an important
variable in the success of the program, particularly in further strengthening the national utility associations.
Moreover, such efforts are likely to support further broadening partnerships with the donor community to
obtain additional funding support in the future. Financial self-sustainability without donor-funded support may
be impossible to achieve otherwise (ICR, paragraph 113).

3. Government ownership/commitment risk. This relates to the participating governments’ commitment to
implementing policy and regulatory reforms for improved efficiency in the water and wastewater sector. The
third phase of the program attempted to ensure the financial self-sufficiency of IAWD. The next phase of the
program aims to further the self-sufficiency of IAWD as supported by the improved performance of
participating utilities and their associations. However, this hinges on support provided to these beneficiaries
by their respective governments as well as other donors (ICR, paragraph 115).




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
        Strategic Relevance and Approach. The IAWD with support from the Government of
          Austria, proposed the Danube Water Program (DWP), to support the institutional capacity building
          and the development of the regulatory and policy instruments of the WSS sector in participating
          countries of the region. The program objectives were in line with WSS priorities in the SEE region

                                                                                                      Page 11 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DANUBE REGION WATER AND WASTE WATER SECT (P128416)



           countries where the authorities sought to ensuring cost-efficient delivery of water services and
           provide incentives for improving performance in the WSS sector.
          Technical Aspects. The program was designed to cover 11 countries (Albania, Bosnia and
           Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Croatia, Kosovo, North Macedonia, Moldova, Montenegro, Romania,
           Serbia, and Ukraine). The DWP sought to strengthen utility associations since they served as
           leading actors in policy discussions and made valuable contributions to improved utility efficiency.
           Design featured the Danube Learning Partnership (D-LEAP) as a core activity that was
           established as a regional capacity building initiative of national water utility associations.
          Implementation Arrangements. Implementation of component 1 was under the World Bank. The
           IAWD was selected as the primary implementing agency for component 2 . This selection was
           based on IAWD's competitive advantage in implementing capacity-building activities in the target
           countries as well as experience with national and regional policy issues through its close
           cooperation with its association members (ICR, paragraph 14). Also, a program steering
           committee would be established to discuss the annual work program, receiving annual progress
           reports, and reviewing overall implementation progress (PAD Annex 3). The ICR (paragraph 104)
           noted that hosting the Project Implementation Unit (PIU) on the World Bank’s premises in Vienna
           "allowed for excellent cooperation and communication" between the Bank and IAWD during
           implementation.
          Fiduciary Aspects. Financial Management and Procurement were both under the Technical
           Secretariat established at IAWD headquarters in Vienna. Both activities had adequate
           arrangements and training on procurement procedures was recommended.
          Safeguards. The DWP did not trigger any environmental nor social safeguards.
          Risks. Nine risks were identified at appraisal relating to project stakeholder, operating
           environment, implementing agency, and project related risks. the overall risk was low. The PAD
           (Annex 4) included a detailed risk matrix with relevant mitigation measures.
          M&E arrangements. The RF was sufficient for assessing its overall performance, with indicators
           clearly aligned to the PDO. The World Bank was charged with collecting monitoring data for
           the activities under component 1, while IAWD was responsible for collecting data and information
           for results monitoring on activities under component 2. Overall, M&E design benefited from a
           robust design and a clear RF.

  Summary of QAE Assessment. The DWP was strategically relevant to participating countries. It
  included a straightforward design with adequate technical aspects, implementation arrangements, and
  fiduciary aspects. Risk assessment was comprehensive and M&E arrangements were robust. Therefore,
  QAE is rated Satisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The Bank provided strong implementation support which enabled the project to overcome challenges. The
 task team was proactive and in coordination with IAWD provided timely appropriate corrective actions in



                                                                                                    Page 12 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DANUBE REGION WATER AND WASTE WATER SECT (P128416)



 response to challenges identified during implementation. This included the close supervision of the
 activities under component 2, overall coordination, and support on fiduciary aspects (ICR, paragraph 109).

 Overall, Quality of supervision is rated Satisfactory. This rating reflects the success of the Bank in
 guiding the program towards a successful completion.

 Based on the assigned ratings for QAE and Quality of Supervision, Bank Performance is rated Satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
      The PAD did not included a Theory of Change (ToC) as it was not a requirement by the Bank at the
        time of appraisal. Nevertheless, the ICR (Figure 1) included a ToC that was developed for phase III,
        and reflected the linkages between the program’s interventions, outputs, intermediate results, and
        outcomes.
       The original PDO was measured through four PDO level results indicators: 1. Number of target
        countries in which regulatory and policy recommendations have been discussed by decision
        makers; 2. Number of Operational Performance Improvement Action Plans or equivalent drafted by
        participating utilities; 3. Number of participating countries that have implemented and are using a
        sector information system to track utility performance; and 4. Number of participating utilities that
        have defined and undergone at least one cycle of efficiency improvements monitored in the sector
        information system. These indicators were directly connected to the PDO, measurable, and had
        reasonable targets and clear baselines.
       The Results Framework (RF) included six intermediate results indicators (IRIs) to track the different
        activities supported by the project. All IRIs were quantitative, clearly defined with reasonable targets
        and directly linked to the project activities.
       Overall, M&E had a robust design with a clear PDO formulation. The RF was comprehensive
        enough to assess the program's overall performance. However, some of the original indicators that
        were output-oriented and were subsequently revised to better reflect the outcomes (ICR, paragraph
        92).



b. M&E Implementation
       The World Bank oversaw the collection of monitoring data for activities under component 1and
         provided updates in annual progress reports. IAWD was responsible for the collection
         of monitoring data for activities under component 2 and provided them to the World Bank for
         review (ICR, paragraph 92).

                                                                                                     Page 13 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DANUBE REGION WATER AND WASTE WATER SECT (P128416)



        M&E implementation included the publication of multiple analytical pieces as part of the program
         such as the State of the Sector reports in 2015 and 2018, reports on WSS services in rural areas,
         challenges and opportunities of EU accession to improve wastewater management, and eight
         annual reports (spanning 2013–2020), which all served as additional resources for assessing the
         program’s performance (ICR, paragraph 93).
        According to the ICR (paragraph 95) "implementation of M&E proceeded with adequate standards
         applied in regular data collection, analysis, and reporting."



c. M&E Utilization
       The M&E system provided enough data to guide implementation, track and assess progress, and
         facilitate decision-making (ICR, paragraph 94).
        Data for water utility efficiency improvements was used for utility benchmarking and results
         monitoring of other capacity-building interventions beyond the scope of the program (ICR,
         paragraph 94).
        The program's lessons and recommendations were relevant to the design of the fourth phase
         and ensured the continued support from the Government of Austria (ICR, paragraph 94).

  Summary of M&E Quality Assessment. M&E benefited from a robust design. Also, M&E
  implementation was adequate and generated enough data to track progress of activities and assess
  achievements of outcomes. Finally, M&E utilization was strong with the program data used beyond the
  scope of the program. Therefore, the Quality of M&E is rated Substantial.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The DWP was an environmental assessment category C. It did not trigger any environmental nor social
   safeguards. The DWP activities maintained ‘C’ environmental risk during the entire time of the
   implementation. Implemented activities included advisory and analytics (e.g., efficiency improvements in
   water supply, with expected positive environmental impacts) and capacity building, training, and similar soft
   activities. No equipment and/or works were procured nor any type of activities carried out under the
   program that could have an adverse impact on the environment (ICR, paragraph 96).




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management (FM). The Technical Secretariat established at IAWD headquarters in Vienna
   handled all fiduciary functions. Un-audited Interim Financial Reports (IFRs) were prepared semiannually
   and submitted to the World Bank within 45 days. Financial statements were audited by private external

                                                                                                   Page 14 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DANUBE REGION WATER AND WASTE WATER SECT (P128416)



   auditors (ICR, paragraph 101). FM and disbursements under component 1 followed the standard fiduciary
   arrangements for Bank Executed Trust Funds (ICR, paragraph 100). FM for component 2 activities
   implemented by IAWD was carried out under the responsibility of the Technical Secretariat (including
   accounting, financial reporting, application and monitoring of internal controls, flow of funds, budgeting, and
   coordination with the external auditors). This component used traditional disbursement by utilizing
   statements of expenditures and records with full documentation. Un-audited Interim Financial Reports
   (IFRs) were prepared semiannually and submitted to the World Bank within 45 days. Financial statements
   were audited by private external auditors.

   Procurement. The Technical Secretariat established at IAWD headquarters in Vienna handled
   procurement. The DWP included limited procurement activities with only a few individual consultant
   contracts and procurement of small-value goods (ICR, paragraph 99).




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None.



d. Other
   None.




11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Bank Performance                Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                  Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                  ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR included eight lessons. the following are emphasized with some adaptation of language:

1. Good coordination with co-donors can enable synergies and increase impact of the
intervention. Organizing regular donor coordination meetings from the beginning of the program
can prevent any potential overlaps or duplication of effort among the many donors in this field.


                                                                                                    Page 15 of 17
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       DANUBE REGION WATER AND WASTE WATER SECT (P128416)



2. A TA program in a country can foster symbiotic and mutually reinforcing relationships for
expanding investment operations among countries in the region with similar sectoral
issues. To that end, several important investment operations resulted from the activities of the
Program. Establishment of such synergy has served as an important element of the Program and
constituted a strong argument for the World Bank’s involvement. The synergy between such a TA
program as the DWP and the World Bank’s investment operations provided important opportunities
to multiply effects and achieve better results. Going forward, the Program can consider building of
further synergies with other regional and global initiatives that can enhance ongoing efforts.

3. Regional programs can be a successful approach to initiate cooperation between regional
countries facing similar challenges. The regional nature of the program is the cornerstone of its
success. Since many of the target countries are faced with similar challenges, the program
facilitated the establishment of helpful partnerships, enabled the countries to learn from each other,
while building healthy competition to encourage progress towards improving service delivery to the
ultimate beneficiaries. Given the transboundary nature of the DWP, water represents a critical
shared resource over which regional cooperation can further be built and enhanced for an improved
management of the shared resources and ensuring water security.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

Quality of Evidence. The ICR benefited from the data collected by the M&E system, which enabled tracking the
progress of activities and assessing the achievement of the PDO.

Quality of Analysis. The ICR provided clear linking between evidence and findings and used the evidence base
to serve the arguments under the different sections, in particular the discussion on outcomes.

Lessons. Lessons reflected the project experience and were based on evidence and analysis.

Results Orientation. The ICR included a comprehensive discussion on the achievement of the PDO. However,
the discussion was slightly skewed towards reporting on the achievement of outcome indicators rather than
what the project actually achieved on the ground.

Consistency with guidelines. The ICR used the available data to justify most of the assigned ratings. Discussion
of outcomes was adequate. While the efficiency analysis lacked a typical economic and financial analysis
conducted under investment projects, the ICR provided adequate justification on the validity of the program's
investments.

Conciseness. The ICR provided comprehensive coverage of program activities, and candidly reported on
shortcomings..



                                                                                                   Page 16 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DANUBE REGION WATER AND WASTE WATER SECT (P128416)



Summary of the Quality of ICR Assessment. The ICR was well written and included information rich
annexes. The ICR benefited from the evidence base generated through the program's M&E system. It included
a clear discussion on the achievement of outcomes and reflected relevant lessons that were helpful in the
design of the fourth phase of the program. Overall, the Quality of the ICR is rated Substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                             Page 17 of 17
