     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     AR GEF Rural Corridors and Biodiversity (P114294)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0023184

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P114294                                    AR GEF Rural Corridors and Biodiversity

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Argentina                                  Environment, Natural Resources & the Blue Economy


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-A0233                                   30-Nov-2020                                           6,234,039.47

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 07-Apr-2015                                31-Dec-2021

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                             6,289,030.00                                    6,289,030.00

 Revised Commitment                              6,289,030.00                                    6,234,039.47

 Actual                                          6,234,039.47                                    6,234,039.47




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Katharina Ferl              J. W. van Holst              Christopher David Nelson       IEGSD (Unit 4)
                             Pellekaan




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Project Appraisal Document (PAD) (p. 5) and the Financing Agreement of May 25, 2015 (p.
   7) the objective of the project was “to increase the protection of vulnerable natural areas and conserve
   biological diversity within the Gran Chaco Ecosystem and the Patagonian Steppe and Coastal-Marine
   Ecosystems, implement measures to enhance biodiversity resilience to climate change and protect forest
   carbon assets”.



                                                                                                  Page 1 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     AR GEF Rural Corridors and Biodiversity (P114294)



   According to the Bank team (February 23, 2023), the ten selected protected areas were selected within Gran
   Chaco Ecosystem and the Patagonian Steppe and Coastal-Marine Ecosystems based on being part of
   biodiversity conservation corridors identified in previous projects implemented by the client in the Gran Chaco
   ecoregion. Protected areas in coastal and steppe ecosystems in Patagonia were selected by the client based
   on being part of the prioritized ecosystems and their investment needs.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  14-Sep-2018

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project included four components:

   Component 1: Core Protected Areas (appraisal estimate US$3.19 million, actual US$3.32 million).
   This component was to finance establishing, strengthening and operationalizing the startup of Selected
   Protected Areas (SPA) within the Gran Chaco Ecosystem and the Patagonian Steppe and Coastal-Marine
   Ecosystem, through: i) providing necessary infrastructure for basic management such as administrative
   buildings, park guard facilities, storage and maintenance infrastructure, information centers, research
   facilities, etc.; ii) carrying out of selected technical studies on, topics such as social, environmental, climate
   change and management themes, including the provision of support to drafting the legal instruments
   required for the establishment of the park and reserve etc.; iii) providing training and capacity building for
   personnel ascribed to SPA and personnel potentially ascribed to the park and reserve.

   During the restructuring in 2018 all references of the Chaco Seco National Park and the Impenetrable
   Chaqueno Provincial Multiple Use Reserve were erased. A total of ten protected areas from the national
   and provincial systems were selected for the implementation of prioritized activities under this component.
   The selected areas included: i) Impenetrable National Park; ii) Copo National Park; iii) Copo Provinical Park;
   iv) Copo Multiple Use Reserve; v) Fuerte Esperanza Provincial Park; vi) Loro Hablador Provincial Park; vii)
   Pampa del Indio Provincial Park; viii) Patagonian Steppe and Marine/Coastal Region: a) Patagonia National
   Park; b) Makenke Interjurisdictional Marine Park; and b) Patagonia Austral Interjurisdictional Coastal Marine
   Park. During the restructuring several activities were removed such as training, capacity building and public
   consultations which had already been planned under different components.

   Component 2: Conservation Corridors in the Gran Chaco and the Patagonian Steppe and Coastal-
   Marine Ecosystems (appraisal estimate US$1.55 million, actual US$1.87 million): This component was
   to finance designing and implementing a multi-stakeholder process for piloting conservation corridors in the
   Gran Chaco Ecosystem and the Patagonian Steppe and Coastal-Marine Ecosystems, through i) mapping of
   the pilot conservation corridors and Patagonia Steppe conservation corridors; ii) designing, validation

                                                                                                         Page 2 of 16
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    AR GEF Rural Corridors and Biodiversity (P114294)



  and dissemination of participatory, operational and strategic plans, programs and management tools for
  said pilot conservation corridors and Patagonia Steppe conservation corridors; iii) designing of cooperation
  frameworks for pilot conservation corridors’ and Patagonia Steppe conservation corridors’ management,
  and the establishment of coordination mechanisms and/or management committees for said corridors; iv)
  carrying out of studies and workshops including on social, environmental, biodiversity and climate-change
  issues in pilot conservation corridors and Patagonia Steppe conservation corridors, and designing of draft
  management plans for legally established provincial protected areas within pilot conservation corridors; v)
  establishing National Parks Administration (APN) field units in the pilot conservation corridors and
  Patagonia Steppe conservation corridors (including the acquisition and utilization of necessary equipment);
  and vi) providing support to Argentina in the designing of financial incentives to promote biodiversity
  conservation in said pilot conservation corridors and Patagonia Steppe conservation corridors (PAD para.
  23).

  Component 3: Collaboration for Corridors’ Conservation (appraisal estimate US$0.99 million, actual
  US$0.44 million): This component was to finance strengthening the Federal System of Protected Areas
  (SIFAP) through the promotion of a shared vision among its members, comprehensive stakeholder
  involvement, institutional support and long-term financial planning. Also, this component was to finance
  developing management standards and strengthening provincial and national parks institutional capacity.
  Activities were to include: i) carrying out of needs assessment studies aimed at acquiring an accurate and
  comprehensive overview of the strengths and weaknesses of national and provincial protected areas
  systems; ii) carrying out regional and inter-provincial workshops for best practice- sharing, as well as
  providing training for conservation management and climate change mitigation/adaptation; iii) developing
  guidelines for provincial protected areas management; and iv) carrying out of training visits by personnel of
  provincial and national protected areas (at national and international level) for capacity building on
  conservation and climate-change themes.

  Also, this component was to finance developing financing mechanisms and improvement of SIFAP’s
  organizational structure (PAD para. 27).

  Component 4: Management, Monitoring and Evaluation (appraisal estimate US$0.55 million, actual
  US$0.63 million): This component was to finance several activities: i) providing technical and operational
  assistance for project management; developing and implementing a monitoring and evaluation program for
  the project (including a monitoring and evaluation program for climate-change themes) and carrying out
  project audits, mid-term review and a final evaluation of the project.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost: The project was estimated to cost US$10.29 million. Actual cost was US$13.34 million.

  Financing: The project was financed by Trust Fund (TFA0233) in the amount of US$6.29 million of which
  US$6.23 million was disbursed.

  Borrower Contribution: The Borrower was to contribute US$3.98 million. Actual contribution was US$7.12
  million.

  Dates: The project was restructured four times:



                                                                                                   Page 3 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     AR GEF Rural Corridors and Biodiversity (P114294)



   On August 28, 2015, the project was restructured to make editorial corrections of the Trust Fund Code in
   the Grant Agreement.

   On September 14, 2018, the project was restructured to: i) modify the wording, scope and expected
   intermediate and final target values (target for PDO 1 was increased while target for PDO 2 was decreased;
   targets of two intermediate outcome indicators were increased while targets for two intermediate outcome
   indicators were decreased) in the Results Framework, and to more clearly reflect the restructured project
   components and logical results chains from outputs to intermediate outcomes; ii) remove some activities
   from Components 1, 2 and 3; iii) narrow the scope of some activities; iv) refine some activities; v) modify
   component costs; vi) redefine disbursement categories and reallocate funds between disbursement
   categories; and vi) accordingly amend legal covenants. These changes did not result in any net reductions
   in the project’s level of ambition.

   On November 5, 2020, the project was restructured to mainly: i) extend the closing date by nine months
   from November 30, 2020 to August 31, 2021, to compensate for implementation delays caused by various
   issues predominantly key staff changes at the provincial and national level, and social isolation measures
   due to the COVID-19 pandemic; ii) change disbursement estimates and the implementation schedule; and
   iii) introduce two additional outcome indicators with targets namely "Land area under sustainable landscape
   practices" and "Area benefiting from biodiversity resilience measures". There was no reduction in the
   project’s level of ambition.

   On August 24, 2021, the project was restructured to: i) further extend the closing date by four months from
   August 31, 2021 to December 31, 2021, to allow the completion of pending activities, which had been
   delayed due to COVID-19 pandemic; and ii) reallocate grant proceeds between disbursement categories.

   Despite two restructurings which had an impact on the project’s key indicators and targets, this review
   concluded that none of these changes associated resulting from the project’s restructuring led to a net
   reduction in the project’s level of ambition. Indeed, in terms of expectations about outcomes, while one
   PDO indicator was reduced by 26% and another relegated to an intermediate outcome indicator, two PDO
   indicators with targets were added (ICR para 37). Hence there was no justification for a split rating of
   outcomes




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Argentina, with over 280 million hectares (ha) of land, was once rich in biodiversity and contained vast
native landscapes with over eighteen diverse eco-regions. However, poverty and limited development
options drove deforestation and natural resource degradation. 20 percent of the country became
considered degraded (2009). The country suffered from high rates of deforestation and disturbances from
cropping and ranching in grasslands.

Some of the poorest and most isolated people in Argentina (often indigenous and campesino) were heavily
dependent on the extraction of natural resources for their livelihoods. The four provinces, Chaco, Salta,
Santiago del Estero and Formosa, made up 88 percent of the Chaco Ecoregion and had some of the
highest levels of unmet basic needs and poverty nationwide. Being dependent on forest products for their

                                                                                                   Page 4 of 16
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      AR GEF Rural Corridors and Biodiversity (P114294)



               livelihoods, these populations consumed more than 50 percent of the total fuel wood in the country (PAD
               para. 5).

               Despite the importance of these national ecosystems for biodiversity, less than two percent of the area they
               covered were under formal protection at the time of appraisal. Also, there was a lack of inter-agency
               conservation efforts outside protected areas. In order to address this issue, in 2014, the Argentine National
               Parks Administration (APN) adopted a “corridor approach” to conservation (Corridors are spatially and
               ecologically-specific landscape elements which provide connectivity between discrete patches to form
               ecological networks -- they are key components for an ecosystem approach to conservation, as
               recommended by the Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD) (2004). It would therefore lend more
               continuity and connectivity throughout the country’s ecosystems, as well as increase coherence in the
               protection of biodiversity through the national parks’ system. The ICR (para 39) noted that “the principal
               value of the project was to develop a regional rural corridors strategy that was flexible and responsive to
               local needs”.

               The objectives of this project supported the government’s Forest Law 26.331 (Ley de Presupuestos
               Mínimos de Protección Ambiental de los Bosques Nativos, 2007), which provided a framework to control
               deforestation, promote land use zoning, implement sustainable forest management and strengthen
               collaboration between the national and provincial forest administrations. This Law also established a crucial
               Forest Fund, to provide significant public financial resources to provinces to promote sustainable use of
               forests and provide payment for environmental services.

               The project’s objectives were in line with the Bank’s most recent Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)
               (FY19-22) and its strategic theme of “reducing environmental risks and safeguarding natural resources” as
               well as the CPS’s results area “improving natural forest cover in Chaco eco-region”. The objectives of this
               project were also in line with the 2018 Systematic Country Diagnostic (“Argentina: Escaping Crises,
               Sustaining Growth, Sharing Prosperity”) and its pathway 4 “investing in natural capital and ensuring
               environmental sustainability”. Finally, the objectives of the project were aligned with the GEF Biodiversity
               Focal Areas, especially, Biodiversity (BD) Strategic Programs (SP1) “sustainable financing of protected
               area systems at the national level; BD SP2 “increasing representation of effectively managed marine
               protected areas in protected areas systems; BD SP3 “strengthening terrestrial protected area networks; and
               Climate Change SP 6 “management of land use, land use change and forestry as a means to protect
               carbon stocks and reduce greenhouse gas emissions”.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective


                                                                                                                        Page 5 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   AR GEF Rural Corridors and Biodiversity (P114294)



Increase the protection of vulnerable natural areas and conserve biological diversity within the Gran Chaco
Ecosystem and the Patagonian Steppe and Coastal-Marine Ecosystems

Rationale
Theory of Change: The project’s theory of change envisioned that project outputs such as infrastructure
being constructed, vehicles and equipment being purchased for selected project areas (SPAs), and
participatory management plans and technical studies (including boundary demarcations) being developed for
SPAs would result in the outcome of increased protection of vulnerable natural areas and conserve biological
diversity within the Gran Chaco Ecosystem and the Patagonian Steppe and Coastal-Marine Ecosystems.
Also, project outputs such as the conservation corridors (Chaco Humedo and Chaco Seco) strategic action
plan being endorsed by authorities as well as additional conservation corridors being designed (Patagonia
region) were to result in the intended outcome as stated above.

Outputs:

      A framework for the implementation of conservation corridors was endorsed by the Chaco and/or
       Santiago del Estero provinces, achieving the target of doing so.
      18 sustainable development sub-projects were completed, exceeding the target of three sub-projects.
      236 SPA staff in the project area were trained on protected areas management planning and effective
       evaluation, exceeding the target of 200 staff. Trainings included: regional strategic planning workshop,
       preparation of management plans and management evaluation, conceptual basis and experience to
       assess effectiveness in the management of protected areas in Argentina.
      631,204 hectares were brought under enhanced biodiversity conservation through the provision of
       infrastructure and equipment for SPAs and the formulation of their management plans. This did not
       achieve the original target of 882,000 hectares nor the revised target of 655,624 hectares. According
       to the Bank team (February 23, 2023) there was no pre-defined list of equipment and infrastructure at
       project appraisal.

Outcomes:

      The size of marine environments under improved forms of protection increased from zero hectares in
       2015 to 106,422 hectares in 2021, achieving the target of 106,422 hectares. The original target was
       279,000 hectares, which was reduced when the steppe eco-systems were removed from the measure
       of the indicator to only reflect the area covered and supported with interventions within the Patagonia
       National Park.
      The project successfully provided technical assistance, equipment and infrastructure to communities.
       One sub-project, for example, was able to produce 18kg of honey, which was sold in the market and
       resulted in an additional income of the equivalent of US$1,000; another sub-project was able to
       generate an income of US$9,800 from the production of honey. The purchase of equipment to better
       process honey under another sub-project generated an income of US$42,500. As the result of another
       sub-project, which improved herd rotation and pasture management, the prices of cattle in local
       auctions increased from US$0.78/kg to US$1/kg live weight. The ICR did not specify if, for
       example, additional incomes only occurred once or several times.

Based on outputs that were likely to result in substantial outcomes and the evidence on outcomes, the
efficacy with which Objective 1 was, or is likely to be, achieved is rate substantial.


                                                                                                 Page 6 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   AR GEF Rural Corridors and Biodiversity (P114294)




Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To implement measures to enhance biodiversity resilience to climate change

Rationale
Theory of Change: The project’s theory of change envisaged that outputs such as developing management
plans for SPAs, implementing sustainable sub-projects, and having people participating in consultation
activities throughout the project’s implementation would result in the outcome of enhancing biodiversity
resilience to climate change.

Outputs:

      Nine Management Plans for SPAs were updated and/or formulated which included climate change
         mitigation and adaptation measures, achieving the revised target of nine plans.
      The “SIFAP 2020-2022 Action Plan” was prepared, reviewed and agreed with the members of the
         Federal System of Protected Areas (SIFAP) and submitted to the Biodiversity Commission of the
         Federal Council of Environment (COFEMA) in October 2020. The Action Plan provided a roadmap for
         effective interinstitutional coordination and biodiversity conservation integrating the national and
         provincial protected areas systems. The target of a common action plan for corridors conservation
         between federal and provincial authorities being adopted was achieved.
        The Chaco Seco Corridor Action Plan and the Chaco Humedo Corridor Action Plan were endorsed by
         the provincial authorities. The Patagonia Arida Corridor Plan was prepared. The target of three rural
         corridor strategic plans to be prepared/updated was achieved.
        A proposal to expand conservation corridors to at least one new province of the Chaco region was
         developed, achieving the target of doing so.
        18 sustainable use sub-projects and four sustainable development sub-projects were implemented.
        24 provinces adhered to a unified and functional information system related to conservation corridors,
         exceeding the target of 18 provinces.
        Three analytical and knowledge products that contributed to strategic planning and the promotion of
         conservation corridors within the framework of SIFAP were completed, achieving the target of three
         products.
        1,346 people in forest and adjacent community benefitted from monetary/non-monetary benefits from
         forests, exceeding the target of 1,200 people. Of those people 639 people were female, exceeding the
         target of 600 females, and 650 people came from an Ethnic minority or being indigenous, exceeding
         the target of 600 people from an Ethnic minority or being indigenous.
        760 people participated in consultation activities during project implementation, exceeding the target
         of 300 people. Consultations took place for the following topics: participatory indigenous plan for the
         impenetrable national park; evaluation and supervision committees for the sustainable use and
         demonstrative subprojects; elaboration/update of the management plans for SPA; monitoring and



                                                                                                  Page 7 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   AR GEF Rural Corridors and Biodiversity (P114294)



       evaluation committees for SPA; meliponiculture (honey production based on stingless bees) sectoral
       round table; livestock roundtable; ecotourism roundtable; awareness workshop in Santiago del Estero.

Outcomes:

      14,765 hectares of area benefitted from biodiversity resilience measures, exceeding the target of
       5,513 hectares. The indicator used as a proxy, measured the area estimated to have been positively
       impacted by the upgrading of a 4,800 square meter waterhole in the Copo national Park in the
       Santiago del Estero Province to increase the availability of surface water to sustain biodiversity during
       droughts.
      241,281 hectares of land area were under sustainable landscape management practices, exceeding
       the target of 226,376 hectares.
      Based on a survey of 1,541 beneficiaries 75 percent of respondents felt that the project investments
       reflected their needs, exceeding the target of 70 percent. The ICR did not state how the beneficiaries,
       participating in the survey, were selected.

Based on this evidence the efficacy with which Objective 2 was achieved was substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
To implement measures to protect forest carbon assets

Rationale
Theory of Change: The project’s theory of change envisioned that project activities such as implementing
sustainable use forest management sub-projects and putting forests under improved forms of protection
would result in protecting forest carbon assets.

Outputs:

      Four demonstration sustainable use sub-projects were completed exceeding the target of three
       demonstration sub-projects being completed. These sub-projects were the following: i) promotion of
       meliponiculture; ii) natural grasslands grazing; iii) demonstration of forest-neutral management
       schemes for small-scale sustainable livestock producers; and iv) demonstrative tourism (sustainable
       use of wild fauna and flora).
      The size of forests under improved forms of protection increased from zero ha in 2015 to 128,000 ha
       in 2021, not achieving the original target of 303,000 hectares and achieving the revised target of
       128,000 hectares. This indicator was changed at restructuring to reflect the area under protection
       within the Impenetrable National Park.

Outcomes:



                                                                                                   Page 8 of 16
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               AR GEF Rural Corridors and Biodiversity (P114294)




                                  According to the ICR 14.6 million tons carbon equivalent were protected in Chaco forests, exceeding
                                   the target of 10.4 million tons carbon equivalent.

                            The project benefitted 1,860 people of which 35 percent were female. The target of 600 beneficiaries was
                            therefore exceeded. According to the Bank team (February 23, 2023) there was no target for female
                            beneficiaries.

                            Based on the evidence in the ICR the efficacy with which Objective 3 was achieved was substantial.




                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The achievement of all three objectives was Substantial.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



   5. Efficiency
   Economic efficiency:

   The PAD (p. 48) did not conduct a traditional economic analysis. The PAD only compared project costs of
   US$30 per hectare for the total terrestrial area being placed under sound formal conservation regimes with
   previous GEF projects where the average cost was around US$43 per hectare for the establishment and startup
   of protected areas.

   The ICR (p. 59) considered the measurable incremental benefits that were directly related to the main activities
   of the project, given the information available, such as the estimated carbon sequestration benefits associated
   with project activities, other ecosystem services provided by the protected areas and the benefits of skill training
   programs on direct beneficiaries and sub-projects.

   The ICR calculated a lower bound scenario representing the benefit streams derived from Component 1 and 2,
   applying a very conservative approach, assuming a 20-year time frame and a discount rate of 9 percent with the
   following results.


                                                                                                                           Page 9 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      AR GEF Rural Corridors and Biodiversity (P114294)



Discount Rate NPV                   BC Ratio
9%            $22,352,161           2.93

The ICR also conducted a sensitivity analysis of an upper bound scenario that assumed a 20 percent
contribution of the project and 25 USD/ton as well as a 15-year implementation period with the following results

Discount Rate NPV                   BC Ratio
9%            $143,027,669          13.36



The ICR (p. 65) expected that Components 3 and 4 will have additional benefits, which were too difficult to
measure due to the qualitative approach to capacity strengthening and project management.

This analysis suggests that the project was a worthwhile investment based on the assumptions in the analysis.

Operational efficiency:

The project’s implementation period was extended twice by a total of 13 months to allow for the completion of
project activities which had been delayed due to issues including key staff changes at the provincial and national
level, lengthy bureaucratic processes with APN to approve procurement processes and social isolation
measures due to the COVID-19 pandemic. As a result of these delays, some infrastructure works in the Copo
Provincial Park could not be completed before project closure.

Taking account of the strength of evidence in the ICR, the efficiency with which the project has been
implemented is rated Modest.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     0
 Appraisal                                                  0
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     0
 ICR Estimate                                               0
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome



                                                                                                    Page 10 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     AR GEF Rural Corridors and Biodiversity (P114294)




Relevance of objectives was High given its close alignment with the Bank’s most recent Country Partnership
Strategy (CPS) (FY19-22) and its strategic theme of “reducing environmental risks and safeguarding natural
resources” as well as the CPS’s results area “improving natural forest cover in Chaco eco-region”. Efficacy was
Substantial because of the evidence (documented in detail in Annex 1 of the ICR) that the project's objectives
were achieved, but Efficiency was rated Modest because of the weak evidence on how efficiently the project
was implemented. Given the moderate shortcomings in the project’s efficiency, the project’s overall outcome
is rated Moderately Satisfactory


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Government commitment: According to the ICR (p. 29) the National Parks Association (APN) and
provincial protected areas managers remain committed to implement the Pas management plans.

Financing: Full implementation of the Pas management plans depends on the availability of funding, which
will depend partly on the new Bank operation (Sustainable recovery of landscapes and livelihoods in
Argentina project (P175669) with financing of US$60.0 million) and APN budget support. The new Bank
project aims to improve the management and resilience of ecosystems and related livelihoods of local
communities in selected conservation and production landscapes and seascapes. Part of this new project
will be implemented in the Chaco and the Yungas ecoregions, providing continuity, and building on outcomes
achieved under this project.

Technical capacity: The ICR (p. 29) stated that there is a risk that sub-projects and stakeholder
engagement will not be scaled up across the biodiversity corridors due to the lack of resources. Also,
communities with weak capacity might need continuous support from local authorities to ensure that
sustainable practices continue to be implemented. However, the ICR also stated that the APN developed a
program for the support on the development of sustainable activities in rural populations which will finance
community driven development sub-projects across the country. Also, provincial and national governments
are trying to advance payment for ecosystem services programs to provide other additional financial
incentives for conservation and sustainable production.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  According to the Bank team (February 23, 2023) the project was built on lessons learned from previous
  Bank engagement in this area. These lessons included: i) inter- institutional synergies are important for
  sustainable natural resource management; ii) long-term commitment is needed for sustainable natural



                                                                                                   Page 11 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     AR GEF Rural Corridors and Biodiversity (P114294)



  resource management and landscape approaches; and iii) protected areas in infrastructure construction
  can be a significant hurdle.

  According to the PAD (p. 10) the Bank team identified relevant risks and rated the following as
  substantial: i) Institutional Capacity for Implementation and Sustainability: due to the need for developing
  institutional capacity to work effectively with a broad range of institutional partners as APN was to work
  outside of their primary jurisdiction and engage multiple public, for profit and non-profit partners with weak
  participation platforms; ii) Environment and Social: Given the cross-sectoral and landscape level actions
  required to deliver effective management of rural corridors outside of their primary jurisdiction, APN
  needed to apply World Bank Safeguard policies at a more strategic level than in previous Bank-financed
  projects; and iii) Stakeholder involvement and technically sound grant activities oriented to improving the
  implementation of the current legal and policy framework for conservation were to be critical during
  implementation. Mitigation measures were not sufficient and resulted in several implementation delays.
  Also, the Bank team did not identify the challenge of keeping competent staff due to low salaries resulting
  in a high turnover of staff which resulted significant delays throughout implementation.

  According to the ICR (p. 28) there was a significant delay of four and a half years between project
  preparation and the first negotiation of the legal agreement in August 2011 and renewed negotiations in
  February 2015 as a result of changes in key stakeholder, sectoral context and the macroeconomic
  situation of Argentina, which put all Bank projects on hold. As a result, there were several discrepancies
  between the project design and the implementation context. As noted in the ICR (para 77) one of the
  discrepancies was the need to support some of the originally selected protected areas (PAs).

  The project’s Results Framework had several shortcomings such as the original Framework which
  lacked clarity and a precise definition as well as a methodology on measurement (see section 9a for
  more details).



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 According to the ICR (p. 28) the Bank team conducted 15 supervision missions and provided timely
 implementation supervision and results reports. Also, aide memoires identified key issues. Financial
 Management and procurement staff assisted counterpart staff with training in procurement processes and
 supported the PIU to monitor budget allocation and planning as well as disbursement progress.

 The Bank team restructured the project three times to modify the Results Framework and allow for more
 time to implement project activities.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory



                                                                                                     Page 12 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     AR GEF Rural Corridors and Biodiversity (P114294)




  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The selected PDO indicators encompassed all outcomes of the PDO statement. However, the project’s
 objective was overly complex and included three different outcomes. Also, several of the indicators
 included in the original Results Framework lacked clarity and a precise definition as well as a methodology
 on measurement. Furthermore, the project’s theory of change and how key activities were to result in the
 intended outcomes was not sufficiently sound. According to the PAD (p. 9) the project’s M&E function was
 to be performed by the PMU at the Project Execution Coordination Unit (UCEFE). The PMU was to conduct
 base line studies and evaluation of key data relative to project objectives and performance. Also, M&E
 activities were to include short-term consultancies with thematic specialists collecting and analyzing
 information not routinely generated by the project in order to objectively and impartially assess impacts.



b. M&E Implementation
  The Results Framework was modified during the 2018 and 2020 restructurings to modify the wording,
  scope and expected intermediate and final target values. Also, in 2020, the PMU hired a M&E specialist
  to strengthen the project’s M&E which resulted in an improvement of the M&E performance.

  According to the Bank team (February 23, 2023), baseline studies were conducted as part of the strategic
  corridors planning (in 2 biodiversity conservation corridors in the Gran Chaco region). Additionally, a
  conservation gaps analysis was conducted, as the baseline for the future design of biodiversity
  conservation corridors in the Patagonian steppe. The Bank team also stated that generally the quality of
  data collected was adequate and that significant efforts have been made, not only to sustain, but to
  improve M&E functions, for the benefit of a new Bank project that has been recently prepared. APN’s
  internal structures for M&E are also being strengthened.



c. M&E Utilization
  According to the ICR (p. 25) the PIU mostly used results from PDO indicators 1 and 5 to report on the
  implementation status of the project. However, progress data was not frequently used by the PMU in the
  annual progress reports or for adapting project implementation.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues


                                                                                                Page 13 of 16
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    AR GEF Rural Corridors and Biodiversity (P114294)



a. Safeguards
  The project was classified as category B and triggered the Bank’s safeguard policies OP/BP 4.01
  (Environmental Assessment), OP/BP 4.04 (Natural Habitats), OP/BP 4.36 (Forests), OP/BP 4.11 (Physical
  Cultural Resources), OP/BP 4.10 (Indigenous People) and OP/BP 4.12 (Involuntary Resettlement).

  According to the ICR (p. 26) the project conducted a Social Impact Assessment (SA) and an Environmental
  Assessment (EA). Furthermore, the project also prepared an Environmental and Social Management
  Framework (ESMF), an Indigenous People Framework (IPF), and a Resettlement Policy Framework.

  The ICR (p. 27) stated that the project design had planned for indigenous people being involved and
  consulted throughout project implementation to ensure their involvement and consent in the formulation of
  the SPA’s Management Plans and the definition and design of rural corridors to avoid potential overlap with
  traditional territories. However, the involvement ended up not being as intensive as originally planned. An
  Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) and Management Plan was prepared, after several delays, for the Chaco
  Corridors and the Impenetrable National Park. The Management Plan for the Impenetrable National Park
  included mitigation measures to avoid potential access restrictions to natural resources for 38 indigenous
  and 12 criollo families living in the park’s buffer zone. Also, the Management Plan for the Copo Provincial
  Park and the Copo Multiple Use Reserve included an IPP and a document on guidelines for the
  regularization of the situation of the inhabitants within both Pas. However, the Management Plan and IPP
  for the Provincial Park Fuerte Esperanza were only partially completed when the project closed due to land
  use and ownership conflicts as well as a legal claim by the indigenous organization MOWITOB which was
  appealed by the province of Chaco.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management:

  According to the ICR (p. 27) the project’s planning, budgeting, accounting, internal control, flow of funds,
  financial reporting and audit arrangements were adequate. All the project’s financial statement audit
  reports were received in a timely manner or with a delay of less than four months. Also, the external
  auditor’s opinions were unqualified and only identified minor issues related to internal control procedures,
  which were all addressed and implemented to the Bank’s satisfaction. Also, all Interim Financial Reports
  (IRF) were of adequate quality and received with delays of less than three months as a result of a high
  turnover of financial management specialists throughout the entire implementation period.

  Procurement:

  According to the ICR (p. 27) the project’s procurement performance was Satisfactory throughout
  implementation despite a high PIU staff turnover and delays in hiring a procurement specialist.

  According to the ICR (p. 28) the project established a grievance response mechanism for potentially
  affected and interested people to contact the PMU. Mailboxes were set up in key project sites and the PIU
  received five questions that were addressed.




                                                                                                  Page 14 of 16
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       AR GEF Rural Corridors and Biodiversity (P114294)




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   NA



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                     Reason for
Ratings                           ICR                      IEG
                                                                                     Disagreements/Comment
                                  Moderately
Outcome                                                    Moderately Satisfactory
                                  Satisfactory
                                  Moderately
Bank Performance                                           Moderately Satisfactory
                                  Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                    Modest                   Modest

Quality of ICR                    ---                      Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR (p. 30-31) included three lessons/findings. Two of them were adapted and listed below to
indicate lessons IEG drew from the project:

        Designing projects with broad geographic scope and generic development objectives
         using flexible investment and institutional strategies adapted to local circumstances
         can result in diffusion of effort, dilution of impact, and difficulties
         measuring outcomes. This project’s objective was broad and covered a wide geographic
         scope. The project’s Results Framework lacked accurate definitions and explicit
         measurement methodologies, making monitoring of progress and credibly verifying
         the achievement of objectives very challenging.
        Effective and successful participatory project implementation processes are more
         likely to achieve positive sustainable project outcomes if they are planned during
         project design. In this project, visible participation of representatives of provincial
         governments and civil society at the project design phase was important and successful for
         strengthening bonds and credibility among local entities which enhanced the project's
         implementation and impact.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No



                                                                                                      Page 15 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     AR GEF Rural Corridors and Biodiversity (P114294)



14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provided an adequate and internally consistent overview of project preparation and implementation
with a structure in line with the guidelines for preparing an ICR. The main text was adequately results-
oriented. However, it was 30 pages; not as concise as 15 pages recommended in the guidelines but
nevertheless a coherent story. The analysis of the project's efficiency included an economic analysis based
on estimated incremental benefits and costs (some benefits drawn from information outside the project) to
estimate benefit/cost ratios for different discount rates and assumed project life. Results were presented for
upper and lower bounds with the lower bound being arguably the best estimate since it was based on the more
conservative assumptions of benefits including a low price for carbon. The economic analysis did not, however,
include a number of project benefits such as incremental revenues from tourism. The three lessons were
relevant and mostly based on evidence from the project. Finally, the ICR did not state mitigation measures for
the triggered Bank safeguard policies nor the extent of compliance with those safeguards. Despite some
shortcomings the quality of the ICR is rated Substantial.




  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                Page 16 of 16
