     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Higher Education Project (P146184)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0023548

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P146184                                    Higher Education Project

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Afghanistan                                Education


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-A0730                                  31-Dec-2020                                          44,233,108.52

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 07-Jul-2015                               21-Dec-2022

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           55,000,000.00                                    55,000,000.00

 Revised Commitment                            45,182,742.52                                    45,182,742.52

 Actual                                        44,233,108.52                                    44,233,108.52




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                 ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Denise A. Vaillancourt      Judyth L. Twigg             Eduardo Fernandez               IEGHC (Unit 2)
                                                         Maldonado




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   As stated in the September 15, 2015 Grant Agreement between the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan and the
   International Development Association (IDA), acting as administrator of the Afghanistan Reconstruction Trust
   Fund (ARTF), the proposed project development objective (PDO) was “…to increase access to, and improve
   the quality and relevance of, higher education in the Recipient’s territory.” The design document presented the
   same statement (Project Appraisal Document [PAD], pp. viii and 4).



                                                                                                   Page 1 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Higher Education Project (P146184)



   The PDO did not change throughout the project’s life. However, all three PDO-level targets were revised to
   more ambitious levels under the project’s Additional Financing and restructuring, approved in September
   2018. Additional minor adjustments to the Results Framework and disbursement-linked indicators (DLIs) were
   introduced under a second restructuring approved in December 2020 responding to constraints on project
   activities due to COVID-19 lockdown and travel restrictions. None of these changes warrant a split rating,
   since all original PDO targets and two of the three revised PDO targets were exceeded, and the third revised
   target was fully achieved by August 2021, 16 months before the revised closing date.

   Nevertheless, a split rating will be used to discriminate between the periods before and after the
   Taliban takeover in August 2021, as agreed between IEG and the region, and in accordance with advice to
   the author from IEG management.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  17-Sep-2018

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   Original Components:

   Component 1: Higher Education Development Program (original estimate of $40.0 million + $4.0
   million in Additional Financing, amounting to a revised component estimate of $44.0 million; actual
   cost: $34.0 million). This component was to support the implementation of Afghanistan's Second National
   Higher Education Strategic Plan (NHESP-II) through a Results-Based Financing (RBF) modality, shifting the
   focus from inputs and activities to results. Financing was to be disbursed to selected line items in the
   Ministry of Higher Education's (MoHE’s) annual budgets (Eligible Expenditures Programs/EEPs) up to
   capped amounts, conditioned on the achievement of an agreed set of DLIs. The EEPs included: (a) salaries
   and allowances of staff in MoHE and public universities and higher education institutions (HEIs); and (b)
   scholarships for academic staff. Six DLIs nurtured and supported the achievement of results in five
   Thematic Areas.

   Thematic Area 1 (Increasing access to priority degree programs for economic development): The
   objective was to expand enrollment in priority degree programs, with special attention to female enrollment,
   through: (a) scholarships for female students from disadvantaged backgrounds; (b) strengthening
   orientation, counseling, and support services, such as childcare; (c) improving transportation services to
   and from universities; and (d) developing online higher education courses to expand access, especially for
   women unable to attend in-person for cultural reasons.



                                                                                                   Page 2 of 25
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  Higher Education Project (P146184)



Thematic Area 2 (Modernizing the quality of teaching and learning): The objective was to assist
universities to introduce outcome-based education (OBE) and student-centered learning (SCL). This theme
also included the introduction of new approaches to curriculum design and delivery; innovative teaching
methods and techniques; active and dynamic learning models; increased use of higher education
publications, information and communication technology (ICT), and internet-based resources; and the
modernization of assessment systems. These new approaches were to be applied to the priority programs
first, then expanded to other degree programs. Universities’ Staff Development Centers (SDCs) were to
provide continuous professional development for academic, management, and technical staff to implement
these new approaches. A key element was strengthening the Afghanistan Research and Education
Network (AfgREN) to operate a national system connecting campus networks with each other and with
other research and education networks globally.

Thematic Area 3 (Improving the qualifications and skills of university staff): The objective was to
increase substantially the number of academic staff qualified to at least the Master’s degree level through
the provision of scholarships to around 300 full-time, regularly employed faculty at public universities.
Special attention was to be given to staff working in priority degree programs and female academics. The
selection of universities for study would take into account cost effectiveness and quality of Master’s degree
programs, along with cultural factors, which affect the preference of many female academics to pursue their
postgraduate studies in-country. The combination of overseas and in-country study in partnership with
foreign universities was to be explored. Scholarship awardees would be bonded by an obligation to work in
Afghan universities after graduation. The recruitment of new staff was expected to mitigate the risk of an
excessive shortage of teachers while some faculty and staff pursued fulltime study. This thematic area also
aimed to support the upgrading of skills of technical staff (laboratory and ICT specialists and librarians)
through short-term programs organized mainly through SDCs.

Thematic Area 4 (Strengthening governance, quality assurance and accreditation): The objectives
were to (a) promote substantive and procedural autonomy of universities and (b) develop the quality
assurance and accreditation system. To help them exercise autonomy and accountability, universities were
to undertake the preparation and implementation of strategic institutional development plans (SIDPs) aimed
at improving the quality and relevance of their degree programs, research outputs, and community services
and incorporating feedback from external and internal quality assurance reviews. SIDPs were required to be
consistent with the NHESP-II and to present a realistic and sustainable financial framework, and would be
monitored through Annual Progress Reports (APRs) reporting progress against targets and any remedial
measures. A Mentors Program, drawn from foreign and Afghan universities, was to support this effort.

Quality assurance and accreditation (QAA) was to be expanded and strengthened to reflect international
standards at national and university levels. The project was to support the establishment of the Afghanistan
Quality Assurance and Accreditation Directorate (QAAD) and its membership in an international
accreditation network. The recruitment and training of QAAD staff would enable: the incorporation of
modern QA protocols and guidelines; the conduct of a fresh cycle of external QA for public and private
universities; and a clear, transparent, and objective process for licensing, QA, and accreditation of the
rapidly increasing number of private HEIs in the country. The project also aimed to support a
comprehensive Internal Quality Assurance System, including: (a) setting up of Internal Quality Assurance
Units (IQAUs) in universities that lack such units; (b) further developing of IQAUs in universities that have
embryonic units; (c) strengthening the planning and conduct of institutional self-assessments; (d) factoring
QA findings into strategic plans; and (e) continuous quality improvement of teaching and learning. IQAUs




                                                                                                Page 3 of 25
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Higher Education Project (P146184)



  were expected to be key in assisting academics to assess and improve the quality of OBE and SCL, as well
  as internet-based teaching and learning methodologies.

  Thematic Area 5 (Stimulating development-oriented research): The objective was to develop a
  research culture in universities, with a focus on applied, development-oriented, demand-driven research,
  mainly in the priority disciplines. Both group and individual research were to be supported, and collaboration
  with overseas researchers was to be encouraged. Research projects undertaken by Kabul-based
  universities were expected to focus on national development. Universities in provincial towns could
  participate national research but were also expected to act as research hubs for the development of their
  provinces. The research culture to be developed was expected to be results-focused, demand-driven, and
  competition-based.

  Component 2: Program Operations and Technical Support (original estimate of $10 million + $1.0
  million in Additional Financing, amounting to a revised component estimate of $11.0 million; actual
  cost: $9.74 million). Using the standard disbursement modality of regular Investment Project Financing
  (IPF), this component aimed to strengthen the capacity of MoHE and universities to implement the reforms
  of the NHESP-II. Planned support included technical assistance, coordination, capacity building, pilots and
  innovations, policy studies including beneficiary feedback surveys of staff and students of institutions and
  programs supported by the project, monitoring and evaluation (M&E), research, and communication.
  Additionally, this component was to finance incremental operating costs of an Operations and Monitoring
  Support Team (OMST) in MoHE.

  Revisions to Components

  Under Additional Financing and Restructuring, approved together in September 2018, the following
  successful activities were scaled up: (a) scholarships for full-time faculty to pursue Master’s or higher-level
  degrees (Thematic Area 3); (b) training of faculty in OBE-SCL (Thematic Area 2); (c) support to public
  universities to prepare and implement SIDPs (Thematic Area 4); and (d) research grants (Thematic Area 5).
  The level two restructuring involved minor revisions to the results framework, DLI targets, and some
  indicator definitions and a two-year extension of the closing date.

  A second Restructuring, approved in December 2020, expanded activities under OBE-SCL (Thematic Area
  2) to increase focus on distance and blended learning and reduced targets for Master’s degrees (Thematic
  Area 3) and research projects (Thematic Area 5) in response to the country’s pandemic lockdown and
  international travel restrictions. Relevant changes included (a) a reallocation of project funds, increasing by
  $5 million DLI funds allocated to the OBE-SCL, reducing by $3 million DLI funds allocated to Master’s
  degree scholarships, and reducing by $2 million DLI funds allocated to research grants. This restructuring
  also included an updating of the results framework to reflect these changes.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Cost. At the time of project approval (July 2015), the original cost of the project was estimated at $50
  million. In September 2018 Additional Financing in the amount of $5 million increased the total project cost
  to $55 million. In late 2022, over a year after the August 2021 Taliban takeover, an amount of $9.82 million
  was cancelled, culminating in a final revised cost estimate of $45.18 million. The Bank’s system indicates an
  actual cost (based on disbursements) of $44.23 million, and an unused amount of $0.95 million.


                                                                                                    Page 4 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Higher Education Project (P146184)



   Financing and Borrower Contribution. The project was 100 percent financed by the ARTF, both the
   initial grant of $50 million, and the Additional Financing of $5 million. While there was no Government of the
   Islamic Republic of Afghanistan (GoIRA) counterpart financing planned or provided, the project was
   conceived as support to the implementation of the NHESP-II. The originally estimated cost of the project
   amounted to about 8 percent of the total estimated budget for implementing the NHESP-II 2015-2020 of
   $658 million, for which GoIRA and the United States Agency for International Development (USAID) were
   slated to finance $518 million and $90 million respectively. Actual disbursements of the ARTF amounted to
   $44.23 million, or 80 percent of the full ARTF amount of $55 million available at the time of the Taliban
   takeover. More than a year after the Taliban takeover and close to the project closing date, $9.82 million
   was cancelled.

   Key Dates. The project was approved on July 7, 2015, became effective on September 15, 2015, and
   closed on December 21, 2022, approximately two years after the original closing date of December 31,
   2020. After the May 3, 2018 mid-term review, Additional Financing of $5 million and a restructuring of the
   project were approved together in September 2018 to scale up activities, involving changes to the results
   framework, a reallocation of project funding, and a two-year extension of the closing date. A second
   restructuring, approved in December 2020, introduced slight modifications to activities and the results
   framework and reallocated remaining resources, all in response to the challenges and constraints
   associated with the COVID-19 lockdown and travel restrictions.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Up until the time of the August 15, 2021 Taliban takeover, the relevance of the PDO was high.

      The PDO was highly relevant to country conditions at the project's outset and remains so
       today. Afghanistan’s higher education sector was underdeveloped, with its 6 percent gross
       enrollment rate one of the lowest in the world, of which only 20 percent were women. Its
       teachercentered pedagogy and passive student learning undermined quality and learning outcomes.
       There was a severe shortage of qualified academic staff in Afghan universities and HEIs, with the
       majority of academics (65 percent) holding only a Bachelor’s degree. The highly centralized
       governance of higher education left little autonomy to universities, which lacked the capacity to
       assume increasing autonomy: technical, developmental, and fiscal. MoHE’s quality assurance and
       accreditation system for public and private HEIs was at an early developmental stage and needed
       further strengthening. Moreover, the academic research output of Afghan universities was
       insignificant. While progress has been made on all of these fronts, these issues continue to
       challenge access to, and quality and relevance of, higher education.
      The PDO was highly relevant to the developmental priorities of the country. Afghanistan's
       National Development Strategy highlighted the importance of strengthening education outcomes
       and accelerating human capital accumulation, and GoIRA was fully aware of the strategic
       importance of human capital in the modern global knowledge economy and higher education’s
       potential role in promoting democratic values and attitudes for developing a socially cohesive nation.
       The Afghanistan National Peace and Development Framework (2017-21) makes specific mention of
       the need to improve the quality of HEIs, using an outcomes-based education model and


                                                                                                    Page 5 of 25
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Higher Education Project (P146184)



                                        restructuring curriculum, assessment, and reporting practices, all supported under the project. The
                                        second National Higher Education Strategic Plan (2015-2020), which sought to orient the
                                        development of the higher education system to promote the economic and social development of
                                        the country, served as the impetus and framework for the project.
                                       The PDO was also highly relevant to the World Bank’s assistance strategy in Afghanistan, as
                                        laid out in the Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for FY17-FY20 (Report No. 108727), and
                                        subsequently extended to FY22. Grounded in a Systematic Country Diagnostic undertaken by the
                                        Bank, the CPF supported the tenets of Afghanistan’s National Peace and Development Framework:
                                        (1) improving governance and state effectiveness; (b) building social capital and nation building; (3)
                                        economic growth and job creation; and (4) poverty reduction and social inclusion. Of the three areas
                                        of engagement supported under the CPF (building strong and accountable institutions, inclusive
                                        growth, and social inclusion through human development outcomes), the PDO was highly relevant
                                        to the first and third areas. Under the third area, it included outcome indicators and targets for
                                        increased enrollment in higher education, with specific targets for women, supported under the
                                        project.
                                       The World Bank had played an integral role in the reconstruction of the higher education
                                        system in Afghanistan, rendering it well equipped to undertake the project. Its support of the
                                        Afghanistan Strengthening Higher Education Project 2005-2013 succeeded in progressively
                                        restoring basic operational performance to the sector through support to 12 core universities,
                                        including investments in human resource development, curriculum standardization, and the
                                        restoration of basic physical infrastructure. This provided a basis and experience upon which further
                                        support was designed.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Increase access to higher education in Afghanistan

                             Rationale
                             The theory of change envisaged the achievement of Thematic Area 1 (increasing access to higher
                             education, especially of females) through the support and nurturing of increased female enrollment in the first
                             year of public universities, with a focus on priority disciplines for economic development (DLI 1). Activities
                             envisaged to realize these outputs included the establishment of counseling and support services for
                             female students; provision of transport services to and from universities for female students; improving female
                             students’ access to adequate residential facilities on campus; provision of scholarships for female students to
                             complete their university studies; and the strengthening of universities’ ICT capacities and facilities to provide



                                                                                                                                    Page 6 of 25
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Higher Education Project (P146184)



online higher education courses, for the benefit of all students, but especially convenient for female students
given cultural norms and constraints.

The following activities were implemented, and intermediate outcome and PDO-level targets achieved, as of
August 2021 (the month of the Taliban takeover), and 16 months prior to the extended closing date of
December 21, 2022. References to revised targets refer to those revised under the September 2018
Additional Financing and Restructuring.

Outputs and intermediate results

      The project established counseling centers at six universities (Kabul Education University, Balkh,
         Kabul University, Herat, Jawzjan, and Bamyan). These centers provided consultative support and
         sessions for the beneficiaries, although there were delays in recruiting psychologists for the centers.
        The project provided 25 buses to transport female students and academics at 25 universities.
        The project awarded 400 scholarships to economically disadvantaged female students, including
         2,500 Afs per month for the entire academic year. The Bank's team, in its May 5, 2023 email to IEG,
         clarified that these scholarships were paid directly to disadvantaged female students to use at their
         discretion. Since public university students do not pay tuition, these scholarships could be used for
         other education costs (e.g., books, stationery, and living costs). These scholarships aimed to improve
         retention of female students, mostly from disadvantaged backgrounds. An estimated $300,000 was
         paid to about 300 female students at the Bachelor's level over the three-year period of 2018-2020.
        The project supported the establishment of child care centers at six universities (Takhar, Albironi,
         Bamyan, Parwan, Faryab, and Kabul medical universities), and the renovation of child care centers at
         two additional universities (Herat and Badakshan), reported to be ongoing as of August 21, 2021 (ICR,
         p. 13).
        The project supported the construction and completion of 14 water and lavatory complexes, while four
         others were in progress by August 2021.
        Under the project four female dormitories at provincial universities (Kunar, Takhar, Bamyan, and
         Helmand) were constructed, with a fifth dormitory (at Badghis HEI) under construction. Of the four
         completed dormitories, only one (Kunar) was functional, with the remaining three facing issues
         including lack of boundary walls, lack of female students (Helmand), and a retaining wall issue
         (Bamyan). The project prepared an action plan to expedite the resolution of these impediments to
         functionality, but it was not implemented due to the August 2021 events.
        (IRI 2) These impediments notwithstanding, the number of female students with access to adequate
         residential facilities for women on university campuses increased from a 2014/15 baseline of 2,500 to
         5,800, exceeding the original and revised targets of 5,000 and 5,500, respectively.
        DLI 3: The project achieved an increase in the number of public universities with functional ICT
         centers for ICT-based higher education. Reported in detail under Objective 2 (improved quality), this
         intermediate outcome also contributed to (this) Objective 1 (increased access), especially postCOVID.

Outcomes as of August 2021

      The total student enrollment in universities in priority degree programs* reached 88,624, of whom
       21,159 were female and 67,465 male, exceeding the original targets for total and female
       enrollments (81,000 total; 18,000 female) and the revised targets (86,500 total; 18,500 female).
      (IRI 1) Female enrollment in priority degree programs* in the first year of public universities (DLI 1)
       more than doubled, reaching 6,700 in August 2021 from a 2015 baseline of 3,000, exceeding the

                                                                                                    Page 7 of 25
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Higher Education Project (P146184)



         original, unchanged target of 5,500. The remarkable increase in female enrollment in priority
         programs was due in significant part to the allocation of reserved seats for girls in the
         kankor (university intake exam) and an increase in the reserved seats in 2018 and afterward. In 2019,
         6,000 seats were reserved for female students at 13 universities, which increased to 6,926 seats at 20
         universities in 2020.
        Over and above its contribution to education quality (Objective 2), the development and further
         strengthening of ICT capacities of universities, detailed below under Objective 2, also helped MoHE
         strengthen its ability to offer distance education during the COVID-19 pandemic and a Higher
         Education Learning Management System (HELMS) platform for digital education.
        * The focus on priority degree programs is detailed and assessed under Objective 3: Increased
         relevance of higher education in Afghanistan.



Rating
High


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
Increase access to higher education in Afghanistan

The objective was not revised, but official operations ceased after the Taliban takeover on August 15, 2021.

Revised Rationale
Since the Taliban takeover on August 15, 2021, there has been no official relationship between the World
Bank and the government. There is no information about any project activities after that date.



Revised Rating
Negligible


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Improve the quality of higher education in Afghanistan

Rationale
The theory of change laid out a set of Thematic Areas, underpinned by strategically selected DLIs, to support
and nurture improvements in the quality and governance of higher education. Thematic Area 2 (modernizing
and enhancing the quality of teaching and learning) supported increases in the number of fulltime
academic staff trained in -- and practicing -- outcome-based education and student-centered learning (DLI 2).
It also supported an increase in the number of universities with functional ICT centers for ICT-based higher
education (DLI 3) (supporting both access and quality objectives). Activities included training in OBE and
SCL; improvements in professional networking systems connecting universities to each other and to global
networks; and strengthening of SDCs for continuous professional development. Thematic Area 3 (improving


                                                                                                 Page 8 of 25
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Higher Education Project (P146184)



the qualification and skills of academic and technical staff) supported scholarships to university faculty so they
could complete Master’s (or higher-level) degrees in priority disciplines (DLI 4) and increases in the number of
technical and maintenance staff completing short-term courses to raise their skills. The award of scholarships
to faculty and the design and delivery of technical and maintenance courses were the main activities.
Thematic Area 4 (strengthening governance, quality assurance, and accreditation) supported improvements
in quality assurance systems, processes and capacities, including the establishment and strengthening of
IQAUs in universities (DLI 5); the completion by universities of quality assurance cycles; and strengthened
governance capacity of universities through training in leadership and management and the development,
implementation, monitoring, and evaluation of university-level SIDPs, to enhance greater autonomy and
accountabilities of universities. Supporting activities included development of the Afghanistan Quality
Assurance and Accreditation Directorate in MoHE; setting up and strengthening IQAUs in universities; and
technical support to universities in the preparation and implementation of SIDPs, the development and
execution of APRs, the use of QA reviews for plan adjustments, and a continuous process of teaching and
learning quality improvement.

Outputs and intermediate results as of August 2021

Modernizing and Enhancing the Quality of Teaching and Learning (Thematic Area 2)

      One of the project’s outstanding achievements was the institutionalization of OBE and SCL in the
         universities. A total of 2,050 academics were trained in, and practicing, OBE and SCL, far exceeding
         the original and revised targets of 1,000 (original target), 1,250 (revised in 2018) and 1,500 (revised
         in 2020), respectively (DLI 2). The actual practice of OBE-SCL was confirmed by third-party
         verification (TPV) reports, which checked syllabi of a random sample of instructors to ensure they
         included outcomes, lesson plans, and course schedules. Two-thirds of the 116 syllabi checked in the
         2020 TVP exercise had all the necessary parts. Student surveys corroborated teachers’ self reports
         about using SCL methods and about the use of OBE practices in classrooms. TVPs found that
         instructors’ use of SCL in the classrooms was most characterized by group work and discussions, and
         whiteboards, computers, projectors, and videos were reported to be the most used teaching aids.
        The development of OBE-SCL training materials was based on guidelines and workbooks used in
         countries such as Malaysia and Sri Lanka. International experts from the University of Technology,
         Malaysia, provided initial training in Malaysia to 68 academic staff from Afghanistan universities and
         certified them as OBE-SCL Master Trainers, who, in turn, trained the rest of the 2,050 faculty
         members in Afghanistan.
        The project also helped establish professional development centers at 12 universities and trained their
         directors, who facilitated the OBE-SCL training workshops and adoption of this approach in the
         classrooms.
        The project supported the establishment of ICT centers at 12 universities and the training of more than
         66 technicians in topics such as e-learning, technical skills, and basic and advanced network
         administration. It also installed solar systems in six universities and provided IT equipment packages,
         some including computers, to 40 universities and HEIs.
        Of the 12 universities benefiting from newly established ICT centers under the project, ICT centers in
         10 of those universities were assessed to be fully functional, almost achieving the original,
         unchanged target of 12 universities (DLI 3). The ICT center at Baghlan University had not yet been
         inaugurated in view of the university's relocation due to security threats. Assessment of ICT
         functionality was based on four indicators captured in annual scorecard reviews: (1) students and
         personal computers (PCs) ratio; (b) technician and PCs ratio; (c) utilization of ICTs by students; and

                                                                                                    Page 9 of 25
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Higher Education Project (P146184)



       (d) utilization of ICTs by academic staff. In a May 5, 2023 email to IEG, the Bank's team added that
       the ICT center in Bamyan University was also found not to be functioning by the TPV in 2020.
       Completion of ICT centers was a work in progress at some of the universities. Those that were found
       not to be fully functional in a particular year were reassessed in the following round of third-party
       verification.
      Although ICT centers facilitated online and blended education, the 2021 ICT assessment documented
       challenges at some locations: low internet bandwidth, lack of stable electricity, internet outages, some
       vacant ICT technician positions, and low levels of technical knowledge of students and faculty for
       effective e-teaching and learning. Sixty percent of surveyed students reported receiving distance
       education services from different platforms (WhatsApp and HELMS).
      In response to COVID-19, the project scaled up ICT support to cover more public universities and
       higher-level institutes to help implement e-learning through HELMS and other platforms. Eighteen
       projects supporting ICT equipment, networking, and solar system facilities for 16 public universities
       and HEIs were in either the procurement or implementation process in November 2020.
      Progress was also made on other initiatives, including the expansion of the AfgREN and the
       integration of e-learning into the country’s higher education curriculum on a pilot basis. In addition, five
       AfghanX courses (web-based platform for courses taught at Afghanistan’s universities) were uploaded
       on the EdX platform to familiarize a global audience with Afghanistan’s culture and heritage.

Improving the Qualifications and Skills of Academic and Technical Staff (Thematic Area 3)

      The project awarded 494 scholarships, of which 436 were in Master’s programs and 58 in Ph.D.
       programs. One-third (33 percent) of scholarships were awarded to female academics. Of the 494
       scholarships awarded, 265 faculty members completed their programs, falling short of the original
       and revised end-of-project targets of 300 (original), 350 (revised in September 2018), and 300
       (revised in September 2020) respectively, due to international travel restrictions and university
       closures resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic.
      A total of 400 technical staff completed short-term technical and maintenance courses (in disciplines
       such as ICT, lab equipment, and maintenance, among others), achieving two-thirds of the original
       target of 600 and fully achieving the revised target of 400 (DLI 4).

Strengthening Governance, Quality Assurance and Accreditation (Thematic Area 3)

      As of August 2021, IQAUs were established at 18 public universities. Nine of them were functioning at
       international standards, achieving slightly more than half (56 percent) of the original, unchanged
       target of fully functioning IQAUs in 16 universities (DLI 5). The units were instrumental in facilitating
       self-assessment and external QA assessment, training faculty in OBE-SCL, and improving
       universities’ overall relevance and quality.
      A total of 48 public and private universities completed a new regionally benchmarked quality
       assurance cycle, fully achieving the original target of 24 public and 24 private universities. Completion
       was based on universities carrying out self-assessments and competing an external QA review, which
       would then be disseminated by MoHE. TPV reports indicate high enthusiasm and commitment of the
       QA teams and their role in promoting and adopting the QA process by faculty members, students, and
       university personnel. In its May 5, 2023 email to IEG, the Bank's team confirmed that the target of 48
       public and private universities was met by the project's closing (December 2022), as reported in the
       ICR's Annex 1 (p. 30), even though the ICR's main text only reported on the public universities'


                                                                                                    Page 10 of 25
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  Higher Education Project (P146184)



        lessthan-full achievement (20 of 24 public universities) by August 2021, but noted to be still on track to
        meet the target by the project's end.
       At the national level, the project contracted the United Nations Education, Scientific and Cultural
        Organization (UNESCO) to conduct an assessment of QAAD’s institutional capacity in 2019-20 and
        develop an institutional reform plan, which provided recommendations on how to move towards a
        quality assurance directorate, independent of the MoHE. Moreover, QAAD made notable progress in
        promoting good practices, including by working with development partners (Asia Pacific Quality
        Assurance Network [APQN], Malaysian Qualifications Agency, UNESCO, USAID, World Bank) to
        advance QA in Afghanistan. QAAD also continued to maintain its membership in the APQN, and four
        public universities obtained membership during the APQN annual conference in April 2018.
       By the project's end, a total of 450 university senior managerial and administrative staff completed
        short-term leadership and management courses in the context of greater authority and accountability
        accorded to universities, substantially achieving the original, unchanged target of 500 (90
        percent achievement).
       In contrast with the 450 staff, reported in the above bullet, and documented in the ICR's Annex 1 (p.
        30), the main text of the ICR (p. 16) reports that only 352 university leadership staff were trained in
        leadership and management. In its May 5, 2023 email to IEG, the Bank's team confirmed that indeed
        450 staff completed this training, and that those trained in 2021 were not captured in the main text's
        reporting. While the numbers do not add up to the total of 450, the following details in the main text on
        the nature of that training are worth noting. The project supported the design and delivery, by the
        Asian Institute for Technology (Thailand), of an Advanced University Leadership program in 2016 and
        2017, which trained an initial 245 university leadership staff by the end of 2019. To ensure
        sustainability, the project organized and supported a National Resource Persons (NRPs) Masterclass
        Training at the National Institute of Technical Teachers Training and Research in India, which trained
        25 Afghan NRPs. During the last quarter of 2020, an additional 107 university leadership staff were
        trained by those NRPs.
       The project also supported the delivery of short-term courses for over 500 technical staff, including
        166 library technicians, 160 lab technicians, 66 ICT technicians, and 130 gender focal points. A short-
        term training impact assessment revealed that two-thirds (67.5 percent) of academic respondents
        noted improvements in lab technicians’ knowledge and skills, helping them to operate lab equipment
        more effectively.
       The project also facilitated the revision of the Accreditation Framework, the main instrument for
        external quality assurance and accreditation.

Outcomes as of August 2021

     Reform of teaching and learning was successfully implemented with the establishment and adoption
      of OBE and SCE in the classroom, which facilitated greater focus on learning outcomes and on
      students’ needs and challenges.
     (PDO 3) The qualifications and knowledge base of faculty were enhanced in priority programs. With
      project support, the number of full-time academic staff with at least a Master’s degree in priority
      degree programs increased from the baseline of 700 in 2015 to 1,800, exceeding both the
      original and revised targets of 1,000 and 1,600, respectively. Over and above the 265 completed
      degree programs supported under the project, this increase was due to other factors, including the
      recruitment of new faculty and the return of faculty benefiting from other scholarships and Master’s
      degree programs that were established at six universities for 10 disciplines. The Bank's team, in its
      May 5, 2023 email to IEG, clarified that these other sources of scholarships for university lecturers

                                                                                                   Page 11 of 25
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Higher Education Project (P146184)



         included Fullbright, Chevening, and DAAD (German Academic Exchange Service), among others. IEG
         notes that scholarships supported under the previous Strengthening Higher Education project/SHEP
         were yet another source. The establishment of continuous professional development centers for
         faculty and their improved access to professional networks also contributed to the enhanced skills and
         qualifications of faculty.
        The upgrading of skills and the adoption of tools and processes improved higher-level education
         governance and quality assurance.

    1. (PDO 2) Twenty-four universities: (a) prepared and issued strategic five-year rolling institutional
       development plans (SIDPs), consistent with NHESP-II, and (b) undertook APRs, both prepared in
       accordance with a standardized template, exceeding the original target of 18 universities and fully
       achieving the revised target of 24 universities. This achievement is an important indicator of
       improvements in quality and governance.
    2. The strengthening of quality assurance at national and university levels institutionalized the quality
       assurance process and raised it to international standards.



Rating
High


OBJECTIVE 2 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
Improve the quality of higher education in Afghanistan

The objective was not revised, but official operations ceased after the Taliban takeover on August 15, 2021.

Revised Rationale
Since the Taliban takeover on August 15, 2021, there has been no official relationship between the World
Bank and the government. There is no information about any project activities after that date.



Revised Rating
Negligible


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
Improve the relevance of higher education in Afghanistan

Rationale
he theory of change for this objective held that, in its quest to improve access, quality, and relevance of
higher education, the project’s activities would support a strong focus on priority degree programs deemed
most relevant for serving the needs of and enhancing the prospects for the country’s economic development.
Identified as national priorities in the NHESP-II, these degree programs included: Physical and Life Sciences
(biology, chemistry and physics, geology, and earth sciences), Computing (computer science and computer

                                                                                                  Page 12 of 25
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Higher Education Project (P146184)



programming), Engineering, Manufacturing, and Construction (engineering, construction, electro-mechanics,
chemical technology, and mining), Health (pharmacy, general medicine, medical treatment, stomatology, and
nursing), Environmental Protection (environment and environmental engineering), Agriculture (agriculture,
veterinary forestry, crop and livestock production, agronomy, irrigation, animal husbandry, and horticulture),
Communication and Information Technologies, Management and Policy Administration, and English
Language and Literature. Journalism, Education, Law, and Social Sciences were added later in year 3 to the
list of priority disciplines to ensure that enough female faculty were available for the purposes of awarding
scholarships for Master’s or higher-level degrees.

Outputs and intermediate results as of August 2021

      Support to boosting access and relevant indicators (scholarships for female students, male and
       female student enrollment, and the expansion of online courses) all focused on the priority degree
       programs. (Details reported under Objective 1)
      Support to improvements in quality and governance and relevant indicators (scholarships for faculty
       for earning Master’s and higher-level degrees; strengthening of capacities for strategic planning, plan
       implementation, and monitoring, linked to NHESP-II; and quality assurance processes and use for
       enhancing effectiveness) also focused on the priority degree programs. (Details reported under
       Objective 2)
      Likewise, as detailed below, the project’s support to research focused on applied,
       developmentoriented, demand-driven research, mainly in these same priority disciplines.
            o With project support, MoHE developed a competitive process for awarding research grants,
               established research technical committees and task forces, and provided grants for faculty to
               conduct individual and group research on Afghan developmental challenges.
            o As of August 2021, MoHE awarded grants to 161 research projects (110 individual and 51
               group projects), of which 117 research projects (78 individual and 39 group) were completed,
               substantially achieving the original target of 120 research projects (80 individual and 40
               group projects), achieving 84 percent of the revised target of 140 (established during the
               2018 Additional Financing/Restructuring), and exceeding the target of at least 70 individual
               research projects and at least 30 group research projects (for a total of at least 100) revised
               during the 2020 restructuring.
            o The project also prepared a concept note on “students-as-researchers pedagogy” in June
               2021 to initiate a process to support the incorporation of research into undergraduate learning
               and teaching in Afghan HEIs.

Outcomes as of August 2021

The project was successful in improving the relevance of higher education in Afghanistan.

      It whole-heartedly embraced and focused on strengthening the degree programs designated as most
       relevant by GoIRA in its NHESP-II.
      Improvements in teaching and learning, achieved through enhanced qualifications of teachers and
       enhanced methods of teaching and learning (OBE-SCL), were overtly focused on these priority
       programs.
      Support to improvements in quality assurance and governance ensured that strategic planning,
       management, quality assurance, monitoring, and evaluation would all be grounded in NHESP’s
       priority programs and used to enhance those programs' effectiveness.

                                                                                                Page 13 of 25
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Higher Education Project (P146184)




                                    Efforts to expand access and boost enrollment all successfully culminated in substantially increased
                                     enrollments of males and females in these priority programs.
                                    The project not only supported research projects falling within these priority programs; it also
                                     supported and nurtured, within these priority areas, research that was relevant to national and
                                     provincial needs and priorities, with criteria ensuring that they were development-oriented and
                                     demand-driven.



                            Rating
                            High


                            OBJECTIVE 3 REVISION 1
                            Revised Objective
                            Improve the relevance of higher education in Afghanistan

                            The objective was not revised, but official operations ceased after the Taliban takeover on August 15, 2021.

                            Revised Rationale
                            Since the Taliban takeover on August 15, 2021, there has been no official relationship between the World
                            Bank and the government. There is no information about any project activities after that date.



                            Revised Rating
                            Negligible


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The project achieved strong results in its initial years of implementation prior to the Taliban takeover,
                            exceeding all of its original outcome targets and two of the three revised (more ambitious) outcome targets,
                            the remaining revised target being fully achieved. The overall efficacy rating for the three objectives is high.

                            The Bank's team, in its May 5, 2023 email to IEG, stated that the majority of the achievements reported here
                            are attributable to the project, although still recognizing that other higher education projects (for example, the
                            US$90 million USAID Higher Education project) may have contributed, especially to Objective 2 (quality).



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            High



                                                                                                                                 Page 14 of 25
             Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
             Higher Education Project (P146184)



 OBJR1_TBL




         OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
         Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
         After the Taliban takeover in August 2021, efficacy was negligible for all three objectives.



         Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating                        Primary Reason
         Negligible                                                External shock


 5. Efficiency
A cost-benefit analysis undertaken at the time of appraisal estimated the Net Present Value (NPV) of the project
at $165 million and the internal rate of return (IRR) at 16 percent, assuming an 80 percent employment rate
among university graduates and a 5 percent increase in their earnings. Due to the project’s suspension at the
time of the Taliban takeover, the project was unable to collect the necessary data to update the NPV and IRR. In
the absence of this data, the ICR (p. 16) notes that, since the project exceeded its initial targets and most of its
revised, more ambitious targets with only 80.4 percent of its total budget, and 16 months before the closing date,
“…it is fair to conclude that it has exceeded the estimated economic benefits.”

The ICR reports that implementation was also very efficient, thanks to the strong and efficient OMST based in
MoHE and the close collaboration and coordination between the Bank, OMST, and the MoHE leadership team.
The OMST team was competent and able to resolve project issues without referring them to the Bank’s team,
and it had good working relationships with MoHE leadership and HEIs, each staffed with one university
operating coordinator responsible for coordinating project activities. The RBF modality, instrumental in shifting
the focus from inputs to results, was successfully implemented with concerted support from the Bank, MoHE,
and the Ministry of Finance, and it contributed to the project’s strong outcomes. RBF reduced procurement
challenges, since procurement under Component 1 was managed by MoHE and GoIRA following the national
Procurement Law.

The 2018 Additional Financing and Restructuring reinforced and expanded successful elements of
implementation and raised the level of ambition of the project targets. The 2020 Restructuring helped the
project to overcome some of the constraints, disruptions, and inefficiencies in project implementation, and in
higher education service delivery more generally, caused by lockdowns and travel restrictions during the
COVID-19 pandemic.

An analysis of planned versus actual costs by component reveals an ongoing effort to reinforce and expand
project activities, judiciously, to address evolving challenges and opportunities.

There were very few minor shortcomings, including delays in procurement and delays in responding to audit
recommendations.


Efficiency Rating
High



                                                                                                          Page 15 of 25
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Higher Education Project (P146184)



a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?              Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                       0
Appraisal                                                    0
                                                                                        Not Applicable
                                                                                       0
ICR Estimate                                                 0
                                                                                        Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The project's outcome prior to the Taliban takeover is rated Highly Satisfactory, given its high ratings for
relevance, efficacy and efficiency. The relevance of the PDO at time of the Taliban takeover is rated high, since
the PDO effectively addressed the most salient issues faced by the higher education subsector and was well
aligned with GoIRA’s national development priorities and with the second national strategic plan for higher
education. Efficacy is rated high overall, with Objective 1 (increase access to higher education in Afghanistan)
highly achieved, Objective 2 (improve the quality of higher education in Afghanistan) highly achieved, and
Objective 3 (improve the relevance of higher education in Afghanistan) highly achieved. The absence of data
for an end-of-project cost-benefit analysis notwithstanding, efficiency is rated high, given that almost all original
and (more ambitious) revised outcome targets were exceeded, and the remaining revised target fully achieved,
even with only 80 percent of project resources used up until that time, an indication that the project exceeded
the economic benefits estimated at appraisal. Moreover, these outcomes were achieved 16 months prior to the
project's closing date.

The project's outcome after the Taliban takeover is rated unsatisfactory, in light of its high ratings for relevance
and efficiency, and negligible ratings for efficacy.

A split rating of performance before and after the Taliban takeover, weighted by disbursements made during
each period, culminates in a fully Satisfactory outcome.

                                                  By August 15, 2021                   After August 15, 2021
               Relevance                                                                     High
                Efficacy
         • Objective 1 (access)                           High                                Negligible
         • Objective 2 (quality)                          High                                Negligible
       • Objective 3 (relevance)                          High                                Negligible
               Efficiency                                 High                                  High
        Phase Outcome Rating                       Highly Satisfactory                     Unsatisfactory
     Phase Outcome Rating Score                            6                                      2
                                                                                       Additional Disbursed: 0
                                                       Disbursed:
              Use of Funds
                                                                                     Remaining, unused funds:
                                                $44.23 million (ICR, p. 1)


                                                                                                       Page 16 of 25
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Higher Education Project (P146184)



                                                                                         $10.77 million


            Phase Weight                       44.23/55.0 = 80.42% x 6            10.77/55.0 = 19.58% x 2
           Weighted Rating                              4.825                              0.392
         Overall Rating Score                                     5.217 (rounded to 5)
        Overall Outcome Rating                                         Satisfactory

This split rating methodology was adapted specifically for the Afghanistan portfolio, given the abrupt fall of the
government and takeover by the Taliban. This table was reviewed and noted as fully consistent with the special
IEG guidance.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The project’s formidable outcomes are at high risk in the wake of the Taliban takeover of August 15,
2021. As envisaged under the project’s design, the sustainability of its outcomes had been enhanced, up
until the August 15, 2021 events, by a number of factors, most notably: (a) strong GoIRA ownership and
commitment to the reforms, thanks to the project’s support to the implementation of Afghanistan’s own higher
education reform program; (b) the technical viability of the project design, based on international best
practice, knowledge, and expertise, and analytic work undertaken by the Bank in 2013, as well as the
experience and lessons learned from the previous Bank-supported higher education operation (SHEP); (c)
project design and implementation arrangements, which supported and nurtured the strengthening of
management and technical capacities in MoHE and in universities; and (d) the fiscal sustainability of project
investments, which the ICR assesses as not posing an undue fiscal burden on the overall higher education
budget (ICR, p. 22).

Since the August 21, 2021 events, the Taliban’s policies towards girls’ education and gender segregation,
coupled with restrictions on women’s participation in society and academia, put the project’s remarkable
achievements of increased female enrollment and female faculty development at high risk. Moreover, most
of the former senior staff of MoHE, who held leadership positions, are no longer in the country. Faculty
scholars studying abroad are not willing to return to Afghanistan. There are no reliable data on how many
faculty who benefited from project scholarships remain in the country.

Prospects for the sustainability of other outcomes, especially the continued use and refinement of the
OBESCL approach, infrastructure improvements, and quality assurance and governance reforms, are
contingent on some continuity in related policies and in commitment to reforms, which are uncertain under
current circumstances. This points to the importance of the Bank’s re-engagement with Afghanistan’s higher
education subsector, when feasible, to sustain these outcomes.




                                                                                                    Page 17 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Higher Education Project (P146184)



8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  In a very difficult country context of security challenges and political instability, the Bank supported the
  design of a highly relevant and evidence-based project. The project was designed to support the
  implementation of higher education reform, as laid out in Afghanistan’s NHESP-II. Preparation drew
  heavily on local evidence, knowledge, and experience and on in-depth analytic work. The success and
  lessons of the Afghanistan Strengthening Higher Education Project (SHEP), implemented between 2005
  and 2013, highlighted the importance of: evidence-based approaches; GoIRA ownership; strengthened
  systems for sustainability; flexible implementation, especially in a fragile environment; and a robust M&E
  framework. Design work also drew on the Bank’s analytic report Higher Education in Afghanistan: An
  Emerging Mountainscape, finalized in 2013, which provided a solid understanding of the country context
  as well as the status and challenges of the higher education sector, and it highlighted best practices from
  the Bank’s experience in higher education globally. Preparation was highly consultative, drawing on
  longstanding dialogue with MoHE and with some of the major public universities.

  The PDO, theory of change, and indicators were clearly defined and coherent, and were appropriately
  gender-sensitive. M&E arrangements were strong (Section 9). These features, together with the RBF
  design, facilitated both smooth implementation and a strong focus on results. The PAD was clear in
  articulating the development challenges and the rationale for investing in Afghanistan’s higher education
  system. The risk assessment was thorough and realistic, raising salient potential issues that could
  undermine implementation and results. Mitigation measures were appropriate – and proved to be
  effective – for reducing risks, including a selective focus on development initiatives, a sizeable technical
  assistance component, flexibility during implementation, management and leadership strengthening of
  MoHE and universities, a strong OMST, and reliance on fiduciary arrangements that worked for other
  ARTF and IDA projects. The Bank did its due diligence in assessing capacities and in addressing
  shortcomings in procurement, financial management, and environmental and social safeguards (Section
  10). In retrospect, the ICR does note in its lessons section that better coordination with United Nations
  agencies and non-governmental organizations may have enhanced sustainability, given Afghanistan's
  fragility and instability.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Highly Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The Bank carried out implementation support missions twice a year throughout the project’s life, even
 during the pandemic, when such missions were carried out virtually. This is a noteworthy accomplishment,
 given the ongoing security challenges, over and above the pandemic. Implementation Status and Results
 Reports (ISRs) and Aide-Memoires were detailed, clearly and candidly assessing the project’s
 achievements and challenges, and documented recommendations and agreed-upon actions to address the
 issues and challenges identified. The Bank’s team provided support and guidance to MoHE and the
 Ministry of Finance in implementing the new RBF modality, facilitating relatively smooth project
 implementation. The Mid-Term Review was seized as an opportunity to expand successful activities with
 Additional Financing. Throughout its implementation support, and facilitated by the RBF design, the Bank's

                                                                                                    Page 18 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Higher Education Project (P146184)



 supervision missions were strongly focused on results. Indeed, the strong support of the Bank equipped
 MoHE and the Ministry of Finance to implement this modality very well, underpinning a shift in the project’s
 focus from inputs and activities to delivering results/DLIs. Supervision of procurement and financial
 management was supportive and regular. MoHE’s strong leadership and commitment to project objectives
 (which were fully supportive of national reform), an effective Steering Committee, and a competent OMST
 – all supported and nurtured under the project – proved to be strong factors in the project’s success.
 Compliance with the Bank’s environmental safeguards policies was an area that would have benefited from
 more attention, given that the Bank’s Third-Party Monitoring Agent identified a few safeguard issues with
 the project’s civil works in Bamyan and Badghis (see Section 10.a).



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Highly Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Highly Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The project’s clearly stated objectives and its well-articulated theory of change provided a solid basis for
 sound design of M&E. As stated in the PAD (p. 75), the objectives of M&E were to: (a) track the project’s
 implementation experience and strengthen it, where needed; (b) assess the results achieved under project
 components and subcomponents; and (c) evaluate the outcomes. The results framework developed at
 project design laid out expected outputs, intermediate outcomes, and outcomes, with annual targets to
 provide a continuous picture of project performance. The use of DLIs underpinned a focus on critical
 milestones within the various higher education reform themes supported under the project, incentivizing
 progress on all of these fronts. The indicators were specific, measurable, sufficiently ambitious, achievable,
 relevant, and timebound. Baselines were duly established.

 Institutional arrangements were given due attention. Component 2 aimed to strengthen MoHE’s capacity
 for M&E, assessed as moderate at the project’s outset. It financed an M&E specialist in MoHE/OMST to
 collect national and university-level data, compile and analyze it to report on project results and outcome
 indicators, and provide MoHE with technical assistance and capacity building. The verification of DLIs
 consisted of two sets of activities: (a) the provision by MoHE/OMST of an annual monitoring report on the
 status of achievement of DLIs; and (b) the undertaking of TPV studies by a consultant firm financed under
 the project. TPV studies were to cover all universities relevant for the DLIs each year, include surveys of a
 scientific sample of academic and managerial staff and students, stratified by gender, and include site visits
 to IQAUs, ICT centers, relevant research sites, and sites practicing SCL and OBE.



b. M&E Implementation
  The implementation of M&E by MoHE and OMST allowed the Bank to track the project’s progress against
  outcome and intermediate outcome targets on a regular basis during its implementation support

                                                                                                    Page 19 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Higher Education Project (P146184)



  missions. There were some delays and inconsistencies in MoHE data because the Higher Education
  Management Information System was not yet fully operational, and some data and statistics were
  collected manually from the universities. The project recruited local research organizations to verify
  MoHE’s M&E reports and DLI achievements as independent third parties. The project also involved the
  Bank’s Afghanistan Reconstruction Trust Fund/ARTF Third-Party Monitoring Agent to assess its civil
  works activities.

  OMST provided the Bank bi-monthly and annual monitoring reports on a regular basis. Moreover, the
  project funded several studies assessing the capacity of the QAAD, ICT capacity, and female enrollment.
  Discrepancies between enrollment data in TPV, MoHE, and ISR reports were identified and were
  attributed to the lack of an integrated higher information system at MoHE and to confusion about the list
  of priority disciplines and sub-disciplines. The project's M&E system helped resolve many of these
  discrepancies and continued to monitor gender-disaggregated enrollment data.



c. M&E Utilization
  Data generated by project M&E were used to verify DLI achievements; inform the 2018 restructuring and
  Additional Financing, as well as the 2020 restructuring for the COVID-19 response; and manage the
  project’s day-to-day activities. The RBF mechanism tied funding to actual results, based on independent
  verification of M&E data. M&E was used to identify successful activities during the Mid-Term Review,
  which led to Additional Financing in 2018. The use of M&E data to track scholarship recipients at
  different stages of their studies, until their return, led to some policy changes, including the addition of
  new degree programs to the list of priority degrees, and a renewed focus on the need to recruit more
  female faculty at public universities, particularly in priority disciplines and
  science/technology/engineering/mathematics subjects.



  M&E Quality Rating
  High

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as Environment Category B (having potentially adverse environmental impacts
   on human or environmentally important areas) in accordance with OP 4.01 (PAD, p. 16). (The ICR did not
   document the Environment Category, but the Bank's team, in its May 5, 2023 email to IEG, confirmed its
   Category B status.) The PAD also mentioned that the Grant would not finance any civil works, but that
   GoIRA may finance civil works under NHESP-II, including classrooms and facilities, libraries, ICT centers,
   and dormitories for female students. However, the ICR reports construction of female dormitories and other
   infrastructure achievements under the project. IEG assumes that project attribution lies in the fact that DLIs
   rewarding female enrollment are likely to have incited the support of needed infrastructure to this end. IEG
   sought but did not receive confirmation of this interpretation from the task team.

   As a part of project preparation, MoHE conducted an environmental assessment and prepared a sectoral
   environmental and social management framework (ESMF) to address potentially negative environmental

                                                                                                    Page 20 of 25
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Higher Education Project (P146184)



  and social impacts caused by construction activities undertaken by GoIRA, financed from its own resources
  as part of its sectoral program. The ESMF consisted of environmental and social mitigation measures,
  environmental and social monitoring requirements, and documentation protocols. It also specified capacity
  building needs for effective implementation of the ESMF. OMST was designated to assist MoHE to put in
  place the necessary implementation arrangements. The ESMF (including a Resettlement Policy
  Framework) was prepared in Pashto, Dari, and English and disclosed locally on May 6, 2015 and to the
  Bank’s InfoShop on May 12, 2015.

  The project made substantive progress implementing the environmental safeguards provision on the civil
  works sites. Monthly monitoring and supervision reported ESMF compliance for each sub-project. The
  Bank’s third-party monitoring raised safeguard issues with Bamyan and Badghis dormitory construction
  projects. To address these issues, the Minister of Urban Development and Lands assessed Bamyan
  municipality’s request for processing land titles for Project-Affected Persons. By the time of the mid-August
  2021 events, the final decision was waiting for the opinion of the President’s Administrative Office, and the
  Bamyan dormitory was not yet functional. The project successfully resolved a social safeguard issue in the
  Badghis dormitory construction project by collecting land documents from the private donor. The project
  also established a Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) to address any safeguard, gender violence, IT,
  and degree-related issues. By November 2020, the GRM had received 54 grievances, of which 51 had
  been successfully resolved, and the remaining three were pending. The Bank's team, in its May 5, 2023
  email to IEG, confirmed that independent review of the safeguards application was conducted once, by the
  Bank's third-party monitor.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management. An integrated fiduciary system assessment was undertaken for financial
  management, procurement, and governance at appraisal. Based on this assessment and subject to the
  implementation of a Project Action Plan to mitigate the identified risks, the project's overall fiduciary
  framework and systems provided reasonable assurance that project funds would be used for their intended
  purposes. The overall fiduciary risk was rated as substantial. Component 2 was to provide financial
  management expertise to strengthen MoHE's and universities’ capacities in internal auditing and internal
  controls. Bank funds for Component 1 were to be disbursed upon achievement of (a) DLI targets met; and
  (b) submission of Interim Unaudited Financial Reports with information on EEPs. Standard funds flow
  mechanisms for Afghanistan were to be followed for Component 2, with project funds deposited into a
  designated account in US dollars, whose replenishment would be based on statements of expenditure.

  Financial management generally progressed well. Eligible Expenditures for Component 1 were always in
  excess of the project’s contribution and reported in time for DLI verification. Under Component 2 (managed
  by MoHE/OMST), a few delays in responding to audit recommendations caused the project’s financial
  management rating to be assessed as moderately satisfactory. IEG asked the task team to confirm
  whether any of the external auditors' opinions were qualified, and if so, what were the nature of
  qualifications and measures taken to address them, and whether all audit recommendations addressed by
  time of evaluation. IEG has not yet received a response. The Bank's team did confirm, in its May 5, 2023
  email to IEG, that the project complied with the financial management manual.

  Procurement


                                                                                                  Page 21 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Higher Education Project (P146184)



   The PAD (p. 14) noted that since EEPs are “non-procurable” expenditures involving salaries and
   scholarships, a procurement plan for Component 1 was not required. Procurement under Component 2
   was to be carried out in accordance with the Bank’s guidelines.

   Procurement was initially centralized at the National Procurement Authority, which caused delays,
   especially for civil works projects. .The subsequent delegation of most of the preparatory work to MoHE
   expedited the procurement process. Procurement under Component 1 was managed entirely by GoIRA,
   following national procurement law. Procurement activities under Component 2 were carried out by MoHE
   OMST, following Bank procurement guidelines. To strengthen MoHE’s procurement capacity, OMST
   assigned procurement specialists to work closely with MoHE’s procurement directorate. There were a few
   delays in implementing procurement activities under Component 2. In its May 5, 2023 email to IEG, the
   Bank's team explained that the delays were due to the unfamiliarity of the procurement specialists in
   OMST with the Bank system and guidelines, which was addressed with support by the Bank's staff. The
   impact of delays was not significant, since major procurement was under Component 1, which applied the
   government's procurement law The Bank's May 5, 2023 email to IEG confirmed that Bank procurement
   guidelines were followed, where they were applicable.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   Gender. Over and above the project’s support to MoHE to increase female enrollment reported under
   Objective 1 in Section 4 (reserving seats in annual university intakes, providing scholarships for
   economically disadvantaged female students, constructing dormitories for female students, and
   transportation and other support services, such as counseling and childcare), the project implemented
   gender-based violence interventions and helped establish systems for mitigating gender-based violence at
   the HEIs. MoHE established a task force to revise gender strategy and anti-harassment policy. By August
   2021, 28 of 29 public universities had a gender officer (all female), and 11 positions were under
   recruitment. There remained a critical need to strengthen the capacities of these gender officers, who did
   not have the required training or qualifications to address and manage gender issues.

   Institutional Strengthening. The project’s RBF approach contributed to MoHE and HEI institutional
   strengthening by giving more ownership over the project.



d. Other
   None.



11. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                   IEG
                                                                                Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Bank Performance                Highly Satisfactory   Highly Satisfactory


                                                                                                  Page 22 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Higher Education Project (P146184)



Quality of M&E                   High                  High

Quality of ICR                   ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The following five insightful and relevant lessons are drawn from the ICR.

      Results-based financing can be an effective mechanism for delivering development
         outcomes and fostering innovation and efficiency. Although it was the first project in
         Afghanistan to include an RBF approach, this project’s smooth implementation by MoHE and
         the Ministry of Finance was due in significant part to the Bank’s strong support and coaching.
         RBF propelled a shift from inputs and activities to results and provided MoHE flexibility in the
         use of the project’s budget to fund essential and innovative activities, among which were a
         number of activities to increase female enrollment. RBF limited the Bank’s involvement in
         procurement and other administrative activities, improving project efficiency.
        Affirmative action policies to increase the representation of women in higher
         education can be highly effective. Reserving seats for female students in Afghanistan’s
         national university entrance exam in priority degree programs, together with coordinated
         support services, contributed substantially to increases in female enrollment in a context of
         deep-rooted inequalities in Afghan society. These actions demonstrated MoHE’s strong
         commitment to gender equity.
        Especially in an FCV context, a competent Operations and Monitoring Support Team
         (OMST), with staff working full-time on the project, can be pivotal to project
         success. The Bank’s presence in the field was limited due to prevailing security situations in
         Afghanistan. The strong and competent OMST at MoHE was highly effective in
         compensating for this shortcoming. OMST ensured coordination between MoHE’s leadership
         and the Bank, solving many implementation problems that arose, and providing regular
         monitoring reports to the Bank.
        Proactive risk management is crucial for safeguarding and securing implementation
         and results in a fragile context. The project encountered formidable issues during
         implementation, including work disruptions caused by periodic bombing and explosions in
         Kabul and the COVID-19 pandemic. OMST, with Bank support, continued project activities
         working through digital means when necessary, including during the COVID-19
         pandemic. Moreover, the 2020 project restructuring provided support to the higher education
         system to strengthen its response to the pandemic.
        In retrospect, a closer engagement with United Nations partner agencies and
         nongovernmental organizations, especially in a context of conflict and political
         instability, may have enhanced sustainability of reform implementation and
         results. While not fully anticipated during project design or implementation, the abrupt and
         sweeping changes following the August 15, 2021 Taliban takeover, and their severe threats
         to sustainability, point to the importance of closely engaging with relevant UN and NGO
         partners who would be equipped to serve as facilitators or third-party implementing agencies
         in order to carry forward selected activities initiated and supported under the project. This




                                                                                                     Page 23 of 25
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Higher Education Project (P146184)



         approach is a key consideration for the design and implementation of future operations in
         Afghanistan and other FCV countries.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

Quality of Evidence.

Thanks to a high quality M&E system (Section 9), including strengthened M&E capacity at MoHE and university
levels and third-party verification of DLIs, the availability, quality, and credibility of evidence was strong. Overall,
the ICR’s presentation of this evidence was clear and comprehensive, both as tallied in Annex 1 and as
outlined in the efficacy section of the main text. There were a few minor inconsistencies in the presentation of
some (baseline, target, and outcome) data within and across the various documents (restructuring Project
Papers and ICR), which were largely sorted out by IEG's close review of the various key design and
restructuring documents.

Quality of Analysis. The use of this evidence was effective. The ICR’s analysis supported a thorough review
of the project’s results chain, linking outputs and activities to intermediate outcomes and results. The ICR cited
the sources and triangulated project data on indicators and DLIs with third-party verification reports and other
sources, including beneficiary surveys. It was clear and systematic in using this data and qualitative information
(on leadership, capacity strengthening, government commitment) to explain convincingly the success of this
project in an extremely challenging environment. The systematic presentation of data and findings provided a
rich narrative of implementation challenges, the contribution of the RBF to an enhanced focus on results, and
the partnerships and collaboration across a range of actors that culminated in the achievement of objectives.
IEG suggests that the ICR’s assessment of two objectives (improved access, and improved quality and
relevance) could have facilitated a deeper look at quality and relevance had Objective 2 been subdivided into
two separate objectives (as is done in this ICRR).

Quality of Lessons. The quality of lessons was high. The lessons were well grounded in the ICR’s narrative
and in its documentation of experience gained under this project. The lessons are also highly relevant to other
countries facing the challenges of higher education reform, gender inequities, a Fragility, Conflict & Violence
context, and/or inexperience with the RBF approach.

Results Orientation. The ICR’s results orientation was strong, both in its thorough presentation and analysis
of data across the entire results chain (including DLIs), and in its insightful discussion of the RBF approach and
its nurturing and support of a stronger results orientation for the higher education sector in Afghanistan.

Internal Consistency/Adherence to Guidelines. Overall, the ICR was well written, internally consistent, and
adherent to the Bank’s guidelines. There were a few shortcomings.

      The various project costs, broken down by component, were not systematically presented in the ICR
        (Annex 3, p. 37) to reflect the formally approved revisions of ARTF financing (which financed 100

                                                                                                         Page 24 of 25
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  Higher Education Project (P146184)



    percent of the project) during implementation, or the actuals at project closing. These various iterations
    included the original cost of $50 million; the revised cost of $55 million, with the approval of $5 million in
    Additional Financing in September 2018; the revised cost of $45.18 million after the cancellation of
    $9.82 million in December 2022; and the actual cost at closing totaling $44.23 million. Rather than
    reporting on these evolving costs (and component breakdowns), the ICR’s cost table: (1) reports
    incorrect totals of $55 million for original amount at approval and for actual at project closing; (2) reports
    incorrect costs for Component 2; (3) calculates inaccurate disbursement rates against the original
    approved financing; and (4) contains mistakes in the totals of each column. This ICRR's reporting of
    costs and financing is based on its close review of the original design and restructuring documents.
   The “Restructuring and/or Additional Financing” Section of the ICR (page 2) listed only the second
    restructuring, approved on December 10, 2020. It did not list the first restructuring, undertaken together
    with an Additional Financing in the amount of $5 million, approved in September 2018. The main text of
    the ICR does report on either of these (ICR, p. 11).
   There were a few inconsistencies between data/information presented in the main text (Efficacy section)
    and Annex 1.
   The ICR’s safeguards discussion does not confirm that the project was Category B.


a. Quality of ICR Rating
   Substantial




                                                                                                   Page 25 of 25
