     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ZM-Lusaka Transm. & Dist. Rehab. (P133184)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0023318

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P133184                                    ZM-Lusaka Transm. & Dist. Rehab.

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Zambia                                     Energy & Extractives


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-52600                                  28-Feb-2019                                          95,057,189.68

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 30-May-2013                                28-Feb-2022

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                          105,000,000.00                                                0.00

 Revised Commitment                           101,000,000.06                                                0.00

 Actual                                          95,057,189.68                                              0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Maria Shkaratan             Christopher David            Ramachandra Jammi               IEGSD (Unit 4)
                             Nelson




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The original Project Development Objective (PDO) was “to increase the capacity and improve the reliability of
   the electricity transmission and distribution system in the Lusaka area”. The PDO was stated identically in the
   Financing Agreement (October 3, 2013, page 5) and in the PAD (page 8).

   The PDO was revised. The revised PDO was “to increase the capacity and improve the reliability of the
   electricity transmission system in the Lusaka area” (Restructuring Paper, May 30, 2013, page 9).


                                                                                                   Page 1 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ZM-Lusaka Transm. & Dist. Rehab. (P133184)



   For the purposes of this Implementation Completion Report (ICR) review, the PDO will be assessed as
   follows:

   PDO1: To increase the capacity and improve the reliability of the electricity transmission system in the Lusaka
   area.

   PDO2: To increase the capacity and improve the reliability of the electricity distribution system in the Lusaka
   area.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  27-Jun-2018

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   1. Original components

   Component 1: Rehabilitation of the 132kV and 88kV Transmission Network in Lusaka Area (cost at
   appraisal: US$106.0 million; actual cost: US$91.1 million) was to invest in the following: (i) upgrades of
   several transmission lines and substations; (ii) construction of two new substations; and (iii) replacement of
   the 11kV switchgear in several locations.

   Component 2: Rehabilitation of the 33kV and 11kV Distribution Network in Lusaka Area (cost at
   appraisal: US$94.0 million; actual cost: US$2.3 million) aimed to finance the following: (i) upgrades to
   distribution lines, substations, and transformers; and (ii) construction of distribution lines and substations.

   Component 3: Technical Assistance and Project Supervision (cost at appraisal: US$10 million; actual
   cost: US$15.3 million) was to finance: (i) Project’s technical supervision; (ii) Project Implementation Unit
   (PIU) activities; (iii) technical assistance to the electricity utility Zambia Electricity Supply Corporation
   Limited (ZESCO); and (iv) identification and preparation of energy sector policies and regulations.

   Note: Due to the deficiencies of the ICR in presenting Project costs, this Review uses the Project PAD for
   the costs at appraisal and Project’s Restructuring Papers, Implementation Status Reports (ISRs), and Aide
   Memoires for costs at closure (with the exception of the Component 3 costs, which are sourced from the
   ICR). The aforementioned deficiencies are as follows: the presentation of the Component 2 costs at closure
   in the ICR contradicts what is reflected in the June 27, 2018 Restructuring Paper, and in the post-
   restructuring ISRs and Aide Memoires (including the final Aide Memoire filed at closure). It also does not
   comply with the Bank’s evaluation guidelines. The ICR lists the Component 2 costs as US$43.06 million at
   closure (ICR, page 49 and elsewhere), while the Component was cancelled at the point of time when the

                                                                                                        Page 2 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    ZM-Lusaka Transm. & Dist. Rehab. (P133184)



  disbursement for it was US$2.3 million (Restructuring Paper, June 27, 2018, page 3). This misrepresents
  the level of Project’s achievements. In addition, the Component 1 costs at closure does not take into
  account the balance of US$0.95 million that remained at closure and thus increases the disbursement
  rate.

  2. Changes in components during implementation

  The Project underwent two restructurings: a level 1 restructuring on June 27, 2018; and a level 2
  restructuring on February 4, 2021. The second restructuring involved only a change in the closing date, by
  12 months. The first restructuring involved the following changes:

       i. Component 2 Rehabilitation of the 33kV and 11kV Distribution Network in Lusaka Area, to be
          financed by the European Investment Bank (EIB), was dropped. The reason was that the works
          under Component 2 had been delayed as compared with the two other components and would not
          be completed at the same time. The implementation of activities under Component 2 would,
          however, be finalized within a standalone EIB project, as agreed with the EIB (Restructuring Paper,
          June 27, 2018, page 6).
      ii. The results framework (RF) was adjusted accordingly. Specifically, the PDO indicator measuring
          improvements in distribution system reliability (the main outcome of Component 2 activities) -
          Average interruption frequency per year (SAIFI) in the project target areas in Lusaka Division - was
          replaced by the PDO indicator measuring improvements in transmission system reliability (related to
          Component 1) - Unserved load on the Lusaka transmission network. This indicator was defined as
          the percentage of the peak load that was shed out of total peak load (on the Lusaka transmission
          network). This was the only change to the RF during Project implementation.
     iii. Reallocation of US$6 million from Component 1 (Rehabilitation of the 132kV and 88kV Transmission
          Network in Lusaka Area) to Component 3 (Technical Assistance and Project Supervision) and
          cancellation of US$4 million from Component 1. The ICR explains that the reason for this change
          was that savings in the amount of US$10 million were achieved in Component 1 due to a revised
          procurement packaging and close implementation support from the World Bank; and a part of those
          savings (US$6 million) were reallocated to Component 3 to finance the project supervision
          consultant until the extended Project closure (ICR, page 12), while the remaining US$4 million were
          cancelled.
     iv. Extension of the closing date by 24 months.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost: The appraisal estimate was US$210.0 million, and the actual Project cost was US$108.07
  million.

  Project Financing: The Project was financed by the following sources: (i) a US$105 million credit from the
  International Development Association (IDA) to the Government of Zambia, to be on-lent to ZESCO under
  terms and conditions satisfactory to IDA (of which US$93.4 million was disbursed at closure); and (ii) a loan
  from the European Investment Bank (EIB) in the amount of US$65.0 million (of which US$2.3 million was
  disbursed).

  Comment on IDA financing: The original amount of the IDA loan was $105.0 million. It was reduced to
  US$101.0 million at the restructuring of June 27, 2018 when US$4.0 million was cancelled (see section

                                                                                                  Page 3 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ZM-Lusaka Transm. & Dist. Rehab. (P133184)



   “Changes in Components during Implementation” above). From the amount of US$101.0 million, the
   amount of US$6.7 million was lost over the period of Project implementation due to the fluctuations of the
   Special Drawing Rights (XDR)-US Dollar rates (the Project was denominated in XDR), resulting in total IDA
   amount of US$94.3, out of which the amount of US$93.35 million was disbursed and US$0.95 million
   remained undisbursed at closure. (Aide Mémoire Feb 17, 2022, page 4)

   Comment on EIB financing: The original amount of the EIB financing (to be funding Component 2) was
   US$65.0 million (PAD, page 11). At the time of the second restructuring (June 27, 2018) when Component
   2 was cancelled, the disbursements amounted to US$2.3 million (Restructuring Paper 2018, page 3-4).

   Borrower/Recipient contribution: The Borrower’s contribution was US$40.0 million at appraisal (PAD, page
   11), and the actual contribution was US$15.35 million at closure (ICR, page 49).

   Project Dates: The Project was approved on May 30, 2013 and became effective on February 28, 2014.
   The mid-term review was held on December 20, 2017. The original closing date was February 28, 2019.
   The Project was extended twice, first to February 19, 2021 (under the first restructuring), and then to
   February 28, 2022 (under the second restructuring), for the total of three years (or 36 months).

   Please see the note in section d.1. Original Components regarding ICR deficiencies in presenting Project
   costs.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country and Sector Context: At approval, the country’s ten-year average annual GDP growth was 5.7
percent, supported by stability and prudent macroeconomic policies, and Zambia was now classified as a
Lower Middle-Income country by the World Bank. However, electricity sector deficiencies were creating
barriers for continued growth and poverty reduction: electricity demand had outpaced generation and
network capacity expansion, leading to electricity supply shortages and its low reliability and quality. Over
the decade of 2000-2010, power shortages caused a reduction of the per capita GDP growth rate by more
than 0.1 percentage. At the same time, demand for electricity was estimated to grow at 4.6 percent annually
in 2012-2020 and at 2.6 percent annually in 2020-2030. The Lusaka area would be affected the most.
Improving electricity sector efficiency had become critically important.

Relevance to Government Strategies at approval. The Sixth National Development Plan (6NDP) for the
period 2011 - 2015 was organized around the objective of “accelerating infrastructure development,
economic growth and diversification, to promote rural investment and accelerate poverty reduction and to
enhance human development”; and rehabilitating the existing generation, transmission and distribution
facilities and networks was among the key plans for the electricity sector. The Government has
promulgated several policies to pursue its energy sector objectives, including approving a revised National
Energy Policy in 2007. The National Energy Strategy was seeking to enhance the security of supply and
reinforce and extend transmission and distribution networks, among other targets.

Relevance to Government Strategies at closure. At closure, the Seventh NDP (7NDP) for the period 2016-
2020, also had a focus on energy sector development through its Development Outcome 4 Improved

                                                                                                   Page 4 of 18
                       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                       ZM-Lusaka Transm. & Dist. Rehab. (P133184)



Energy Production and Distribution for Sustainable Development, which had four strategic directions: (i)
enhancing generation, transmission, and distribution of electricity; (ii) enhancing strategic reserves and
supply of petroleum products; (iii) promoting renewable and alternative energy; and (iv) improving electricity
access in rural and peri-urban areas.

Relevance to the World Bank Group's (WBG’s) Assistance Strategies at approval. The Joint Assistance
Strategy (JAS) and the Country Partnership Strategy (CPS - March 14, 2013) highlighted energy as one of
the key development focus areas. The reviewed Project was directly linked to the CPS objective of
improving competitiveness and infrastructure for growth and employment. The CPS articulated seven
guiding principles for the World Bank Group’s engagement in Zambia, and in all of them, energy was given
a prominent role.

Relevance to the WBG’s Assistance Strategies at closure. The Project was aligned with the Country
Partnership Framework (CPF) FY19–FY23, which supported electricity transmission under Focus Area 3
Institutions and Resilience, which had a key objective formulated as “Trade and infrastructure for Economic
Integration and Shared Natural Resources Management with the Broader Regional Increases”. Under this
objective, the aspiration was for Zambia to become a regional hub for electricity trading, which would
support enhanced energy security and avoided power shortages.

Other World Bank electricity sector operations in Zambia. The World Bank-financed Power Rehabilitation
Project, which closed in December 2005, assisted ZESCO in rehabilitation of the three major hydropower
generation plants and transmission and distribution systems in selected areas. The Increased Access to
Electricity Services project, approved in May 2008, supported grid extensions, network reinforcements, rural
electrification, and access expansion as well as improvement in efficiency and the quality of electricity
services. The Kafue Town - Muzuma - Victoria Falls Regional Transmission Line Reinforcement Project,
approved in May 2012, supported upgrading the transmission line backbone in project target areas from
220kV to 330kV to facilitate power transfer along the DRC-Zambia-Namibia corridor. The Zambia-Tanzania
Interconnector Project, which was approved in 2018, would link the Southern African Power Pool and the
East African Power Pool. While the previous World Bank electricity sector projects in Zambia invested in
power generation, the transmission backbone, grid extensions, and access in rural areas, the reviewed
Project is aiming at modernizing the transmission and distribution network in the priority area (the capital
city), where projected increase in electricity demand is the highest, and so is the anticipated gap in
electricity availability due to shortages.

At appraisal, the World Bank has a history of joint operations with the EIB in Zambia, namely, to support the
improvements in ZESCO’s governance and the tariff reform in the country. The two institutions were
planning to continue the coordination of their support to electricity sector development, and the reviewed
Project was designed in this context.

Thus, the relevance of objective is rated high.


Rating Relevance TBL




Rating
High


4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

                                                                                                    Page 5 of 18
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  ZM-Lusaka Transm. & Dist. Rehab. (P133184)




EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               To increase the capacity and improve the reliability of the electricity transmission system in the Lusaka area.

               Rationale
               The theory of change (ToC) for the Project was developed retrospectively for the ICR. It showed a direct,
               logical causal link from inputs to outputs, and to the PDO outcomes of the Project. The Project-financed
               construction and rehabilitation activities, supported by TA, would produce improved or expanded transmission
               and distribution networks in the Lusaka area (the outputs); and this would ultimately result in: (i) increased
               capacity and reliability of the Lusaka area transmission network and (ii) increased capacity and reliability of
               the Lusaka area distribution network (PDO outcomes). Related to the physical activities under the Project, the
               TOC is logical and clear and shows the results chain through the cause-effect relationships between inputs,
               outputs, and outcomes. An important shortcoming was the lack of intermediate outcomes in the TOC. While
               they were not needed for the physical activities (construction and rehabilitation works) in the Project, it would
               be useful if the ToC had illustrated how, through which processes, the TA activities were expected to lead to
               Project outcomes. However, the ToC is missing any links between the TA inputs and Project outcomes, which
               is considered to be one of its two minor weaknesses. In addition, the ToC’s assumptions seem to be related
               to the sustainability of the overall Project outcomes and not to the achievement of Project objectives. For
               example, it would make sense to include an assumption related to the risks resulting from the parallel
               implementation of Project activities by IDA and the EIB, as well as to the risks of inefficient procurement of
               multiple contracts by the PIU. The ToC does not provide such information, and this constitutes its second
               minor weakness.

               ORIGINAL PROJECT

               Outcomes:

               - At closure, the achieved transmission capacity amounted to 1,022 MVA, exceeding the original target of 900
               MVA. Three transmission lines were upgraded from single to double circuit, which had a higher carrying
               capacity. As a result, the reliability of the power supply was improved.

               - At closure, the unserved load in the Lusaka transmission network was fully removed, reaching the original
               target of zero percent of the shed peak load over the total peak load.

               - At closure, the number of direct project beneficiaries was as per the original target, 1,200,000 people. The
               share of female beneficiaries was 51 percent, reaching the target, though the mechanism to track this detail
               lacks any sophistication telling us little about the impact on female beneficiaries.

               Outputs:

               - All four original transmission line upgrade targets (measured in kilometers) were reached: for the Leopards
               Hill -Roma; Roma -Lusaka West; Lusaka West – Coventry; and Waterworks - Lusaka South MFEZ. The total
               length of the transmission lines upgraded was 75 kilometers, reaching the target.



                                                                                                                  Page 6 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   ZM-Lusaka Transm. & Dist. Rehab. (P133184)



- The original target for the construction of the transmission line (five kilometers) was reached.

- The original substation capacity upgrade target of 270 MVA was reached. This was needed to upgrade the
existing operational 88/33/11kV, 165MVA Waterworks substation to 132/33/11kV, 270MVA substation and
hence to increase capacity with firm supply of 90MVA at 33kV and 60MVA at 11kV.

- Technical assistance. The training target was exceeded: 224 ZESCO staff were trained, compared to the
target of 150 staff. The training courses were focused on procurement, financial management,
substation/overhead line engineering design and project management. Studies for the preparation of new
energy projects were completed (a binary “Yes-No” indicator). The RF is missing outcome indicators on
technical assistance (TA), making it hard to evaluate the TA activities under Component 3. The ICR does not
include any discussion of TA under efficacy analysis.

Overall, under PDO1, the Original Project achieved all of its expected outcomes and outputs. Thus, the
objective is rated High.



Rating
High


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
To increase the capacity and improve the reliability of the electricity transmission system in the Lusaka area.

Revised Rationale
Please see the discussion of the TOC under PDO1, Original Project.

At revision, there was no change in the PDO1, or related Project’s outcomes/outputs, or the targets. Under
PDO1, the Revised Project achieved all of its expected outputs and outcomes. Thus, the objective is rated
High.



Revised Rating
High


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To increase the capacity and improve the reliability of the electricity distribution system in the Lusaka area.

Rationale
Please see the discussion of the TOC under PDO1, Original Project.

PDO2 was to be achieved through the activities under Component 2, which was financed by the EIB, with the
support from the Borrower, and with no funding from IDA. Disbursements under Component 2 were very

                                                                                                     Page 7 of 18
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               ZM-Lusaka Transm. & Dist. Rehab. (P133184)



                            slow, and by the June 27, 2018 restructuring they only amounted to US$2.3 million or 2.4 percent of the total
                            financing for Component 2 at appraisal. Specifically, procurement for this component was only completed for
                            four contracts out of the ten planned, with only one of them having reached the implementation stage; and the
                            effectiveness of the other six contracts was yet to be achieved, as the bidding documents were still under
                            preparation. (Restructuring Paper 2018, page 3-4)

                            Due to the slow progress, this component was dropped at the restructuring of June 27, 2018. The
                            implementation of the dropped activities was to be continued under a separate non-WBG project, financed by
                            the EIB.

                            Considering the low level of achievement of the expected outcomes under PDO2 by the time of Project
                            restructuring in June 2018 and the cancellation of the PDO2 activities at restructuring, the rating of the
                            achievement of original PDO2 outcomes is Negligible.

                            Note: the assessment of the Project’s achievements under this objective in the ICR (ICR, pages 16-17)
                            contradicts the facts reflected in the June 27, 2018 Restructuring Paper and the Bank’s evaluation guidelines.
                            Specifically, the ICR states that the cancelled (on June 27, 2018) Component 2 activities were implemented
                            by Project closure with IDA financing - while it could not have happened under the Project according to the
                            Project’s Restructuring Papers, ISRs, and Aide Memoires - and further reports the outcomes of the now-
                            separate EIB-financed project as the reviewed Project’s achievements.



                            Rating
                            Negligible


                            OBJECTIVE 2 REVISION 1
                            Revised Objective
                            To increase the capacity and improve the reliability of the electricity distribution system in the Lusaka area.

                            Revised Rationale
                            Please see the discussion of the TOC under objective 1, Original Project.

                            The PDO2 was removed from the Project’s overall PDO at the June 27, 2018 restructuring, and the Revised
                            Project did not have PDO2.

                            PDO 2 under the Revised Project is not rated.



                            Revised Rating
                            Not Rated/Not Applicable


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                                                                                                                                Page 8 of 18
             Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
             ZM-Lusaka Transm. & Dist. Rehab. (P133184)




         Rationale
         Original Project:

         For the Original Project, the overall efficacy is Modest. Under Objective 1, the Original Project achieved or
         exceeded all of its expected outputs and outcomes. Under Objective 2, the Original Project failed to achieve
         any of its objectives by closure. Overall, the original Project design only partly achieved its objectives.



         Overall Efficacy Rating                                  Primary Reason
         Modest                                                   Low achievement
 OBJR1_TBL




         OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
         Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
         Revised Project:

         For the Revised Project, the overall efficacy is High. The Revised Project achieved or exceeded all of its
         expected outputs and outcomes.



         Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating
         High



 5. Efficiency
I. Economic and Financial Analysis.

1. At appraisal.

The benefits included: (i) incremental consumption of electricity, as a result of the project (electricity
consumption in the retail segment of Lusaka was expected to increase from 2,593 GWh to 3,548 GWh by 2020),
and (ii) energy savings resulting from lower technical losses in the network. The benefits were estimated
considering improvements in both the transmission and distribution networks (covering Component 1 and
Component 2 outcomes together); the benefits would occur to end users and would not be possible without the
distribution network improvements (Component 2). The benefit flow started the year following project
completion. The costs included the Project costs of network rehabilitation and new construction and the costs of
serving additional consumption. The analysis covered 30 years and used a discount rate of 10 percent. A
willingness to pay study (for residential and commercial/industrial customers was implemented to assess the
monetary value of the incremental consumption of electricity. The economic internal rate of return (EIRR) of the
Project was estimated at 39 percent and the net present value (NPV) at US$573 million.

2. At closure.

The benefits and the costs were estimated the same way as at appraisal, and the discount rate was the same,
10 percent. The economic analysis considered two scenarios: (i) without the distribution component as per the

                                                                                                            Page 9 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      ZM-Lusaka Transm. & Dist. Rehab. (P133184)



2018 restructuring of the project, and (ii) with the distribution component, activities for which have continued to
be implemented under EIB financing and were scheduled to be completed in 2026. For the first scenario (the
Project after restructuring, without the distribution component), the EIRR was estimated at 45.5 percent and the
NPV at US$650 million. For the second scenario (original Project, with the distribution component) the EIRR
was estimated at 41.2 percent and the NPV at US$816 million.

Comparing the EIRRs at appraisal and at closure, the Project seems to be economically efficient: the EIRR for
the Bank Project (not including the new EIB’s project) at closure (45 percent) was higher than the EIRR at
appraisal (39 percent However, the comparison is not appropriate because the appraisal estimate was made for
a larger project, before Component 2 was dropped. At the same time, using the EIRR calculated for a
comparable project at closure is inappropriate either because it includes a non-Bank project. The appropriate
comparison would be done for Component 1 only, both at appraisal and at closure. Such comparison is not
available from the ICR.

II. Administrative efficiency.

The Project was able to achieve its objectives within the original financing envelope, without additional funding.
The ICR reports that the project benefited from a full ownership by ZESCO (the implementation agency) and the
PIU being embedded in ZESCO and staffed with full-time ZESCO employees, which supported knowledge-
based and efficient decision making (ICR, page 19).

However, the original project design turned out to be deficient, with two agencies (the World Bank and the EIB)
coordinating ambitious investments in a country where capacity limitation create barriers for the implementation
of complex projects. The Project had to be restructured, cancelling Component 2, which equaled to 45 percent
of the original financing. This constitutes a significant inefficiency, resulting from design weaknesses.

Component 3 (Project support and TA to ZESCO) costs increased from the original US$10 million to US$15.3
million after Component 2 was dropped. The only explanation provided in the ICR states that the US$6 million
were transferred from Component 1 “to Component 3 to finance the project supervision consultant through to
the extended project closing date” (ICR, page 12). This seems to be a significantly higher amount than a two-
year salary of one consultant.

In addition, the Project was extended twice, for the total of 36 months (three years). In relation to the first
extension, the ICR reports that the Project’s scope and cost were defined too generally at appraisal, and a
comprehensive technical review (including the engineering designs, specifications, and bidding documents) had
to be conducted in the first two years after effectiveness. This work was only completed in December 2015 (ICR,
page 27). The Restructuring Paper provides additional details: the extension was needed to revise and
consolidate the supply and installation of the procurement packages under Component 1 in the first three years
of Project implementation, which led to increased complexity, resulting in a longer than anticipated time to
complete procurement. Additional delays were caused by the unexpected geotechnical conditions at the Project
sites. However, disbursement efficiency improved at the end of FY2017 and in FY 2018. (Restructuring Paper of
June 27, 2018, page 3)

The second extension was explained by the following: the project encountered delays due to a protracted legal
dispute related to land ownership at one of the sites, poor performance by one of the contractors that led to a
termination of the contract, and a suspension of activities in another contract due to fatalities during
implementation of the works (see details in the Safeguards section). Additionally, the Project was affected by
COVID-19. (Restructuring Paper of February 4, 2021, page 3)


                                                                                                      Page 10 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      ZM-Lusaka Transm. & Dist. Rehab. (P133184)



The Project’s efficiency is rated as Modest.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?           Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                   95.20
 Appraisal                                               39.00
                                                                                    Not Applicable
                                                                                   85.50
 ICR Estimate                                            44.50
                                                                                    Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of objectives: High

Efficacy: Modest

Efficiency: Modest

Outcome: Moderately Unsatisfactory (a value of 3).

Revised Project:

Relevance of objectives: High

Efficacy: High

Efficiency: Modest

Outcome: Moderately Satisfactory (a value of 4).

With the Original Project rated as Moderately Unsatisfactory and the Revised Project rated as Moderately
Satisfactory, based on the disbursed funds as a percentage of total funding at closure before and after the June
27, 2018 restructuring (US$37 million or 34 percent before the restructuring and US$71.07 million or 66 percent
after restructuring), the Overall Project Outcome rating is Moderately Satisfactory:
0.34*3+0.66*4=1.02+2.64=3.66. This result reflects the benefit of the early restructuring of the project.


a. Outcome Rating

                                                                                                  Page 11 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      ZM-Lusaka Transm. & Dist. Rehab. (P133184)



    Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Financial. This risk could arise if ZESCO has insufficient financial resources to maintain the transmission
assets that were upgraded or constructed by the Project. This risk is being mitigated considering ZESCO’s
continued efforts to improve its financial performance and maintain an operating profit (which ZESCO had
achieved prior to Project approval). This will depend on a continued adjustment of tariffs to cost recovery
level. Within the Project, this risk was mitigated by Component 3 activities, such as the support to energy
sector policies and regulations. In particular, the Project financed a cost of service study, which is expected
to form the basis of future tariff revisions by the electricity regulator (ICR, page 28).

Institutional. This risk could arise if ZESCO’s institutional capacity turns out to be insufficient to support the
maintenance of the assets upgraded or constructed by the Project. Institutional (Governance) risk was
assessed as Moderate at appraisal and was further mitigated under Component 3 through the provision of
training on procurement and financial management to ZESCO employees.

Economic. Continued economic development is expected to result in further increase in demand for
electricity in the Lusaka area, putting additional pressure of the transmission network capacity. The ICR
states that the Government and ZESCO needs to continue resource mobilization to ensure that Lusaka’s
electricity network has sufficient capacity considering economic growth and an increased population, and
service reliability is maintained. (ICR, page 29)




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The Project’s design adequately responded to the need to improve the availability and reliability of
  electricity supply through the transmission assets’ upgrade and expansion. The design was supported by
  strong Borrower ownership and ZESCO’s sufficient financial and institutional capacity. The IDA credit
  was provided to the Government and on-lent to ZESCO, who also was the implementing agency for the
  Project; and this implementation arrangement supported the Project’s sound decision making and
  efficiency.

  However, the Project’s design had weaknesses. First, as the ICR reported, the Project’s scope and cost
  were defined with insufficient details at appraisal, and a comprehensive technical review (including the
  engineering designs, specifications, and bidding documents) had to be conducted in the first two years
  after effectiveness, causing implementation delays (ICR, page 27). Second, the Project suffered from the
  misalignment of the implementation progress of its two physical investment components (Component 1
  and Component 2). The ICR noted that the misalignment could have been managed through a stronger
  coordination mechanism (ICR, page 27). As a result of a significantly delayed implementation of
  Component 2, financed by the EIB, the Project had to undergo level 1 restructuring when the PDO was
  changed and Component 2 was dropped. Third, the ICR concluded that risks associated with safeguards’
  oversight were underestimated at appraisal (assessed as Moderate). Fatalities and less severe incidents

                                                                                                         Page 12 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ZM-Lusaka Transm. & Dist. Rehab. (P133184)



  that occurred during implementation highlighted the Occupational Health Services (OHS) deficiencies
  that required strengthening of capacity at both the PIU and Owner’s Engineer. Stronger mitigation
  measures at appraisal could have helped to prevent the tragic accidents. (ICR, page 27)



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The Project’s supervision was complicated by a change in the Project’s Task Team Leaders (TTLs) and the
 fact that both the TTLs and technical specialists were located outside of the country. However, regular
 supervision missions were conducted, Aide-memoires prepared, and 15 ISRs filed and used for the
 dialogue with key stakeholders. The Bank team adequately dealt with the supervision challenges that were
 encountered. Importantly, the misalignment between Component 1 and Component 2 was managed
 efficiently, and the decision to restructure the Project and drop Component 2 was made sufficiently early
 considering the disbursement schedule, thus avoiding inefficient use of Project’s resources (ICR, page 28).
 This intervention by the Bank team allowed both the Bank and the EIB to continue the implementation of
 the ongoing activities without the need to coordinate them and supported the high efficacy of the revised
 Bank Project.

 The ICR reported that the Bank team adequately dealt with the supervision challenges encountered,
 including fiduciary shortcomings, severe safeguards incidents and the Covid-19 pandemic. A key fiduciary
 challenge was the over-commitment of IDA resources, which later had to be reimbursed by the
 implementing agency. Further, tragic site fatalities led to the suspension of activities on one
 contract. During the Covid-19 pandemic, project activities continued, and the team used virtual supervision
 missions. (ICR, page 28)



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 Overall, the Project's RF adequately reflected the logic of Project interventions and was sufficiently linked
 to the PDO. Most of the indicators were quantitative, and all of them were time-bound, had baselines and
 targets, and were attributable to the Project. There was a gender-disaggregated indicator. The RF
 adequately measured the project-level outcomes (number of sub-projects implemented, number of
 beneficiaries, energy and emission savings) and the outputs. The RF was adequate, with the exception of
 lacking outcome indicators on TA activities (only output TA activity indicators were included). Overall, the

                                                                                                    Page 13 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ZM-Lusaka Transm. & Dist. Rehab. (P133184)



 RF is heavily focused on technical indicators measuring the improvements in transmission equipment and
 could include more developmental indicators (benefits to the economy and the population).



b. M&E Implementation
  The ICR reported that the M&E implementation was effective. The PIU was embedded in ZESCO, which
  supported a satisfactory data collection and reporting. During the Mid-Term Review (MTR) preparation,
  the PIU showed responsiveness with regards to effective M&E implementation. In connection with the
  MTR mission, the PIU prepared a comprehensive report describing the context, the progress of
  implementation, including the challenges that were overcome. Some shortcomings were however
  identified in relation to fiduciary and safeguards aspects of the project. (ICR, page 24)



c. M&E Utilization
  The ICR reported that the monitoring data generated by the PIU had been key in establishing the
  dialogue among key stakeholders. It informed key implementation decisions with regards to the
  infrastructure support and system operations, including the June 27, 2018 restructuring, and the
  February 4, 2021 restructuring. (ICR, page 25)




  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Environmental and Social Safeguards. The Project was classified as Environmental Category B, and three
   safeguards policies were triggered: (i) the Operational Policy (OP) on Environmental Assessment (OP4.01)
   based on anticipated potential negative impacts under components 1 and 2; (ii) OP 4.11 for Physical
   Cultural Resources, because of the excavation activities under Component 2; and (iii) OP 4.12 for
   Involuntary Resettlement based on the assumption that planned construction of new substations may
   require land acquisition by ZESCO. An Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) and an
   Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) were prepared. A Resettlement Policy Framework
   (RPF) was prepared; it guided the development of three Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs). Completion
   reports for three RAPs (Lusaka 132 KV Ring, Waterworks and Greenfield) were prepared and disclosed by
   the PIU. A Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) was operational throughout project implementation. The
   implementation involved a high number of complaints (72 complaints were recorded in the GRM); and all of
   them were resolved. (ICR, page 25)

   Three fatalities associated with project activities occurred during implementation. The first two happened in
   April 2020 during blasting activities under the contract for the 132kV Roma‐Lusaka West Overhead Line. To
   allow for the root cause analysis (RCA) and implementation of corrective measures, ZESCO suspended

                                                                                                  Page 14 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    ZM-Lusaka Transm. & Dist. Rehab. (P133184)



  activities under the contract through September 2020. The third fatality occurred in May 2020 due to an
  asphyxiation accident with a contractor at a warehouse. In both cases, remedial action was taken at all
  levels, and based on the RCA undertaken with the Bank’s support, ZESCO strengthened its occupational
  health and safety systems, including the establishment and filling of an OHS Officer position at the PIU and
  increasing site supervision staff. No further fatalities were recorded on the project. (ICR, page 25-26)

  Other serious incidents during Project implementation were as follows: (i) a local community member was
  trapped by conductors during a de-stringing of a section of transmission line, (ii) a driver employed as a
  linesman rolled his vehicle off the road after hitting potholes at speed; (iii) a local community member was
  hit by rock fragments from a blast needed for implementation of Project activities; and (iv) a near-drowning
  accident occurred in an excavation pit due to vandalization of the security barricades. Following all these
  incidents, ZESCO undertook RCAs, based on which Safeguards Corrective Action Plans were developed
  with the support of the Bank. (ICR, page 26)

  The ICR reported that the safeguards’ risks were underestimated at appraisal (assessed as Moderate) and
  that fatalities and other serious accidents could have been prevented if stronger mitigation measures were
  designed at appraisal. (ICR, page 27) The Restructuring Paper of February 4, 2021 (page 4) reported that
  the fatal accidents revealed gaps in implementation of the safeguards standards.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management

  The ICR reported that throughout implementation, the PIU met the Interim Financial Report requirements
  of the project. The audits were completed on time and were unqualified. Disbursements were slow in the
  first three years of implementation (reflecting the initial delays with procurement of the main supply and
  install contracts), but the situation improved over time, and by project close, the IDA credit was almost fully
  disbursed, with the exception of the US$0.95 million that remained undisbursed at closure. (ICR, page 27)

  Procurement

  The ICR reported that procurement was slow at commencement of the project due to the additional
  technical design and detailed engineering required, and the delayed hiring of the Owner’s Engineer.
  Further delays were experienced when for the first main supply and install contract, the PIU combined IDA-
  financed and EIB-financed activities under a single procurement package. This was contrary to the
  procurement modalities defined at appraisal whereby Component 1 and Component 2 activities would be
  procured separately using World Bank and EIB procurement guidelines respectively. There were also gaps
  in contract management which led to the expiration of an advance guarantee by the insurance company on
  one of the main supply and install contracts, which led to ZESCO’s filing a complaint in court. A final
  determination of the matter has not yet been reached. Given the previous experience of the World Bank
  working in the sector, it is disappointing these challenges were not better addressed at design.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)

                                                                                                    Page 15 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ZM-Lusaka Transm. & Dist. Rehab. (P133184)



   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                               Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                   IEG
                                                                               Disagreements/Comment
                                                                               Mainly due to several
                                                                               weaknesses in Project
Outcome                        Satisfactory          Moderately Satisfactory
                                                                               efficiency, which lead to the
                                                                               Modest efficiency rating.
                                                                               Due to several weaknesses in
                                                                               Project design and multiple
                                                                               accidents including three
Bank Performance               Satisfactory          Moderately Satisfactory   fatalities on Project sites, which
                                                                               could have been mitigated better
                                                                               at design and during
                                                                               implementation.
Quality of M&E                 Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                 ---                   Modest


12. Lessons

The following lessons were derived from the ICR with minor modifications by IEG (ICR, pages 30):

1. The modalities of coordination among Project’s co-financiers need to be discussed in detail and
agreed upon among the donors and the Borrower prior to Project’s approval. Clear articulation of the
added value of both contributions needs to be thoroughly covered in the design and the
responsibilities linked in the relevant theory of change.

2. To improve the effectiveness of transmission investment projects, technical readiness for
implementation needs to be enhanced. Key stakeholders need to work together to ensure that pre-
engineering work and safeguards assessment are thorough to allow a fair and productive bidding
process and a timely implementation start. In the reviewed Project, detailed engineering designs and
specifications were only completed two years after project effectiveness.

3. Staffing the PIU with employees of the implementing agency is good practice for efficient
implementation and sustainability of projects. ZESCO had extensive experience in implementing
partner-financed projects of the scope and magnitude of the Project, and therefore integrating the
unit within ZESCO’s operations was efficient, cost effective and led to greater ownership. Moreover,
the technical expertise gained by the ZESCO staff will scale up ZESCO capabilities to oversee the
electricity network and improve the sustainability of achieved outcome.




                                                                                                 Page 16 of 18
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       ZM-Lusaka Transm. & Dist. Rehab. (P133184)



4. Large scale infrastructure projects are rarely likely to have ‘Moderate’ safeguards risks given the
considerable complexity of works. Stronger emphasis on mitigation approaches to the threats at
design stage is likely to limit the potential damage that comes from these activities.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provided sufficient background information, a good justification of the PDO relevance, useful
information regarding Project’s M&E quality, Bank performance, safeguards and fiduciary compliance, and risk
to development outcome. The ICR has internal consistency. The lessons learned are linked to the narrative. In
addition, it is clear that the ICR drew on substantive background research.

However, the ICR had significant shortcomings, considering the IEG criteria for assessing ICR quality. The
shortcomings mainly relate to such important issues as the analysis and ratings of the Project’s Efficacy and the
cost data. Specifically, the assessment of the Project’s efficacy under PDO 2 To increase the capacity and
improve the reliability of the electricity distribution system in the Lusaka area (ICR, pages 16-17) contradicts the
facts presented in Project documents and does not comply with the Bank’s evaluation guidelines. Specifically,
the ICR states that the cancelled (on June 27, 2018) EIB-financed Component 2 activities were implemented by
the Project after the cancellation using IDA financing – contradicting the Project’s Restructuring Papers, ISRs,
and Aide Memoires - and further reports the outcomes of the new EIB-financed project as the restructured Bank
Project’s achievements. In addition, the ICR incorrectly reports project costs, exaggerating disbursements
under Component 2 and failing to report actual disbursements under this component at the time when it was
dropped from the Project. This pushes up the disbursement rate, as well as exaggerates the Project’s efficacy.

These weaknesses have created barriers to the validation of the ICR, for which it became necessary to review
the Restructuring Papers, ISRs, and Aide Memoires for the Project. The conclusion IEG has reached is that the
Efficacy analysis in the ICR is inconsistent with the information in Project documents and does not comply with
the Bank’s requirements. Therefore, the ICR quality is rated as modest.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Modest




                                                                                                     Page 17 of 18
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
ZM-Lusaka Transm. & Dist. Rehab. (P133184)




                                                                          Page 18 of 18
