     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Income Support Program for the Poorest (P146520)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0023329

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P146520                                    Income Support Program for the Poorest

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Bangladesh                                 Social Protection & Jobs


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-55530                                  30-Jun-2020                                         211,223,062.42

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 16-Dec-2014                                15-Jun-2022

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           300,000,000.00                                                0.00

 Revised Commitment                            249,999,999.08                                                0.00

 Actual                                        221,733,786.47                                                0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Livia Maria Angelica        Judyth L. Twigg              Eduardo Fernandez               IEGHC (Unit 2)
 Benavides Matarazzo                                      Maldonado




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The project development objective was to provide income support to the poorest mothers in selected
   Upazilas, while (i) increasing the mothers’ use of child nutrition and cognitive development services, and (ii)
   enhancing local level government capacity to deliver safety nets. The objectives were the same in the Project
   Appraisal Document (PAD, p. 6) and in the Financing Agreement (p. 5).

   In agreement with the ICR, this ICR Review will assess achievement of three objectives:


                                                                                                    Page 1 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Income Support Program for the Poorest (P146520)



        a. Provide income support to the poorest mothers in selected Upazilas
        b. Increased mothers’ use of child nutrition and cognitive development services
        c. Enhanced local level government capacity to deliver safety nets

   The objectives were not revised, but some outcome targets were changed at restructurings in 2018 and 2019.
   The target for the number of beneficiaries was reduced as part of a partial cancellation of the credit, and the
   number of Unions maintaining a single beneficiary registry of at least five safety net programs was
   increased as a result of speedier uptake than projected at appraisal. As the project met both the original and
   revised outcome targets in each case, a split rating methodology is not undertaken for this ICR Review.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project had three components:

   Cash transfers for beneficiary mothers (appraisal: US$267 million; restructuring with partial
   cancellation: US$205.21 million; actual: US$187.2 million). This component was to finance quarterly
   cash transfers to eligible households that met two specific characteristics: (i) the households belonged to
   the bottom two expenditure quintiles, and (ii) the households had a pregnant mother and/or a mother of
   children below the age of 60 months. Transfers were conditional on pregnant women getting four antenatal
   checkups, children attending growth monitoring and promotion checkups, and pregnant women and
   mothers participating in monthly child nutrition and cognitive development awareness sessions.

   Enhancing local level government capacity (appraisal: US$32.87 million, of which International
   Development Association [IDA] US$29.5 million; restructuring with partial cancellation: US$22.67
   million; actual: US$13.01 million). This component was to support project implementation through
   strengthening the capacity of (i) local governments to develop beneficiary lists and enroll them in the
   program, locally branded as "Jawtno," or "Nurture"; (ii) of community clinics (CC) to deliver the services to
   mothers and children, and (iii) the Union Post Offices to make electronic payments to beneficiaries using
   postal cash cards. One or more non-governmental organizations (NGOs) were to be hired to support CCs in
   the provision of antenatal and child growth services, and to directly provide the child nutrition and cognitive
   development awareness sessions. Services agreements were to be signed with key agencies such as the
   Directorate General of Health Services and the Bangladesh Post Office.

   Monitoring and evaluation (appraisal: US$3.50 million; restructuring with partial cancellation:
   US$2.69 million; actual: US$6.90 million). A monitoring and evaluation system was to be designed to
   assess progress in achieving the project’s objectives and the impact of cash transfers on household poverty
   and on child nutrition and cognitive development (CNCD) outcomes. A management information system
   was to be developed to monitor beneficiaries and their usage of health services. Also, third party monitoring
   would be responsible for (i) annual evaluations to determine administrative issues and constraints, (ii)
   biannual Knowledge, Attitude and Practice assessments on CNCD processes in order to course correct if
   necessary, and (iii) qualitative and quantitative evaluations to assess impact on household poverty and

                                                                                                     Page 2 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Income Support Program for the Poorest (P146520)



   CNCD outcomes based on household level surveys. Evaluations under item (iii) were to be financed
   through Trust Fund resources.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   The project was approved on December 16, 2014, became effective on April 16, 2015, had the midterm
   review on December 27, 2017, and closed on June 15, 2022, 23.5 months after the original closing date of
   June 30, 2020.

   The total project cost was originally estimated at US$ 303.37 million, to be financed through US$300 million
   of an IDA credit and US$3.37 million through Government of Bangladesh counterpart financing. Actual total
   cost and IDA financing was US$221.7 million.

   The project was restructured twice. The first restructuring, on May 1, 2018, allowed Union Parishads (local
   level governments) to manage the targeting process using the same Proxy Means Testing methodology as
   the one used in the National Household Survey, and under criteria to be defined in the Operations
   Manual. This change was deemed necessary as the National Household Database was not available at the
   time of restructuring, three years after effectiveness, and further delays were expected. This restructuring
   also included an increase in the transfer allocations of 50 percent, to reflect cost of living increases in the
   country. In addition, some targets were changed, and the impact evaluation was dropped.

   The second restructuring, dated August 20, 2019, included a partial cancellation of US$50 million of IDA
   financing, cancellation of the whole of the counterpart financing, extension of the project closing date to
   June 15, 2022 (23.5 additional months), reallocation between disbursement categories, and more flexibility
   in the required experience of the procurement specialist (prior terms of reference had strict requirements
   with respect to experience, hindering the hiring process) and in the implementation schedule in accordance
   with the new timeline under the project extension.

   Conditions were eliminated at the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic and not reinstated thereafter. The
   Financial Agreement was not amended for this purpose.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The project objectives were relevant for the country. While there had been much progress in key social
indicators in Bangladesh at the time of project preparation, still 31.5 percent of the population was poor and
18 percent extremely poor. Bangladesh already had social safety net programs, but they were highly
fragmented and mainly directed towards emergency and seasonal shock responses. These programs had
poor targeting mechanisms and covered only one-third of the poor population. The government, in its Sixth
Five-Year Plan, included two objectives that addressed the need to establish results-based programs
through improving “poor households’ access to quality education, health, and nutrition services,” and
“strengthening coordination, targeting, and coverage of social protection programs.”



                                                                                                     Page 3 of 15
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Income Support Program for the Poorest (P146520)



               The project was well aligned with Bangladesh's Country Partnership Framework (CPF, FY 16-20) as part of
               Focus Area 2, Social Inclusion, which aimed to improve equity in access to quality of education, to quality
               maternal and infant health services, and to improved social protection coverage for the poor. The CPF
               addressed the challenges in governance in the country, particularly at the subnational level, an aspect that
               was highly relevant for this project as it was expected to be implemented at the local level, with support
               from central government. The World Bank had global experience in the development and implementation of
               social safety net programs that included conditional cash transfers focused on maternal health and child
               education, health, and nutrition. In addition, the project built on a pilot financed by the Bank's Rapid Social
               Response Multi-Donor Trust Fund (P123629, 2011-13, US$2.1 million), called Shombhob, that provided
               cash transfers to mothers who fulfilled two co-responsibilities, namely, attending monthly nutrition
               awareness sessions and regular growth monitoring of their children up to 36 months old. The evaluation of
               the pilot showed that the targeting system using a Proxy Means Test Formula worked well, the additional
               income increased the quantity and quality of food consumed in the household, and wasting (weight for
               height) among children between 10-22 months was significantly reduced.

               The project's objectives could have been stated at a higher outcome level. As described in the PAD, the
               objectives were output oriented, making it difficult to ensure a direct linkage with the expected medium-term
               impact of reduced poverty and strengthened future workforce and earning capabilities (as presented in the
               Theory of Change in the ICR). Given that the Shombhob pilot measured outcomes, similar indicators could
               have been used for this project. Furthermore, the project design included an impact evaluation that was
               ultimately cancelled.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Provide income support to the poorest mothers in selected Upazilas

                             Rationale
                             This objective would achieve provision of income support through quarterly transfers to eligible households,
                             as per the two following criteria: (i) households should belong to the bottom two expenditure quintiles, and (ii)
                             these households should have pregnant women and/or children up to 60 months old. Therefore, beneficiaries
                             were poor pregnant women and mothers with young children. The targeting requirement specified in the
                             objective would be supported by assistance to local governments in developing beneficiary lists and capacity
                             to enroll households in the program. Only two children per household could be recognized under the program,
                             in line with family planning policy in Bangladesh.

                             Outputs and intermediate outcomes


                                                                                                                                Page 4 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Income Support Program for the Poorest (P146520)



Project implementation was mainly at the local government level, where beneficiaries enrolled in the program
and were registered through a specifically designed management information system (MIS). There were
multiple delays and challenges in development of the targeting mechanism and implementation of the MIS,
but after two years of project implementation, the program was enrolling beneficiaries as projected. The
enrollment process was stopped once lockdowns started due to COVID-19. Enrollment started again later,
but at a slower pace due to capacity limitations.

Targeting of beneficiaries was to be implemented through the National Household Database (NHD), which
was expected to be up and running by the time the program started. The NHD was not ready in time,
however, and an alternative targeting system had to be developed at the local level using a proxy means
testing methodology similar to the one used by the NHD.

Program implementation was monitored at the local level through periodic beneficiary spot checks surveys
carried out by an independent firm. These spot checks validated program implementation by local
governments, including coverage of minority and/or indigenous populations, and were under the responsibility
of a third party specifically hired for this purpose. These spot checks were carried out close to targeted levels
or exceeding targets between FY18 and FY20. However, they were stopped during COVID-19 lockdown
measures, and once activities resumed, the spot checks were not relaunched because a new firm was not
hired in time. As a result, the target of 20 spot checks per year was not met at project closure. Notably, the
spot checks included monitoring of compliance with the project's Small Ethnic Communities Plan (SECP) to
ensure that there were no adverse social impacts on minority ethnic groups. During the period in which spot
checks were carried out, findings showed that inclusion efforts had been successful, such that no
exclusions based on ethnicity were detected.

Outcomes

The main outcome for this objective was the number of beneficiaries receiving cash transfers. The project
provided cash transfers to 600,007 beneficiaries, surpassing both the original target of 600,000 and the
revised target of 400,000 beneficiaries. As part of the first restructuring, individual transfer amounts were
increased, in order to reflect an increase in household consumption and expenditures since project
preparation. As part of the second restructuring, US$50 million in project financing was cancelled, and the
beneficiaries target was revised from 600,000 to 400,000. The target of 400,000 was established on a yearly
basis starting in year five (FY20), and according to the ICR, this target was achieved and surpassed in FY21.

The program focused on female beneficiaries in the bottom two expenditure quintiles. All beneficiaries were
female, exceeding the 95 percent target. The program allowed for any female caregiver to be enrolled in the
program, regardless of whether she was the biological mother of the child. Thus, there seems to have
been little risk of exclusion of eligible beneficiary children. About 75 percent of beneficiaries were in the
bottom two expenditure quintiles, exceeding the 70 percent target.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective

                                                                                                   Page 5 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Income Support Program for the Poorest (P146520)



Increase mothers’ use of child nutrition and cognitive development services

Rationale
The cash transfers under Objective 1 were to be paid to eligible households conditional to pregnant mothers
having four antenatal visits, children being monitored for height and weight (on a monthly basis for 0-24
months old and then quarterly until 60 months), and monthly attendance to nutrition, development, and
education sessions. The rationale was that monetary transfers would provide an incentive to pregnant women
and mothers to go to CCs and get the medical check-ups and education sessions that could lead to improved
health, nutrition, and cognitive development in children up to 5 years old.

Outputs and intermediate outcomes

Overall, attendance at CCs was quite positive, achieving or exceeding by the end of project the targets for co-
responsibilities. There were four different co-responsibilities to be met: (i) up to four antenatal care (ANC)
visits by pregnant women; (ii) monthly Growth, Monitoring and Promotion (GMP) checkups for children 0-24
months old; (iii) quarterly GMP checkups for children two to five years old; and,(iv) attendance to CNCD
monthly sessions.

At the end line, all targets were exceeded for all co-responsibilities. The target of 70 percent was exceeded
for ANC by project closure (actual was 81 percent), though there were challenges in meeting the target during
the project period. Several factors came into play, including delays between enrollment and availability of
services, inadequate capacity at CCs, women’s mobility, and reluctance to attend sessions. Notably, the
target was exceeded at the time where conditionalities were not a requirement to receive transfers. In the
case of monthly GMP the final achievement was 94 percent, and the quarterly GMP was 91 percent,
exceeding in both cases the target of 70 percent. For CNCD, 94 percent of mothers attended sessions,
exceeding the target of 70 percent.

As per a beneficiary assessment carried out during FY21, pregnant women and mothers highly valued these
services, so much so that even during FY21 and FY22, when transfers were not conditioned to attendance to
these health services, the women continued to attend. This outcome is attributed to the strong commitment of
the firm that carried out the sessions and provided technical assistance to CCs. Also, health workers and
community leaders were important stakeholders in promoting services to pregnant women and mothers of
young children. On the other hand, according to the FY21 beneficiary assessment, there seem to have been
some challenges in the provision of services at the CCs, including the availability of functioning equipment,
limiting their capacity to fully provide services.

Outcomes

All beneficiaries received at least half the maximum benefit amount, exceeding the target of 70 percent of
beneficiaries. By service:

      94 percent of CNCD beneficiaries fulfilled the co-responsibilities, surpassing the target of 70 percent;
      81 percent of beneficiary pregnant women fulfilled the ANC co-responsibility, surpassing the target of
       70 percent;
      94 percent of beneficiary mothers fulfilled monthly GMP co-responsibilities, surpassing the target of 70
       percent; and



                                                                                                  Page 6 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Income Support Program for the Poorest (P146520)




      91 percent of beneficiary mothers fulfilled quarterly GMP co-responsibilities, surpassing the target of
       70 percent.

After the first restructuring in 2018, coverage was higher than the target. The only exception to this early
achievement was ANC, which was below the target until FY22. Achievement of targets is attributed to the
interest of mothers in obtaining maternal and child services, and to the stakeholders that provided these
services who promoted them. During FY21 and FY22, conditionalities were eliminated so that women
received the transfers regardless of whether they attended the CCs and CNCD sessions. There appears to
be high demand for health services regardless of transfers, raising the question of whether financial
incentives are necessary for the community to use them.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
Enhance local level government capacity to deliver safety nets

Rationale
Under this objective, the project would facilitate the implementation of cash transfers, including (i) the use by
Union Parishads of the NHD, previously called the Bangladesh Poverty Database, to create beneficiary lists
and enroll beneficiaries into the project, (ii) strengthen CCs to deliver mother and child services, including
education sessions, and (iii) strengthen Union Post Offices to make electronic payments through postal cash
cards upon compliance with co-responsibilities, using biometric identification.

Outputs and intermediate outcomes

The project was implemented at the Union Parishad level, with support from higher-level governments
(Upazilas and Districts) and overall coordination by the Local Government Division of the Ministry of Local
Government, Rural Development and Cooperatives. There were also multiple partners involved at the local
and central level, including the Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics (BBS), to determine potential beneficiary
households; the Directorate General of Health Services of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
(MoHFW), to coordinate maternal and child health services; and the Bangladesh Post Office to facilitate the
biometric-enabled electronic payments.

Despite the complex institutional design and initial difficulties in getting payment and services up to speed, the
governance structure worked satisfactorily as evidenced by the fact that beneficiaries received transfers and
attendance at CCs was relatively high. Still, project implementation faced challenges. There were difficulties
in setting up the targeting mechanism, operating the MIS, and managing the biometric system, all of which
delayed payments to beneficiaries.

A grievance redress system was to be implemented at the Upazila level. This system was intended to
generate transparency and create a place where beneficiaries could go if they felt they had not been treated
fairly. By the end of the project, 85 percent of implementing Upazilas had processed grievances, far
exceeding the target of 40 percent. Grievances were primarily related to issues around payments and lack of

                                                                                                    Page 7 of 15
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               Income Support Program for the Poorest (P146520)



                            understanding of the relationship between conditionalities and payments. During FY20 and FY21, when
                            conditionalities were removed, the number of grievances decreased.

                            Outcome

                            At the outcome level, Unions were expected to be able to maintain a single beneficiary registry that would
                            cover at least five safety net programs. The streamlining of beneficiary lists was expected to ensure more
                            effective management of the multiple social safety net programs in Bangladesh. A total of 443 Unions kept a
                            single beneficiary list by end of project, exceeding the original target of 100 Unions and the revised target
                            of 325 Unions.

                            This objective also aimed to improve the capacity of CCs to provide the necessary services for mothers to
                            meet the required co-responsibilities. Quality of service indicators were not monitored as part of the project,
                            but the Bank commissioned a beneficiary assessment in 2021. This assessment focused on the knowledge,
                            attitudes, and practices of pregnant women and mothers with respect to the maternal and child services
                            provided to them. Overall, attitudes were quite positive towards the services provided. Ninety-eight percent of
                            mothers who attended childcare services found that the child’s growth chart was a useful instrument. Most
                            mothers (78 percent) found the CNCD sessions useful, helping them to recognize nutritious foods as well as
                            the need to play with children. Most respondents (90 percent) used the money to buy food and other
                            necessities for their children. While these results are encouraging, they do not provide robust information on
                            the quality of the services provided.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The project achieved its objectives, albeit with some difficulties during the launching process. In addition,
                            during the COVID-19 lockdown period, services were not provided for a period of about ten months and, once
                            services reopened, uptake was slow. With achievement of all three objectives rated Substantial, overall
                            efficacy is rated Substantial.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   The PAD included an economic analysis using extensive evidence from the literature for similar conditional cash
   transfer programs, as well as from the Shombhob pilot project previously implemented in Bangladesh. Based on

                                                                                                                              Page 8 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Income Support Program for the Poorest (P146520)



this analysis, the impacts expected from the project were: (i) short-term impact on poverty; (ii) medium-term
impact on child nutrition indicators; and (iii) longer-term impact on human capital and earnings of beneficiary
children. A four percent reduction in rural poverty was estimated if the project were to have full coverage of rural
areas in Bangladesh. The Shombhob pilot showed that counseling sessions had a significant impact on
mother’s knowledge of breastfeeding practices and on wasting (weight to heigh ratio), and to a lesser extent on
dietary diversity, stunting, and underweight indicators. The PAD's analysis estimated long-term impact on future
earnings via an assumed 0.5-year increase in schooling, taking into account repetition and dropouts. Its cost
benefit analysis, at a 10 percent discount rate, resulted in an internal rate of return (IRR) of 10.5-16.5 percent
and a net present value (NPV) of US$17-US$450 million. It should be noted that these estimates assumed
coverage of the cash transfer program throughout all rural areas in the country, while the project only operated
in two divisions (out of 8 divisions in the country) and in 7 districts (of a total of 64).

The project was also expected to lead to efficiency gains in the administration of social safety net programs.
It was designed to support the streamlining of the five largest social safety net programs under the proxy means
testing targeting system. The PAD's analysis estimated savings of US$100-250 million per year, compensating
by far the expected costs of the project. These savings were also calculated based on nationwide adoption of
the streamlined system.

The ICR carried out a similar cost-benefit analysis using actual costs and achievement data, resulting in a NPV
of the project between US$174 million and US$1.14 billion, with an IRR of 13.9 to 20.2 percent. An additional
hypothetical scenario was run with the project closing in June 2020, with no extension. In this context, the IRR
was somewhat higher (by 15-21 percent), but the NPV was lower (US$73 million-US$415 million). As per this
estimate, the extension was well justified.

The cost-benefit analysis assumed that children’s nutrition and cognitive abilities improved as a result of the
service packages provided by the CCs and the NGOs, thus leading to improved cognitive abilities and to
increased educational attainment. While this assumption is strongly supported by global experience with similar
conditional cash transfer and early childhood development programs, specific evidence for this project is
lacking. The impact evaluation for the project was cancelled, and there is no nutrition data available. The
beneficiary assessment carried out in 2021 demonstrated that beneficiaries did go to clinics for the GMP and
participated in the CNCD sessions; however, the quality of services was not evaluated, and child growth results
were not recorded in a centrally accessible database.

The ICR also includes a simulation on poverty reduction as a result of the cash transfers. Assuming coverage of
all the rural areas in the country (a similar assumption as that of the ex-ante simulation), extreme poverty could
have been reduced by 2.7 percentage points, 1.3 percentage points fewer than what was estimated in the PAD.

The ICR does not mention the potential impact of streamlining social safety net programs. While only about ten
percent of Union Parishads (443 Union Parishads) streamlined the five largest social safety net programs under
the project, this achievement potentially could serve as a demonstration effect that could be scaled up to gain
financial efficiency in the management of these programs.

There were significant implementation shortcomings. The slow start of the project had substantial opportunity
costs. The project had a three-year delay in launching the transfers due to the unavailability of the targeting
mechanism. The MIS experienced delays and shortcomings that necessitated manual intervention, slowing
down payroll generation as the project scaled up and ultimately slowing payments to beneficiaries, "opening the
door to potential error and fraud" (ICR, p. 15). Frequent turnover of Project Management Unit (PMU) staff,
including of the Project Director, "hampered efficient implementation due to lack of leadership and decision-


                                                                                                       Page 9 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Income Support Program for the Poorest (P146520)



making" (ICR, p. 15). Procurement activities were often slowed because of turnover and vacancies in
procurement staffing. Also, there was a two-year delay in hiring the NGO that provided the CNCD services. This
means that a significant group of mothers and young children missed the opportunity to benefit from the project.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?            Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                    100.00
 Appraisal                                                16.50
                                                                                     Not Applicable
                                                                                    100.00
 ICR Estimate                                             20.20
                                                                                     Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of objectives is rated Substantial, as the objectives were fully aligned with the Bangladesh Country
Partnership Framework (FY16-20), the Bangladesh Sixth Five-Year Plan, and country context. Efficacy is rated
as Substantial as the project achieved its objectives, albeit with some challenges in the early years of
implementation and the subsequent impact of the COVID-19 lockdown. Although the cost-benefit analysis
demonstrated high returns, efficiency is rated Modest given significant implementation inefficiencies. Taken
together, these ratings indicate that there were moderate shortcomings in the project's preparation,
implementation, and achievement, leading to an Outcome rating of Moderately Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The project was the sole financier of the Jawtno conditional cash transfer program, such that once the
project closed, transfers ended. The contract with the NGO providing support to CCs and offering the CNCD
sessions also ended. The World Bank is preparing a new project, Bangladesh Enhancing Investments and
Benefits for Early Years (BEIBEY, P178133), building on the experience of this project to support the early
childhood development agenda, thus providing continuity in the implementation of public policy. Still, the
break between the closure of this project and the launching of BEIBEY means that several cohorts of
pregnant mothers and young children will not benefit from early childhood development services. The
project's investments in strengthening local government capacity were critical for the development of early

                                                                                                  Page 10 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Income Support Program for the Poorest (P146520)



childhood development programs. While the ICR states that the project generated overall awareness of the
early childhood development agenda, there is a risk that both the awareness of this agenda and
implementation capacity may dwindle if support from the central government does not continue.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  Project design drew from extensive global knowledge on conditional cash transfer programs and from the
  Shombhob pilot project, implemented in Bangladesh. Transfer amounts were estimated based on specific
  amounts that would contribute to supplementing income, but avoiding an amount too large that could
  potentially lead beneficiaries to avoid seeking work opportunities. Ultimately, however, transfer amounts
  had to be raised by 50 percent, indicating that the allocations might have been somewhat low, given
  yearly cost of living increases in Bangladesh. The health and nutrition care packages and the CNCD
  sessions also drew from the pilot project, leading to an improved design, based on lessons learned. For
  example, project design took into account previously observed difficulties in using cash cards with
  personal identification numbers/codes (PINs), and opted instead for the use of biometric technology for
  validation of the individual’s identity. Much of the preparation phase made good use of trust funds to
  provide technical assistance to the client.

  Institutional arrangements were very complex, requiring multiple stakeholders to coordinate at the
  national and subnational levels. At the national level, the Ministry of Local Government, Rural
  Development and Cooperatives, MoHFW, BBS and Bangladesh Post Office had to work together so that
  their respective services would be provided at the local level. At the subnational level, Districts, Upazilas,
  and Union Parishads all had roles. Coordination mechanisms were designed into the project to ensure
  that each entity would carry out their roles and responsibilities; however, this level of expected
  coordination may have been too ambitious, given the low implementation capacity in the country.

  The PAD's risk assessment deemed the project as having substantial risk. The reasons behind this rating
  were linked to weak country level governance, low implementation capacity, and risks of leakage of funds
  in the cash transfers. These risks were mitigated by the implementation of an MIS and setting up
  electronic payments. Overall, however, the project failed to ensure full readiness prior to launching. While
  NHD data was available, the Bangladesh Bureau of Statistic (BSS) lacked adequate capacity to process
  the data, thus meaning that there was no list of eligible beneficiaries at project launch. meaning that
  there was no targeting mechanism in place at project launch. The biometric system used to register
  women’s attendance to CCs and CNCD activities had not been tested.




  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory




                                                                                                      Page 11 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Income Support Program for the Poorest (P146520)




b. Quality of supervision
 The project benefited from a strong local team that was able to carry out close supervision of the
 project. Supervision missions continued after the COVID-19 pandemic started, moving to a virtual format.
 The Bank team co-chaired a working group that met quarterly with partner government agencies and
 implementation support institutions to identify problems and agree on solutions. Counterpart institutions
 recognized and were appreciative of the Bank’s support during the implementation process.

 The Bank team responded to design issues through two restructuring processes. The first restructuring
 came late, three years after project launch; during this entire period, the NHD was still unavailable. The
 second restructuring was timely and ensured that the revised project financing and timeline were adequate
 to ensure full disbursement. A third restructuring should have been carried out to reflect the de-linking of
 cash transfers to co-responsibilities. Since this was a response to the COVID-19 pandemic, the de-linking
 is justified to ensure that poor women would receive cash transfers during lockdown.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The design of the project's monitoring and evaluation was comprehensive. An MIS was designed, based on
 the Shombhob pilot, to monitor indicators, each of which had a defined frequency of measurement, a
 defined data source, and target and baseline values. In addition, M&E design included hiring a third-party
 agency to carry out knowledge, attitudes, and practices (KAP) assessments and process
 evaluations. Finally, a quantitative impact evaluation was included to assess program impacts, including on
 household poverty and CNCD outcomes. The MIS design allowed for recurrent monitoring of most
 indicators in the results framework, thus ensuring that administrative systems were in place and reducing
 the project's dependence on third-party assessments.



b. M&E Implementation
  M&E was generally implemented as designed, prior to the COVID-19 pandemic. The PMU collected and
  reported data regularly through the MIS. The reporting processes faced challenges due to changes in the
  targeting system, and to delays in processing data resulting from difficulties in managing the biometric
  system. These issues resulted in a need to register participants on paper and then transfer the
  information into the system so that women could be paid. A third-party Operational Review Services
  (ORS) firm was hired to carry out process evaluations and spot checks in sample locations. Results from
  this field work were discussed with Bank missions. The Bank, using Trust Fund financing, also
  commissioned quarterly spot checks of CNCD sessions between December 2017 and March 2020 to

                                                                                                  Page 12 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Income Support Program for the Poorest (P146520)



  determine the quality of service delivery and obtain beneficiary feedback. The baseline for the impact
  evaluation was carried out during the first half of 2019. However, the endline survey could not be carried
  out because of disruptions and changes in project implementation due to the pandemic. A beneficiary
  assessment was conducted in May 2021 to obtain information on KAP as well as feedback from
  beneficiaries. A follow-up survey is currently under implementation that will look at changes in family
  care, KAP, and household food frequency.



c. M&E Utilization
  The M&E tools were used by the PMU and Bank teams to assess progress and make adjustments as
  necessary. In particular, the MIS provided the necessary data to update the results framework and make
  decisions on implementation activities that were lagging. The process and CNCD spot checks were used
  to design stakeholder assessment and refresher trainings for community facilitators, and to make other
  decisions to facilitate project implementation. The COVID-19 pandemic impeded field work during the
  last two years of project implementation, breaking the previous feedback loop that allowed
  improvements to occur. Finally, the lack of an impact evaluation did not allow for a lessons-learned
  exercise from the project. This shortcoming could be partially countered by the survey that is still to be
  delivered.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as Category C on Environmental Assessment, but it triggered the social policy
   OP/BP 4.10 on Indigenous Peoples as the project included areas with ethnic minorities. An SECP was
   prepared and disclosed. The ethnic communities identified in the project area spoke the same language as
   the local communities, so that materials did not need to be prepared specifically for them. The MIS
   enrollment system allowed for the monitoring of compliance with SECP and was reviewed on a yearly basis
   to ensure compliance. In addition, the spot check carried out by the ORS found that ethnic communities
   were integrated into the program, with no reports of exclusion due to ethnic origin. Monitoring indicators
   were not designed to quantify coverage, and therefore information on inclusion of small ethnic minorities is
   qualitative.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Fiduciary responsibility was under the PMU, working with Local Government Divisions. At appraisal,
   fiduciary risk was assessed as substantial, given that large amounts of funds would be transferred as cash
   payments to beneficiaries. Financial reporting had to be done manually, as the audit system did not work.
   Financial audits were carried out on a yearly basis and, though at times delivered after the deadline, did


                                                                                                   Page 13 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Income Support Program for the Poorest (P146520)



   not show any ineligible expenditures. On procurement, the project faced challenges in adequate staffing,
   producing substantial delays in contracting and, thereafter, in amending contracts to reflect changing
   realities under the project. Procurement ratings ranged between moderately satisfactory and moderately
   unsatisfactory.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None reported.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                      IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
                                                                                  Significant implementation
Outcome                        Satisfactory             Moderately Satisfactory   inefficiencies produced an
                                                                                  Efficiency rating of modest.
                                                                                  There were moderate
Bank Performance               Satisfactory             Moderately Satisfactory
                                                                                  shortcomings in readiness.
Quality of M&E                 Substantial              Substantial

Quality of ICR                 ---                      Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR (pp. 19-20) offered insightful lessons, including some re-stated here by IEG:

      Global experience shows that the matching of conditionalities and cash transfers is a
       successful mechanism to achieve impact on human capital indicators. The experience
       of this project shows that they can be decoupled. Demand for health services could still
       be substantial apart from the incentive created by cash transfers, if promotion activities are
       actively undertaken and quality facilities are available.
      Attention to quality of services is important to ensure impact in project
       implementation. While project design needs to be realistic, considering country capacity,
       outcomes need to include some measurement of quality. In the case of this project, the
       collection of data on child weight and height could have contributed both to monitoring of
       services and to evaluation of project impact.
      Support for the development of country systems is critical for the long-term
       sustainability of social programs. The project contributed to the creation of an MIS that
       allowed for monitoring indicators on beneficiary access to services. In a similar manner,
       support for development of an information system to record maternal and child health

                                                                                                    Page 14 of 15
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Income Support Program for the Poorest (P146520)



         indicators could have contributed to capacity to measure impact and promote program
         sustainability.
        The demonstration effect of pilots can be an important tool to motivate stakeholders
         to scale up programs that contribute to country strategic objectives. In this case, the
         Shombhob pilot demonstrated that financing demand, while ensuring availability of quality
         services, could lead to significant results. This hands-on experience not only helped in the
         scaling up of the program, but also in generating a consensus that such a program could be
         viable in the country.
        Simplicity of institutional arrangements can facilitate successful project
         implementation. A program addressing child nutrition and cognitive development will
         inevitably require involvement of multiple stakeholders. However, project design can easily
         become too complex, making implementation difficult. Striving for simple institutional
         arrangements is therefore vital.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is well written and provides a comprehensive explanation of project implementation and results. The
document provided a theory of change that was useful to assess project objectives. Project outcomes and
intermediate results were explained in detail, and the narrative provided information on the key aspects of
project design and implementation, as well as issues faced during implementation. Since the project design
was output-oriented, there was little information on the quality of services that could have given a sense
of whether there was progress toward longer-term impacts. The results from the ORS field work and the FY 21
beneficiary assessment could have been used more extensively for this purpose.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                   Page 15 of 15
