     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Justice Sector Insttnl Strengthening (P143274)



                                                                                     Report Number: ICRR0023247

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                   Project Name
 P143274                                      Justice Sector Insttnl Strengthening

 Country                                      Practice Area(Lead)
 Kazakhstan                                   Governance


 L/C/TF Number(s)                             Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-83610                                   31-Dec-2018                                          14,040,252.06

 Bank Approval Date                           Closing Date (Actual)
 19-Mar-2014                                  31-Dec-2021

                                              IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                              36,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                               14,040,252.06                                               0.00

 Actual                                           14,040,252.06                                               0.00




 Prepared by                  Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Deryck R. Brown              Clay Wescott                  Jennifer L. Keller              IEGEC (Unit 1)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The project development objectives (PDOs) of the project were to: (a) strengthen the institutional capacity of
   selected agencies for effective implementation of selected laws; and (b) improve the efficiency, transparency
   of, and access to selected public services in the justice sector. (Loan Agreement, p.5)

   For this review, IEG unpacks the PDOs into four (4) objectives as follows:



                                                                                                     Page 1 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Justice Sector Insttnl Strengthening (P143274)



        1. to strengthen the institutional capacity of selected agencies for effective implementation of selected
          laws;
        2. to improve the efficiency of selected services;
        3. to improve the transparency of selected services; and
        4. to improve access to selected services.

   The ICR took the same approach, though with slightly different wording, despite overlapping objectives that
   lead to difficulties in assigning the project outcomes to these four objectives (as some apply to more than
   one).




b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   A. Strengthening the Implementation of Key Elements of the Legal and Institutional Framework
   (Estimated: USD11.2 million of which IBRD USD6.7 million/ Actual: USD2.59 million of which IBRD
   USD1.56 million)

   This component, with 3 sub-components, financed consultants' services, training and goods as it sought “to
   reduce state intrusion into the functioning of Kazakhstan’s private sector, enable self-regulation of
   professional bodies and introduce modern, transparent dispute resolution systems” (PAD, p.8). Specifically,
   it was intended to

        1. strengthen the Ministry of Justice (MoJ) by carrying out regulatory and fiscal impact assessments,
           and conducting workshops, training, and user surveys, as well as communications and outreach
           activities. It also aimed to support MoJ to improve legislative drafting policies, processes and
           capacity.
        2. support selected agencies with the drafting of a law on self-regulated professional organizations,
           organizing drafting workshops, training and focus groups, as well as outreach and communications.

   B. Improving the Service Quality and Responsiveness of the MoJ (Estimated: USD11.8 million of
   which IBRD USD7.1 million/Actual: USD13.29 million of which IBRD USD7.6 million)

   Component B - with 5 sub-components - financed consultants' services, training and goods to strengthen
   MoJ's capacity in a number of areas, including: development of a comprehensive performance monitoring
   framework; feedback on the quality of legislative drafting (supported under Component A); improving
   forensic capability and enforcement of judicial decisions; improving the public registration (registry) services


                                                                                                      Page 2 of 20
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Justice Sector Insttnl Strengthening (P143274)



  offered by MoJ such as the land registry; improving provision of and access to legal aid; and preparing a
  strategy to support the reintegration of former offenders, including through employment opportunities.

  C. Strengthening Judicial Efficiency and Professionalism (Estimated: USD27.7 million of which IBRD
  USD16.6 million/ Actual: USD1.41 million of which IBRD USD0.85 million)

  The third Component (C) - with 2 sub-components - financed consultants' services, training and goods
  to support the Supreme Court to improve its operational efficiency. The support included: carrying out of
  various analyses and diagnostics to identify the impediments that increase the non-adjudicative burden on
  judges and ways to remove the impediments and increase judges' efficiency; simplifying and streamlining
  court procedures; strengthening the Supreme Court's institutional capacity to carry out its administrative and
  management functions, including the capacity to monitor the performance of lower courts. It also sought to
  enhance the capacity of the Supreme Judicial Council as well as the Institute of Justice, the training arm of
  the judicial establishment.

  D. Project Implementation and Coordination (Estimated: USD5.1 million of which IBRD USD3.07
  million/ Actual: USD6.01 million of which IBRD USD3.67 million)

  Component D - also with 2 sub-components - funded the provision of technical support by way of
  contracting an Implementation Support Group (ISG) to support project implementation, including project
  management, procurement and financial management experts, monitoring and evaluation and change
  management. It also supported a pilot fellowship/grants program for mid-career professionals from the
  justice sector.

  Contingency (Estimated: USD4.18 million of which IBRD USD2.51 million/Actual: nil)



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  The project began with an approved IBRD loan amount of USD36 million (60 percent) and a Borrower
  contribution of USD24 million (40 percent), for a combined total of USD60 million. However, at the time of
  closing, the IBRD loan stood at USD14.04 million while the Borrower's contribution was USD9.35 million - a
  combined total of USD23.39 million (or USD36.6 million less than the original estimate). It was restructured
  4 times between May 2018 and December 2021 (see below). Two of these restructurings included
  cancellations of portions of the loan amount - by USD9 million and by a further USD12.7 million - reducing
  the loan by almost two-thirds (2/3). Although the procurement of information and communications
  technology (ICT) equipment was originally to be funded from the proceeds of the loan, the Borrower
  decided to use their own resources instead for the purchase of the ICT equipment.

  The project was restructured on four occasions as follows:

      1. May 2018: Loan amount was reduced from USD36 million to USD27 million, and the activities and
         results indicators (RIs) were modified to reflect the reduction in the scale and cost of project financed
         activities.
      2. August 2018: Project closing date was extended by 18 months from December 31, 2018 to June 30,
         2020 to enable the Borrower to implement the new, scaled-down activities introduced in the May
         2018 restructuring.


                                                                                                    Page 3 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Justice Sector Insttnl Strengthening (P143274)



       3. May 2020: Project closing date was extended by another 18 months from June 30, 2020 to
          December 31, 2021.Further modifications were made to the results framework to better align results
          indicators with the PDO. Component were adjusted by changing activities and reallocating funds to
          accommodate COVID-19 related activities.
       4. December 2021: As the project was closing, the undisbursed balance was cancelled, reducing the
          loan amount by a further USD12.7 million. This was part of a portfolio-wide effort to save the
          Borrower from paying commitment fees on the undisbursed balance, as well as to free up
          counterpart funding so it could be reallocated to pandemic-related spending.

   In effect, the project, originally planned to be implemented over a period of 4.5 years, was extended to 7.5
   years but utilized only 39 percent of the original budget.

   Because the project's scope shrank and project commitments decreased through the cancellation of funds,
   the ICR carried out a split rating. However, as there was no Board-approved change in the PDO, IEG finds
   that a good case can be made not to apply a split rating and to assess the project based on the revised
   scope (and PDO indicators) agreed on at the May 2018 and May 2020 restructurings.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The clearest statement of the problem to be addressed by the project appeared in paragraph 16 of the
Project Appraisal Document (PAD):

" A recent review of Kazakhstan's justice sector highlights some of the key challenges facing Kazakhstan's
justice sector, including: low public trust in courts, related to concerns over integrity and corruption;
slow contract enforcement; limited access to justice for the poor and vulnerable; and over-
regulation of the private sector." The PDOs are highly relevant to addressing these challenges.

Annex 2 of the PAD provides the country and sector context, including a description of the Kazak justice
sector, its challenges and the reform agenda. It links the project to objective (ii) of the World Bank-
supported 2012 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for involvement in Kazakhstan, which was “to
promote improved governance in public administration and service delivery (including modernizing
the judiciary and civil service.” The PDOs are highly relevant to this objective.

However, the PDOs could have been better formulated and more focused given the level of commitment
and depth of the challenges. Annex 2 of the PAD states that the project sought to modernize the legal and
institutional framework for justice entities critical to private sector functioning and growth, as well as to
ensure access to justice for all, and strengthen the institutional capacity and operational efficiency of the
MOJ and the courts. It also sought to improve public sector management and civil rights by upgrading the
courts and other key elements of the justice system in line with international good practices and expanding
access to women, minorities and juveniles. Despite this tall order, it also claims that the project would
contribute to the CPS's first objective ("to promote diversification, innovation, investment in human
capital, and international trade integration for employment generation") by strengthening the judicial
system and streamlining the role of the state vis-a-vis its citizens and businesses, which would help
accelerate the appropriate definition of the state and shift to a more market-oriented and transparent

                                                                                                    Page 4 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Justice Sector Insttnl Strengthening (P143274)



economy. Finally, it claims that the project would contribute to the World Bank Group's twin objectives of
ending extreme poverty and promoting shared prosperity.

Reforming and strengthening the justice sector remains broadly relevant in the context of the Bank's
Kazakhstan Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD - April 2018) and Country Partnership Framework for the
Republic of Kazakhstan, 2020-2025 (CPF - November 2019). The former highlighted 'Rule of Law' as a key
objective and a prerequisite for an enabling business environment. As the ICR points out, the project is
generally aligned with the SCD's strategic pillar on 'Private Sector Development' and its policy priority of
"enhancing governance, rule of law, accountability and strengthening public sector capacity." The CPF's
Key Focus Area 1, on the other hand, is Promoting Inclusive Growth; Objective 1 under this Key Focus
Area is Strengthening the Environment for Private Sector Development. It is accepted wisdom that a strong,
efficient and independent justice sector contributes directly to these objectives by instilling confidence to
both the corporate sector and the citizens at large, which in turn helps to improve the business environment
by providing predictability and stability.

The Bank could have increased the relevance of the PDOs with greater specificity. It would have been
preferable, for example, if the PDO said clearly that the project set out to strengthen the MOJ and Supreme
Court instead of "selected institutions." Similarly, it would have been better to be clear and specific on which
public services in the justice sector were to be made more efficient and transparent rather than to say
"selected services." The perception of (presumably low levels of) integrity and (presumably high levels of)
corruption that served to undermine citizens' trust in the court system is, at best, addressed indirectly. The
second part of the PDO - to improve efficiency and transparency of, as well as access to, selected public
services in the justice sector - addresses the perception of slow contract enforcement and limited access for
the poor and vulnerable. The project combines elements of court reform (with an emphasis on improving
efficiency and transparency) with legislative drafting, law enforcement (presumably focused on the over-
regulation of the private sector) and even the re-integration of offenders (which was later dropped).
The project set out to do too many things and could have been more precise and narrowly-focused, given
that this was the Bank’s first intervention in the justice sector in the country.

The ICR retroactively constructs: a ToC (p.9), as there was none in the PAD; and, an updated ToC (p.22)
reflecting the drastically reduced scope of the project and focus on the MOJ, the Judiciary (mainly the
Supreme Court) and, to some extent, the High Judicial Council, which did not exist at the time of appraisal.
The most significant changes were the reduction in the level of ambition in Component B, as well as
modifying one sub-component under Component C from 'Strengthen judicial training' to 'Strengthen judge
selection and performance' (with a commensurate change in the related RI from 'Improved efficiency of
judicial officers' to 'Improved transparency in judge selection launched').

Although the outcome of PDO-A is 'Improved institutional capacity of selected agencies to effectively
implement laws and deliver efficient and transparent justice services', the fact is that while the MOJ might
play a central role in the drafting of legislation, it clearly cannot and does not implement all laws by itself.
Hence, improving the quality of the laws (by better legislative drafting) can have little or no impact on the
implementation of the laws. To be clear, the quality of a law can be judged on its ability to achieve the
underlying policy objectives; if a law does not work because it was designed without taking into account the
context in which it is to be implemented - such as capacity and political economy - it is not a well-designed
law. Improving the quality of the laws can, therefore, have a direct impact on their implementation but there
are many other factors involved, not all of which are within the control of the MOJ. Also, while PDO-A talks
about "justice services", it is Component B that focuses on justice services (and the outcome PDO-B -



                                                                                                      Page 5 of 20
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Justice Sector Insttnl Strengthening (P143274)



               'Improved efficiency of selected justice services' and PDO-C 'Improved transparency of selected justice
               services' - partially repeats PDO-A - '... [to] deliver efficient and transparent justice services').


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To strengthen the institutional capacity of selected agencies for effective implementation of selected laws.

                             Rationale
                             While Objective 1 remained the same, there were changes to the indicators on two occasions during the
                             project's implementation - in May 2018 and May 2020. In view of the low level of disbursements (less than
                             USD4 million disbursed by the time of the first restructuring) and almost negligible level of activity in the
                             period before the first restructuring in May 2018, the project can be assessed based on the revised scope.

                             The first indicator was the percentage of private sector survey respondents who expressed satisfaction with
                             the implementation of the new Commercial Code, the new Law on Self-Regulatory Organizations and the
                             Administrative Offences Code. The associated target was not achieved, as the Government instead opted to
                             amend existing laws and bring its regulatory framework in line with international standards. This indicator was
                             therefore dropped in the May 2018 restructuring, when as many as 6 PDO indicators were eliminated while 4
                             new ones were introduced.

                             The second PDO-level indicator was the percentage of users of project-supported pilot courts expressing
                             satisfaction with the quality of judicial services. The baseline was 27 percent in 2013. Although the ICR claims
                             that the target of 55 percent was exceeded (89 percent achieved), the very same achievement is claimed
                             after the May 2018 restructuring (and rated as High); however, for the period after the May 2020 restructuring
                             up to project closing on December 31, 2021, the result held constant at 89 percent although the target had
                             been increased to 92 percent. The increase from the baseline could not be attributed to the project for the
                             period before the May 2018 restructuring since, overall, project implementation was very slow to negligible, as
                             shown by the low level of disbursements between 2014 - 2017; a common thread running through the ICR
                             that also came out during interviews was that the ISG contractor (Price Waterhouse Coopers) did little to
                             implement project activities during the first 3-4 years after the project became effective. At the second
                             restructuring, the team wrote that:

                             "Project implementation has advanced and has led to some encouraging results under the leadership and
                             support of the Minister of Justice, Mr. Marat Beketayev, and the new President of the Supreme Court, Hon.
                             Mr. Zhakip Assanov. Although the Project has faced several delays since effectiveness, recent developments



                                                                                                                                Page 6 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Justice Sector Insttnl Strengthening (P143274)



suggest a much greater potential to achieve impact in many areas, although on a smaller scale than originally
envisioned."

The fact that the actual result never exceeded 89 percent (despite increasing the target marginally to 92
percent) suggests that user satisfaction remained steady and did not show any improvement during the
period of project implementation.

One additional indicator was introduced after the May 2018 restructuring: Availability of new tools and
mechanisms for public participation in lawmaking, enshrined in draft law and subordinate legal acts. This was
a simple Yes/No indicator (i.e. new tools and mechanisms either exist or they do not) where the baseline was
'No' as at December 31, 2014 and the result was achieved (“Yes”) by the time the May 2020 restructuring
was approved.

A third indicator was introduced after the May 2020 restructuring: Formalization of the High Judicial Council's
(HJC) institutional transformation policy by ensuring the use of transparent mechanisms, including in
automated mode, for selection of judges. This was also a Yes/No indicator. The HJC did not exist at the time
of appraisal; it was established after the original project was designed/approved and with some support from
the project, so the "formalization" of its 'institutional transformation policy" can be credited to the Bank's
intervention. This mechanism was created to handle the selection and appointment of judges using, among
others, an automated system for judge selection that would begin to address the issues of integrity and
corruption raised in the original problem statement.

The project was restructured several times to adapt to changes in key government personnel and in demand
(or requests). New activities were introduced as necessary, but nothing indicates that the scope changed
(even though the pathways taken towards improved institutional capacity may have shifted). For instance, the
Government of Kazakhstan adopted a seven-pillar program supported through business process reviews and
pilot testing even though this was not included in the original project design. Although the Commercial Code,
the Law on Self-Regulated Professional Organizations and others that were intended to be either drafted or
implemented with the support of the project were never pursued, the ICR attributes the drafting, adoption and
implementation of seven other laws to the project (ICR, p.25). The ICR also claims the project is responsible
for "substantial amendments to the legislation on [intellectual property] IP rights and standards, key to
expanding legal protections for innovations and contributing an improved, more attractive business
environment for domestic and foreign investors” (ICR, p.27).

Based on the indicators in place at closing and other evidence presented, particularly in light of the scaled-
down activities and the fact that less than 25 percent of the originally allocated loan amount was utilized,
IEG rates achievement as Modest.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To improve the efficiency of selected services.


                                                                                                   Page 7 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Justice Sector Insttnl Strengthening (P143274)




Rationale
Objective 2 aimed at improving efficiency and streamlining of selected justice sector services. Project support
focused primarily on helping the Supreme Court to implement its recently-adopted seven-pillar program,
which was not originally included in the project but was introduced at the time of the May 2018 restructuring.
This objective had two outcome indicators at the outset:

      The civil enforcement cases resolved by the MOJ by December 31 each year as a percentage of the
       total value of such cases; and
      Aggregate case disposal ratio for civil cases in project-supported pilot courts.

Indicator 1 was dropped at the time of the May 2018 restructuring as nothing had been implemented and the
system for private enforcement of judicial acts was reformed, reshaping the framework for enforcement
services in line with international standards. The project supported the transfer of non-litigious cases from the
Supreme Court to private notaries, thereby decreasing the backlog and future workload of the courts while
also streamlining the system for the delivery of justice services. The overall efficiency gains in court
processing of cases are potentially significant.

In the case of Indicator 2, the measurement of the indicator refers to the percentage increase over the 2013
baseline of the "aggregate case disposal ratio of civil cases for project-financed pilot courts." In the
explanatory note, the indicator measures "the efficiency of case disposal for civil cases in the high-volume,
low-disposal-rate courts (for rolling out such efficiency-enhancing technical support across Kazakhstan's court
system)." The 2013 baseline was zero and the end-of-project target was 50 percent (of the total number of
cases in project-supported pilot courts). The indicator could not be measured and the ICR instead substituted
an intermediate results indicator (IRI) on the average number of days for disposal of civil cases (from filing to
final decision) in pilot courts. The ICR claims the number of days was cut by 5 times, with 53.6 percent
resolved within 3 to 30 days, 3.6 percent above the original target (p.28). This is a reasonable proxy for the
original PDO indicator.

One additional indicator was added after the May 2018 restructuring and another at the May 2020
restructuring. These were, respectively:

      Increased number of licensed forensic experts (with a baseline of zero (0) and a target of
       250). 655 forensic experts had been licensed over 2 years (between May 2018 and May 2020), and
       the target of 250 was surpassed and increased to 750 when the project was again restructured in May
       2020. No additional forensic experts were licensed by project closing, leaving the end-of-project target
       only partially achieved with a total of 655 (or 87 percent of the target).
      Number of forensic laboratories with international and domestic certification (with a baseline of zero
       (0) and a target of 3). Three such laboratories had been licensed (ICR, p.48-9).

Both of these indicators measure outputs and not outcomes.

While the ICR shows how the Bank was proactive in restructuring the project to include new
activities/indicators, adapting to changes in circumstances, as well as making it responsive to client
demand/needs, this proactivity did not always result in useful indicators being developed. The recommended
ICRR rating is Modest.




                                                                                                    Page 8 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Justice Sector Insttnl Strengthening (P143274)




Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
To improve the transparency of selected justice services.

Rationale
This objective aimed at improving transparency in the services available to citizens under the justice sector.
The original results framework included only one PDO indicator for this objective/outcome: Publication on the
respective websites of the MOJ, the Supreme Court and project-supported pilot courts of data on judgements
enforced, registrations processed, inspections and clearance ratio of cases. The target was a simple Yes/No.
However, the indicator was changed to limit the publication to just the Supreme Court in light of the fact that
the responsibility for the collection and publication of non-confidential data on justice sector service delivery
was transferred from the MOJ to the Supreme Court. Only the Supreme Court, therefore, published data on
its website and the indicator was modified when the project was restructured in May 2018 to reflect this reality
as follows: Publication on the Supreme Court website of main outcomes of regular monitoring of court
performance reports on implementation of Supreme Court recommendations. The target was again a simple
Yes/No indicator.

By adjusting the coverage of the indicator to reflect the reality on the ground, the ICR concludes that the
target was achieved and therefore gives a rating of High. However, the revised target was actually less
ambitious, and the ICR gives no indication of quality, adequacy, utilization or citizens' satisfaction, making
it less persuasive than suggested. In other words, the ICR presents evidence that, as a result of the project's
support, the Supreme Court publishes the "main outcomes of regular monitoring of court performance
reports" but is silent on the type and quality of data published, whether it is presented in a user-friendly
format, how many people have accessed it, and whether those who have accessed the reports on the
Supreme Court website found them useful.

The rating is determined to be Modest.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 4
Objective
To improve access to selected justice services.

Rationale
Objective 4 focused on improving access to selected justice-related public services for citizens of
Kazakhstan. Activities under the relevant Component in the PAD included improving the registration services
under the MOJ, including registration of real property, improving access to legal aid services, and supporting
the re-integration of former offenders. According to the updated ToC, the re-integration of offenders was

                                                                                                   Page 9 of 20
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Justice Sector Insttnl Strengthening (P143274)



                            dropped; improving intellectual property standards was added; and access to legal aid was replaced by
                            awareness of legal aid, which redefines the original problem from a lack of access to lack of awareness (and
                            implies that there were no obstacles to access - just people don't know how to go about it).

                            The original PDO indicator was: Growth in the number of eligible persons provided with legal aid. There was
                            also a sub-indicator pertaining to the number of eligible female beneficiaries provided with free legal aid.
                            Neither of these targets for was achieved.

                            The May 2018 restructuring saw the introduction of a new indicator: Availability of new tools that improve the
                            awareness of eligible vulnerable groups on obtaining free legal aid. The indicator is a simple Yes/No, with a
                            lack of clarity on the specific tools that were to be made available. Project activities in support of this objective
                            after 2018, therefore, included the drafting of amendments to the Law on Legal Assistance and Advocacy, as
                            well as the creation of appropriate tools and information systems that could enable greater awareness of legal
                            aid. The Law was adopted only in June 2021, 6 months before the project closed, so that implementation had
                            not yet commenced and it was too early to judge the extent to which awareness had increased as a result.

                            The indicators used for this objective are not outcome indicators. Although the ICR provides some evidence
                            of the groundwork being laid for increasing awareness of legal aid (bearing in mind the dilution of the
                            objective from improved access to improved awareness), it is too early to determine whether these tools had
                            worked. Also, while legal aid is important, there were other justice-related services (other than an IRI on
                            copyright holders) where the ICR does not provide evidence of achievement. Consequently, the proposed
                            rating is Negligible.



                            Rating
                            Negligible


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Generally, an Efficacy rating of High or Substantial is warranted when all three of the following are true:

                                1. there is sufficient evidence of outcomes/impact;
                                2. there is evidence of sufficient outcomes/impact; and
                                3. the observed outcomes/impact can be attributed to the project interventions/activities.

                            In this case, there is not sufficient evidence that the project had significant outcomes/impact; nor is there
                            evidence of outcomes/impact that could be sufficient to achieve the project’s objectives. The ICR presents
                            evidence of what could best be described as small wins in the context of the drastically scaled down
                            project. After 4 years with a low rate of disbursement and little or no activity, the team that inherited
                            the project in 2017/18 restructured it on four occasions to adapt to and/or accommodate changes in focus
                            consequent upon changes of personnel on the Borrower's part (which, by itself, is not a legitimate reason for
                            change), and significantly, changes to the implementation arrangements. These changes kept the project
                            going and amounted to a few random activities that allowed the Government to achieve a number of relatively

                                                                                                                                 Page 10 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Justice Sector Insttnl Strengthening (P143274)



  small wins between 2018 and the time the project closed in December 2021. But they did not amount to a
  coherent set of activities to achieve the already flawed PDOs.

  There was a marked improvement in disbursements and implementation progress after the first restructuring
  in May 2018, which also signaled a scaling down of the project and a reduction of the loan amount. The
  evidence presented in the ICR suggests that the achievements supported by the project were not
  transformative. When the COVID-19 pandemic began, project implementation slowed down and the Borrower
  requested the cancellation of the undisbursed/uncommitted balance, equivalent to US$12.7 million, in
  October 2021. Efficacy, therefore, has to be assessed in the context of the considerable reduction in ambition
  and scope of the project. It is rated as being Modest.



  Overall Efficacy Rating                                    Primary Reason
  Modest                                                     Insufficient evidence


 5. Efficiency
For a development project, the central question is whether the expenditure incurred in achieving project
objectives were reasonable in comparison with both the benefits and recognized norms.

The PAD did not provide any economic and/or financial analysis. It made a few general claims based on
"international experience" and listed a number of potential direct benefits of justice sector reform while admitting
that "not all of these benefits are readily quantifiable": reduced time for case disposal, direct benefits for
businesses and households from reduced cost of litigation, speedier resolution of disputes, reduced cost of
doing business, reduced administrative corruption and improved enforcement and registration, leading to
reduced regulatory and administrative burdens on businesses and individuals. It cited a 2012 estimate of the
"stock of non-executed judicial decisions" at a value of KZT 1,997 billion (equivalent to approximately USD13.2
billion) but it is not clear where this estimate came from or how it was calculated. Other benefits, described as
being "more diffuse", would accrue but not all would be realized within the project period.

Notwithstanding the challenges typically associated with public or justice sector reform projects, the ICR
attempted to carry out an ex-post cost-benefit analysis that estimated total economic inflows (benefits) of
US$180.08 million and outflows (costs) of US$38.39 million, US$23.39 million of which consisted of loan
proceeds and the Borrower's counterpart contribution, plus an estimated US$15 million that was used to procure
IT equipment that was originally to be procured under the project. The analysis calculated an internal rate of
return (IRR) of 13.43 percent and a net present value (NPV) of US$77.34 million. The overall benefit-cost ratio is
3.72 for the life of the project.

The methodology and assumptions used in calculating the IRR and NPV are explained in Annex 4 of the ICR. At
the outset, it concedes that the calculations rely on "basic data on justice services" published by the MOJ,
Supreme Court, Judicial Academy and High Judicial Council with project support. Although relatively little that
was eventually included among the restructured project activities focused explicitly on the "enabling business
environment" argument originally used in the PAD as the rationale for the project, the ICR (p.64) stated that "The
main indirect benefits are expected to be generated through positive multiplier effects on the economy and an
improved investment environment."



                                                                                                      Page 11 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Justice Sector Insttnl Strengthening (P143274)



The ICR assigned an efficiency rating of substantial, concluding that "Overall, benefits include, but are not
limited to, cost savings for both the judicial system and the public that derive from the transition to online and
paperless operation of courts (including during the pandemic), enforcement of decisions and registration of
rights through private bailiff and notary systems, decreased appeals due to improving the quality of court
decisions, savings from reduced caseload and associated cost, gains from improved forensic services, etc."

However, efficiency in this operation was compromised especially during the first 4 years of implementation: the
project design was overly-ambitious and over-allocated funding to the multiple activities envisaged; there
were significant delays in implementation that occurred during the first 3-4 years of the project, during which
time the only funds disbursed were to pay for the Implementation Support Group (ISG) contractor - wasted time
and financial resources with little to show for it (i.e. no value for money). The decision to outsource the project
management (ISG) did not represent least-cost achievement of objectives and this situation was only remedied
when the UNDP was sub-contracted as a workaround to help with the implementation of four specific activities
at a total cost of USD2.2 million while still retaining the services of the ISG as the contract could not be
cancelled without parliamentary approval.

The project’s reduced scope and expenditure may have represented good value and implied a level of efficiency
(compared with if the scope had been narrowed without any commensurate reduction in expenditure) but some
of the benefits mentioned are not convincing as they would be difficult to substantiate. For example, the ICR
argues that "...the average number of days for disposal (from filing to final decision) of civil (including tax and
family) cases were reduced from a baseline of 420 to 60 days, resulting in significant economic benefits. These
improvements expedited processing of backlogs providing opportunity to reinvest amounts tied up in litigation in
labor disputes, disputes arising from marriage and family relations, claims for damages, claims related to
environmental protection, disputes related to intellectual property, etc." (Annex 4, p.65). While reducing the
average number of days taken to dispose of cases before the courts does point to improved speed, this does
not automatically translate into efficiency gains; there could be quicker but less satisfactory decisions or
resolutions of disputes, and more appeals. Moreover, to suggest that the time freed up would enable the
reinvestment of savings in the full range of cases on the courts' docket is questionable in the absence of
a breakdown/analysis of all matters pending before the courts.

Another example would be the development of skills and training of judges and judicial staff under the project.
The project supported knowledge and skills gap analysis of judges, judge trainees and justice staff for the
purpose of improving quality of decisions and court performance. A large number of justice officials (7,718)
benefited from trainings, almost half of whom were women. Although it is well-acknowledged that better training
and knowledge can improve productivity and performance, it is yet to be demonstrated that the trainings
supported under this operation were of the type and intensity that would produce the benefits attributed to them.

Because of these factors, IEG rates efficiency as Modest.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:


                                                                                                       Page 12 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Justice Sector Insttnl Strengthening (P143274)




                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      0
Appraisal                                                   0
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      0
ICR Estimate                                               3.72
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

It is difficult to determine the overall outcome of a project if the objectives were not well-defined at the outset.
The PDO should say what changes in behaviors, attitudes, skills or access are being engendered by the
intervention. This particular PDO could have been more specific in targeting particular agencies, laws and public
services. The word 'selected' is indeterminate: it casts the net too wide and makes it possible to include any
agencies, laws or public services. It also makes it almost impossible to fault the outcome because "any outcome
is a good outcome." Focusing on particular agencies (eg. the MOJ or the Supreme Court) or functions (eg. land
registration) would have been far better. In fact, it is what was done from 2018 to 2021, but without amending
the PDO.

The first 3-4 years of implementation saw very little - if any - progress towards the achievement of the outcome.
The various Level 2 restructurings carried out between 2018 and 2021 effectively downsized the project by
eliminating redundant activities while introducing new but less ambitious ones, adjusting the Results Framework
by introducing less demanding RIs, extending the closing date to enable the newly-introduced activities to be
implemented, and cancelling almost two-thirds of the loan amount. For a project that is restructured to this
extent without changing the PDO, there should be some explanation of how the same PDO could be achieved
with more time and less resources. By repeatedly lowering the bar and adjusting the indicators, the project
became a responsive, "just-in-time" technical assistance project with shortcomings in the overall outcome.

With a Substantial rating on Relevance, a Modest rating for Efficacy, and a Modest rating on Efficiency, the
recommended overall Outcome rating is, therefore, Moderately Unsatisfactory.




a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Unsatisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The original project design was unnecessarily broad and complex. The scaled down project was adjusted to
support the Borrower in achieving some modest results. While some of these results - such as
revised/updated legislation, the administrative courts and the use of private bailiffs and notaries, as well as


                                                                                                     Page 13 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Justice Sector Insttnl Strengthening (P143274)



improvements in operational efficiency caused by the introduction or increased use of ICT (which were not
procured under the project and therefore cannot be attributed to the project) - were in place at the time the
project closed, they are at best intermediate outcomes and it would be premature to describe them as
"institutionalized." Whether they become institutionalized or not will depend on a number of factors, notably
continued political support over the long term and their full embrace and ownership by key stakeholders and
citizens.

The ICR states that other achievements such as participatory approaches to law-making and new practices
for the selection and appointment of judges will require continued political support and commitment. It is one
thing to introduce these reforms, quite another for them to be allowed to work. Given the historical, cultural
and socio-political context of Kazakhstan, continued political support should not be taken for granted.
Continuing commitment and support for justice sector reforms, including adequate allocations from the
national budget to meet recurrent and additional capital expenditures, are also required to ensure
maintenance and upgrades to installed systems, continuous enhancements as technology evolves, as well
as continued investment in training and capacity building to upgrade skills and improve performance.

Much of the original justification for the project was about increasing confidence in the judiciary and the
courts among citizens and businesses alike. Adoption and ownership of justice sector reforms by those the
system is meant to serve - the citizens of Kazakhstan and investors/businesses, both domestic and foreign -
will be the ultimate test of whether the results achieved by this operation will be sustained. The failure to
properly engage stakeholders at the design stage (Stakeholder Risk rated High) could signal a lack of
ownership and commitment to the reforms initiated during the project.

Based on these considerations, Stakeholder, Governance and Capacity risks remain high and the overall risk
to development outcome is Significant.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  Although the ICR does a good job of describing the shortcomings in the preparation stage of the project,
  the assessment of quality-at-entry must take account of the operational, sector and country context in
  weighing the relative importance of each of the criteria mentioned below as they affect outcomes.

  Strategic relevance and approach: Although the project had strategic relevance in the context of
  Kazakhstan's long-term vision embodied in its overall development strategy, the 2050 Strategy, the
  associated justice sector roadmap and the Bank's CPS at the time, the approach taken was too broad
  and should have focused on one or a few of the multiple objectives presented in Figure 1 (p.36) of the
  PAD. Because the PDO lacked specificity, the project design was overly-ambitious, attempting to
  address multiple aspects of the issue of rule of law and reform of the justice sector.

  Technical, financial and economic aspects: The original PAD provided no technical, financial or
  economic analysis of the project or its potential benefits. Indeed, as pointed out above, the ICR team
  attempted to carry out an ex-post cost-benefit analysis and to calculate the economic rate of return.
  Benefits were, in a sense, assumed based on unproven assertions ("The project will generate both
  economic and financial benefits ... International experience in reforming the justice sector points to

                                                                                                   Page 14 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Justice Sector Insttnl Strengthening (P143274)



  several ways in which the authorities can claim direct benefits from the project: direct benefits for
  Government from improved court efficiency include reduced time for case disposal, direct benefits for
  businesses and households from reduced costs of litigation, speedier resolution of disputes, reduced
  costs of doing business and reduced administrative corruption; and improved enforcement and
  registration leading to reduced regulatory and administrative burdens on businesses and individuals.
  While not all of these benefits are readily quantifiable, efficient enforcement of court decisions alone, for
  example, could generate significant economic and financial benefits." p.13).

  Poverty, gender and social development aspects: There were no social safeguards issues but the
  PAD mentioned that the MOJ was to launch a Poverty and Social Impact Analysis (PSIA) to inform the
  design of sector reforms to improve targeting of benefits (e.g. legal aid) to the socially and economically
  vulnerable. No information has been provided on whether this PSIA was ever done and, if so, how it was
  used to improve targeting, especially in light of the dilution of the sub-objective (reflected in the indicator)
  from improving access to building awareness. The PAD also mentioned "there is a special focus on
  gender and access to project benefits for women" although there was relatively little other than training
  that focused on gender.

  Implementation arrangements: Although the PAD clearly states that the MOJ will be the Implementing
  Agency, with a designated "structural unit" as the Project Implementation Unit, it also says that MOJ will
  contract a firm (the ISG) to assist with the implementation and management of the project.
  This arrangement was expected to facilitate skills transfer between the MOJ PIU and the ISG consultants
  but should immediately have raised a red flag. In addition, while it is true that the justice sector spans the
  judicial, executive and legislative branches of government, by designating the MOJ as the Implementing
  Agency it put the Supreme Court and Chief Justice in a subordinate position to the MOJ, an executive
  arm of the state. This had an impact on project implementation as Chief Justices are not accountable to
  Ministers of Justice and should not be expected to approach the MOJ with project-related requests.

  Risk assessment: The project was originally designed as a multi-agency project and, therefore, overall
  implementation risk was correctly rated High given the weak capacity of the MOJ, the Supreme Court and
  other arms of the government, as well as the political economy issues affecting Kazakhstan. The
  accuracy of this assessment was substantiated during implementation.

  Bank inputs and processes: This was the Bank's first foray into the justice sector of Kazakhstan, and
  it took approximately 29 months between the initial AIS (in October 2012) and Board approval (in March
  2014). There was ample time in which to do more thorough preparation. However, there is no evidence
  that adequate diagnostic and analytical work, needs/capacity assessments or the type of stakeholder
  consultations usually associated with the development/design of a Bank operation in a new environment
  were ever carried out. The fact that there were many changes to the planned activities in the original
  design (e.g. legislation to be drafted, procurement of ICT equipment, etc.) was indicative of either
  inadequate analysis and consultation, or the result of the 3-4 years of inactivity, or both.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision

                                                                                                        Page 15 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Justice Sector Insttnl Strengthening (P143274)



 Despite there being 7 ISRs on the project between June 2014 and September 2017, Bank supervision
 between approval and the first restructuring in May 2018 appears to have been minimal to non-existent.
 Implementation certainly picked up after the May 2018 restructuring. Consideration should have been given
 to changing the PDO at the time of that first restructuring to make it more specific, targeting individual
 agencies/organizations such as the MOJ, Supreme Court and even the High Judicial Council, and clarifying
 the specific changes being sought through the intervention. There is no reason why the extension of the
 closing date could not have been done at the same time (the extension was done within 4 months after the
 first restructuring). The fact that as many as 4 restructurings were approved within a relatively short
 timeframe, on two occasions canceling large portions of the loan, extending the closing date twice, making
 changes to the activities and corresponding adjustments to the indicators and the Results Framework,
 gives the impression of an almost reactive, haphazard approach to supervision. As mentioned earlier,
 a project that is restructured to this extent without changing the PDO should, ideally, have an explanation
 of how the same PDO could be achieved with more time and less resources. The approach taken
 converted the project into a type of "responsive" fund, adapting to changes in the Borrower's needs and
 priorities. It may have "salvaged" the project and kept it going but it became a collection of activities with
 modest goals not necessarily underpinned by a coherent and strategic approach to addressing a set of
 binding development constraints.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The PAD included a Results Framework with descriptions/explanations of the outcome and intermediate
 indicators, as well as the data sources. However, the initial project design did not contain a detailed M&E
 plan for tracking indicators. Responsibility for M&E was located with both the PIU in the MOJ and in the
 ISG. In fact, MOJ was given overall responsibility for M&E supported by the ISG. MOJ was "to implement
 robust M&E arrangements to collect and report on project results;" elsewhere, their role was described as
 "to consolidate results information provided by the participating agencies." Meanwhile, progress reports
 were to be prepared by the ISG and approved by MOJ. This was, at best, a confusing arrangement and
 ideally there should be a single executing agency with responsibility for all aspects of project management,
 including the M&E. The PAD also suggested that "Results monitoring and reporting, as well as project
 management, will be aligned as much as possible with existing Government structures and processes for
 inter-agency coordination and cooperation ...."

 The May 2018 and other restructurings saw a shift from outcome to output-level indicators, partly due to
 data collection constraints arising from the ambitious nature of the higher-level indicators.




                                                                                                   Page 16 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Justice Sector Insttnl Strengthening (P143274)



b. M&E Implementation
  As indicated above, some of the original indicators were dropped during restructuring because it proved
  difficult to collect the data and measure progress. For example, one of the original PDO indicators on the
  Percent of Private sector survey respondents satisfied with the implementation of the new Commercial
  Code, the new Law on Self-Regulatory Organizations and the Administrative Offences Code was
  dropped because the laws were no longer in force and no private sector surveys were ever done.

  The ICR describes the quality of reporting as "adequate" as semi-annual reports were received after the
  May 2018 restructuring. It does not appear that there was regular reporting by the ISG or MOJ during the
  first 4 years of implementation.



c. M&E Utilization
  It is not clear how effectively the M&E was utilized by the Borrower to recalibrate activities or make
  course corrections during implementation. The shift to output indicators involved, in some cases, simple
  YES/NO choices, indicating whether a result was achieved or not. This did not require a high level of
  sophistication in M&E utilization.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   There were no Environmental or Social safeguards issues.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   There were no fiduciary issues reported.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   No intended impacts were reported.



d. Other
   N/A



                                                                                                  Page 17 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Justice Sector Insttnl Strengthening (P143274)




11. Ratings
                                                                                    Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                     IEG
                                                                                    Disagreements/Comment
                                                                                    Although the ambition of the
                                                                                    project was scalled back, the
                                                                                    objectives remained the same.
                                                                                    In light of the lengthy period of
                                                                                    inactivity during the first 4 years
                                                                                    of the project, the scaling down
                                                                                    of the components and activities,
                                 Moderately             Moderately                  the watering down of indicators
Outcome
                                 Satisfactory           Unsatisfactory              from outcome to output (Yes/No)
                                                                                    measures, and the significant
                                                                                    cancellations of the loan amount
                                                                                    - including one cancellation
                                                                                    during the closing month of the
                                                                                    project - it is difficult to see how
                                                                                    the project could have achieved
                                                                                    its intended outcomes.
                                 Moderately             Moderately
Bank Performance
                                 Unsatisfactory         Unsatisfactory
Quality of M&E                   Modest                 Modest

Quality of ICR                   ---                    Substantial


12. Lessons

Lessons from the ICR:

1. Effective oversight and supervision by the Borrower (Government) are important, even if day-to-
day project management is outsourced to an external partner. The decision to contract out the
project implementation to a private firm was intended to address capacity gaps and insulate the
procurement process from potential corruption. However, it appears that the contractor lacked the
experience and capacity to implement the project, resulting in it becoming a non-performing project
during the first 3-4 years of implementation. The downside of engaging a private sector contractor
was also that no project management capacity was built up in the responsible government agencies
or units for possible future interventions (notwithstanding the PAD's claim that it would facilitate skills
transfer). Later, the introduction of UNDP as a service provider had the same effect. If the Borrower
had a more direct role in project management - whether by assigning government officials to a
dedicated PIU as originally envisaged or through embedding the responsibility for project
management/ implementation to a specific government agency - implementation progress could
have been much smoother and faster, and some residual capacity might have been left in the
different branches of government.



                                                                                                       Page 18 of 20
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Justice Sector Insttnl Strengthening (P143274)



2. Bank support to the justice sector requires sufficient diagnostic and analytical work, including
political economy and/or stakeholder analysis to identify potential winners and losers, and to design
a path forward to success. This is particularly important when the Bank makes an initial investment
in the sector. This type of analysis could have helped the team to gain a deeper understanding of
the issues affecting the justice sector and, in particular, the sensitivities of different stakeholders,
and may have resulted in a better, less ambitious but more realistic project design.

3. Judicial independence is a means to ensuring impartiality of decisions. Organizational
independence of the judiciary does not, in itself, guarantee impartiality, and there are examples of
well-functioning judicial systems where the MOJ acts as the court administrator. When the judiciary
does not have the capacity to implement development projects and available alternatives are
considered – including the executive branch – the arrangements need to be exhaustively discussed
and agreed upon between the parties.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

Despite the shortcomings in both the design and implementation of the project, the ICR team did a
commendable job in marshalling whatever evidence was available to prepare a reasonably good quality ICR.
The ex-post attempt at a cost benefit analysis, calculating the IRR and net present value, as well as developing
a Theory of Change, were all noteworthy aspects of the ICR for which the team must be congratulated.

While the ICR’s ratings are reasonable, it could have provided more evidence to explain the project's relatively
modest achievements in the face of four restructurings, two extensions of the closing date, and two
cancellations of significant portions of the loan amount.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                     Page 19 of 20
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
Justice Sector Insttnl Strengthening (P143274)




                                                                              Page 20 of 20
