     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     HT Relaunching Agriculture: RESEPAG II (P126744)



                                                                                Report Number: ICRR0023334

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P126744                                   HT Relaunching Agriculture: RESEPAG II

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Haiti                                     Agriculture and Food


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-D2100,IDA-H7410,TF-11396              30-Nov-2016                                         78,651,574.10

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 01-Dec-2011                               31-Mar-2022

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            40,000,000.00                                  10,000,000.00

 Revised Commitment                             83,998,848.37                                   8,998,848.37

 Actual                                         78,651,574.10                                   8,998,848.37




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Ranga Rajan                Christopher David            Avjeet Singh                   IEGSD (Unit 4)
 Krishnamani                Nelson




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objectives (PDOs) as stated in the Financing Agreement (Schedule 1, page 4) and
   in the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, page 5):

   (a) strengthen the Ministry of Agriculture, Natural Resources and Rural Development's (MARNDR) capacity to
   define and implement the National Agriculture Extension Strategy;



                                                                                                 Page 1 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     HT Relaunching Agriculture: RESEPAG II (P126744)



   (b) to increase access of small farmers to agriculture extension services and training on animal and plant
   health in priority regions; and

   (c) to provide financial assistance in the case of an agriculture sector emergency.

   The PDOs were revised with the Level 1 restructuring on July 2, 2015 (discussed below). The revised PDOs
   as stated in the Program Document:

   (a) reinforce the capacity of MARNDR to provide or facilitate access to services in the agricultural sector;

   (b) increase market access to small producers and food security in selected areas;

   (c) improve livelihood in areas affected by Hurricane Matthew; and

   (d) enable the recipient to respond properly and effectively to an eligible emergency.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  02-Jul-2015

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   There were three original components (PAD, pages 7 - 9).

   1. Strengthening the role of MARNDR in providing agricultural extension services. The estimated cost
   at appraisal was US$10.00 million. With Additional Financing (AF), the estimate was US$11.00 million. The
   actual cost was US$9.00 million. This component aimed to strengthen MARNDR's capacity to implement
   the National Agriculture Extension Strategy (PDVA) through institutional and organizational reforms at the
   national, departmental and local levels. The activities in this component included: (i) planning and
   coordination of agricultural extension and training services; (ii) developing sector information to increase the
   availability and quality of price and agro-climatic data; and (iii) strengthening sanitary and phytosanitary
   (SPS) capacity.

   This component was renamed "Agricultural Support Services" through the project restructuring in 2015
   (discussed below). The scope of this component was expanded to significantly shift emphasis from
   agricultural extension services to broader agricultural support services.

   2. Providing support for local agricultural extension and innovation services. The estimated cost at
   appraisal was US$36.00 million. The estimate with AF was US$54.03 million. The actual cost was

                                                                                                     Page 2 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    HT Relaunching Agriculture: RESEPAG II (P126744)



  US$56.96 million. This component planned to provide agricultural support services through: (i) establishing
  a Market Support Facility (MSF) to be managed by MARNDR, in coordination with Tables de Concertation
  Agricole Departmentale (refers to Department-Level Roundtables for Consultations on Agriculture, chaired
  by MARNDR and comprising non-governmental organizations (NGOs), Farmer Organizations and public
  and private organizations in Haiti's ten departments), to co-finance on a matching-grant basis productive
  activities, such as adopting priority technologies and applied research, strengthening producer
  organizations and improving post-harvest and agribusiness technology.

  This component was renamed "Direct Support to Producers and Associations" through the project
  restructuring in June 2015. The scope of this component was expanded with sub-components added to the
  MSF support for (i) expanding the voucher-based Farmer Subsidy Scheme (FSS) for subsidizing farmers
  adopting improved agricultural technologies. This component was expanded with the AF for providing
  subsidies to agroforestry activities for climate resilience. With AF, two sub-components were added:
  subsidies for animal husbandry, irrigation rehabilitation and micro-catchment protection.

  3. Agricultural Risk and Emergency Response Contingent Reserve. The estimated cost at appraisal
  was US$1.00 million. The actual cost was US$0.37 million. This component planned to provide support for
  sector emergencies through: (i) emergency recovery subprojects and (ii) subsidy scheme for eligible
  farmers. The ICR (page 45) noted that the relatively low actual cost for this component was that although
  the emergency component was triggered three times (in 2012, 2016 and 2021), a large share of the costs of
  interventions were registered under component two activities. This component was renamed "Emergency
  Response Contingency" in the 2019 Level 2 restructuring.

  4. Project Administration and Coordination. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$3.00 million. The
  estimate with AF was US$13.62 million. The actual cost was US$14.23 million. This component planned to
  support MARNDR in its day-to-day management. This component was renamed "Institutional
  Strengthening, Monitoring and Evaluation, Project Management and Studies", with the 2019
  restructuring.

  A new component was added with the AF for the project.

  5. Improve livelihoods in areas affected by Hurricane Mathew. No estimates of project cost or actual
  project cost. This component aimed to help the households affected by Hurricane Mathew receive support
  from the Crisis Response Window.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project cost. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$50.00 million. With AF, the estimate was US$79.40
  million. The actual cost was US$80.56 million. The difference between the estimated cost and actual cost
  was mainly due to exchange rate changes during implementation.

  Financing. The project was financed by an IDA Grant of US$40.00 million. There was co-financing of
  US$10.00 million from the Global Agriculture and Food Security Program (GAFSP). AF of US$35.00 was
  approved on June 14, 2017. With this, the total Bank financing for the project increased to US$85.00
  million. The ICR (page 5) notes that although the AF was for US$35.00 million, in effect it increased




                                                                                                 Page 3 of 18
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  HT Relaunching Agriculture: RESEPAG II (P126744)



financing only by US$29.40 million due to exchange rate changes between the US$ and SDR between
2011 - 2017. The final amount disbursed was US$80.56 million. About US$2.40 million was undisbursed.

Recipient contribution. Recipient contribution was not planned at appraisal. The ICR (page 45) noted that
there was counterpart funding of US$3.70 million under the MSF (component two activity).

Dates. The project was approved on December 1, 2011, became effective on April 3, 2012, and was
scheduled to close on November 30, 2016. However, the project closed on March 31, 2022.

Other changes. There was one Level 1 restructuring and two Level 2 restructurings. AF was approved for
the project. The changes made during the project lifetime are listed sequentially as follows:

The main changes made through the Level 1 restructuring on July 2, 2015 are: (Restructuring Paper):

      The results framework was revised and as discussed above, activities in components one and two
         were expanded substantially.
        The PDO was broadened to emphasize that project aimed to improve the farmers access to final
         markets rather than the narrower goal of improving extension services.
        Key performance indicators were introduced that were more closely linked to the revised activities
         and the number of PDO indicators were increased from three to five.
        The activity associated with hydro-meterorology, as this activity was financed by a Canadian-funded
         operation. As the information systems of MARNDR had limited capacity for developing agricultural
         vocational schools, the targets for this indicator was reduced from three to one. Focus on SPS
         measures was expanded, as this was a priority for the country.
        The closing date was extended by 19 months to June 30, 2018 for completing the activities that
         were subject to delays in the initial years.

AF was approved on June 14, 2017 in response to the damage and losses caused by Hurricane Mathew in
October 2016. The main changes made through the AF are as follows:

      Two new subcomponents were expanded to emphasize longer-term climate resilience (via the agro-
         forestry and other technologies supported by the Farmer Subsidy Scheme (FSS).
      A sub-component activity on irrigation rehabilitation was added. With this activity, safeguards on
       Involuntary Resettlement was triggered.
      The closing date was extended to December 31, 2019.

The following changes were made with the first level 2 restructuring on June 2, 2019.

      The closing date was extended by two years to December 31, 2021 completing the irrigation
       rehabilitation works that were delayed.
      Measurement of three PDO indicators was adjusted to better capture the outcomes.

The following changes were made through the second level 2 restructuring on December 21, 2021.

      The closing date was extended by three more months to March 31, 2022 for completing the
         remaining ongoing activities.


                                                                                                Page 4 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     HT Relaunching Agriculture: RESEPAG II (P126744)



   Split rating. The PDO was modified even before AF was approved to reflect the increase in project scope
   and ambition. With AF the scope was expanded further. While the original project was confined to
   interventions in the Nord/Nord-East and Sud departments, with AF interventions the geographical reach of
   the project was expanded to the Centre and Grand Anse departments. Given the increase in level of
   ambition, this review is not based on a split rating of objectives.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country context. Haiti is one of the poorest countries in the world, with 78% of its population living on less
than US$2 per day. This situation is due to a combination of factors such as history of political instability,
weak institutional capacity of the state and the frequency of natural disasters. As a result, the World Bank
classifies Haiti as a fragile state, due to its institutions' weaknesses and their vulnerability to instability,
conflict and violence.

Sector context Agriculture plays a dominant role in Haiti, with 25% of the Gross Domestic Product (GDP)
coming from, and 50% of the population employed in the sector. However, farmers in Haiti lacked access to
technologies to increase production. The vast majority of Haitian farmers did not use improved planting
materials such as pest control. Increasing agricultural production was hence important to the government's
strategy of sustaining growth.

Government strategy. At appraisal, the Government's agricultural strategy was articulated in the National
Agriculture Investment Plan (NAIP) for 2011 - 2016. The NAIP focused on three components;: (i)
developing rural infrastructure; (ii) raising production and productivity of agricultural sub-sectors; and (iii)
providing institutional support to the sector. The PDO was well-aligned with the three key axes of the
Government's 2016- 2021 strategy, adopted shortly before the AF was approved for the project: (i) focus
on agriculture infrastructure, especially for water management; (ii) increasing production along value
chains; and (iii) strengthening agricultural services and institutional capacity.

Bank strategy. The PDOs are highly relevant to the Bank strategy for Haiti. At appraisal, the PDOs were
consistent with the three pillars of the Bank's Interim Strategy Note (ISN) for 2012 - 2013: (i) building
capacity at the sector level to respond to future crises and emergencies; (ii) improving education at the
vocational level in the agriculture sector; and (iii) improving the growth and competitiveness of the sector.

The PDO is well-aligned with the Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for 2015- 2019 which was
extended to 2021 and with the 2018 Performance and Learning Review. The CPF highlighted the need for
inclusive growth (through enhancing income opportunities in the agricultural sector) and resilience (through
strengthening climate resilience) and strengthening governance (through improving capacity for delivering
agricultural support services). The Bank's recent County Diagnostic Update (2022) identified agriculture
and food security as Haiti's priorities.

Bank experience. When the Bank was preparing this project, the Bank had two ongoing projects in the
agricultural sector in Haiti. The first - the Strengthening Agricultural Public Services Project, focused on core
institutional strengthening for formulating agricultural policies. The second, the project for the prevention


                                                                                                       Page 5 of 18
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      HT Relaunching Agriculture: RESEPAG II (P126744)



               and control of Avian Flu focused on health. The Bank had also funded a Community Driven Development
               Project.

               Given the fragile context, this project focused on capacity building at the national and local level for
               agriculture extension services (later expanded to agricultural support services), and strengthening farmer
               groups for increasing agriculture competitiveness through improved technologies. Unlike other Bank-
               financed projects in Haiti, this project had the following features: (i) it was part of a comprehensive sector
               investment plan (NAIP) agreed to by the Government and other Development Partners; (ii) it built upon the
               strengths of existing agriculture extension and services approaches; (iii) it leveraged private sector and
               donor investments in the sector; and (iv) it addressed the pressing need for improving public sector capacity
               for providing basic agriculture public goods and services.

               With the AF for the project approved in June 2017, in the wake of the devastation caused by Hurricane
               Mathew on October 4, 2016, the project scope was expanded significantly to promote animal husbandry
               and more resilient water management infrastructure. The project scope also scaled up subsidies to farmers
               in southern Haiti to relaunch agricultural production following the hurricane.

               Given the fragile context, building institutional capacity in a sector that was important for sustainable growth
               was highly relevant in the country context. The PDO was highly relevant to the Government strategy and
               the Bank strategy. Therefore, the relevance of the PDO is rated as High.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Reinforce the capacity of MARNDR to provide or facilitate access to services in the agricultural sector.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of change. Given the fragile context, Haiti lacked the capacity to formulate and implement
                             agricultural policies. Therefore, the project interventions sought to strengthen the capacities at the central,
                             departmental and municipal levels to deliver agricultural extension services to small farmers. The links
                             between activities, outputs and intended outcomes were logical. Activities such as strengthening MARNDR's
                             capacity for planning and coordinating, providing information systems with price and climatic data and
                             strengthening SPS capacity, were likely to aid in strengthening the capacities at the central, departmental and
                             municipal levels to provide agricultural extension services for farmers. With the project restructuring, scope
                             was expanded (beyond a focus on agricultural extension), to access agricultural services and markets. The
                             expected outcomes were likely to aid in the long-term development outcomes of increasing agricultural
                             production and competitiveness. The intended outcomes are predicated on the assumptions that service and


                                                                                                                               Page 6 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   HT Relaunching Agriculture: RESEPAG II (P126744)



input providers are available in Haiti to support the Government's delivery of services to farmers and that
achievement of development outcomes is not undermined by natural disasters.

Outputs (ICR. pages 36 - 37).

These activities were completed as targeted.

      The agricultural strategy and master plan was adopted, disseminated and publicly disclosed on
         MARNDR's website.
        115 farmer field schools were established for disseminating best practices. Farmers and municipal
         agricultural staff were trained in these schools.
        220 facilitators were trained in agriculture extension techniques. Two MARNDR staff were trained for
         two weeks at the Agricultural Research Center for International Development (CIRAD) in France on
         raising of natural predators and integrated control.
        3,368 private and public staff were trained in surveillance and vaccination.
        1,208,015 animals were vaccinated against rabies. 2,430,000 vaccinations were administered against
         anthrax (primarily for bovines).
        The sanitary protection unit's (UPS) fully equipped central building was built and the unit's quarantine
         policy was developed.
        14,560 client days of training related to SPS measures were provided to epidemiological volunteers
         and private veterinarians, far exceeding the target of 6,600 client days.
        317,364 cattle were identified by the project and included in the information system, far exceeding the
         target of 250,000.
        The National Food Security Commission (CNSA) collected market price information in all four
         departments as targeted. This information was made available by SMS and publications to the
         Departmental Agricultural Directorates (DDAs) and the three agriculture Committee offices (BACs).
        30 farmers were trained in collecting specimens, and 578 were trained in mealybugs control in the
         Northeast. 500 farmers were using fruit fly traps, with 40,000 traps purchased under the project.

The following activities were not completed as targeted.

      Some SPS activities that could not be completed by December 2019 for security reasons were
         dropped.
      The activity associated with the upgrading of the Agricultural Middle School was not completed, due to
         security issues at the site.

Outcomes.

The outputs described above were expected to reinforce the capacity of MARNDR to facilitate access to
services. This outcome was measured by the percentage of key elements of the National Agricultural
Extension Strategy (PDVA) implemented to strengthen MARNDR's institutional capacity.

      81.25% of the key elements of the PDVA were implemented to strengthen MARNDR's institutional
         capacity, exceeding the revised target of 80%. The elements ranged from developing key strategies
         such as the quarantine strategy, the strategy to fight the mealybug infestation, enhancing capacity
         through training of facilitators in extension techniques, training of private and public officials in animal

                                                                                                        Page 7 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   HT Relaunching Agriculture: RESEPAG II (P126744)



         health surveillance and vaccination to farm level outcomes such as the application of fruit fly traps by
         farmers and protecting animals against rabies and anthrax.

Given that the outcomes were exceeded, efficacy of this PDO is rated as substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Increase market access to small producers and food security in selected areas;

Rationale
Theory of change. As the small farmers in Haiti lacked the technical know-how and resources for adopting
improved technologies to increase agricultural production, the project interventions sought to provide support
for increasing access to improved agricultural technologies. The causal links between activities, outputs and
intended outcomes were logical. Activities such as establishing a Market Support Facility (MSF) to promote
adoption of improved technology and undertake applied research, strengthen producer organizations and
improve post-harvest and agri-business technology, were likely to aid in the intended outcomes of
strengthening the farmer organizations to apply new technology for upgrading production and post-harvest
practices. The intended outcomes are likely to be reinforced by the activities added with the AF for the project
(such as voucher-based farmer subsidy scheme, subsidies for agroforestry to enhance climate resilience
and irrigation rehabilitation). These activities were likely to contribute to the long-term development outcomes
of increasing agricultural production and reducing food insecurity in the population. The theory of change
assumes that small farmers have adequate absorptive capacity to adopt new technologies.

Outputs (ICR, pages 37 - 38).

      The project provided 21,739 farmers with incentives under the Farmer Subsidy Scheme (FSS). 44% of
         the beneficiaries were women.
      132 Rural Producer Organizations received direct support for implementing investment sub-projects.
         7,452 households benefitted from these sub-projects. 80% of the producer organizations had an
         operational investment at least twelve months after its completion, exceeding the target of 75%.
        78% of producers adopted improved agricultural technologies promoted by the project, exceeding the
         target of 70%.
        7,452 people (85% women) benefitted from the technical packages for goats and poultry in the South
         and Grand'Anse Departments. Additional support was provided to 280 beekeepers.
        3,800 farmers benefitted from irrigation rehabilitation in four irrigated perimeters (Dory, Dubreuil, Les
         Anglais and Menon.
        6,013 hectares of land were converted to agroforestry productions under the project, far exceeding the
         target of 2,500 hectares.
        37,552 client days of extension services were provided to producers, members of producer
         organizations, exceeding the target of 21,500. 90.62% of the participants expressed satisfaction with


                                                                                                     Page 8 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   HT Relaunching Agriculture: RESEPAG II (P126744)



       the farmer field schools, exceeding the target of 75%. 82.8% of the sub-projects were sensitive to
       gender, environment and nutrition, exceeding the target of 60%.
      2,244 hectares were provided with improved irrigation services, exceeding the target of 2,000
       hectares.
      224,905 agricultural producers were registered in the MARNDR registry, exceeding the target of
       150,000.

Outcomes.

The outputs described above were expected to have four outcomes: (i) increase in the value of production
generated by the farmer subsidy scheme; (ii) increase in sales of the supported producer organizations; (iii)
increase in the number of direct project beneficiaries; and (iv) increase in the number of women beneficiaries.

      Value of production generated by the farmer subsidy scheme increased to US$32.50 million,
       exceeding the target of US$24.00 million.
      The sales of the supported producer organizations increased by 172%, far exceeding the target of
       50%.
      78, 242 people directly benefitted from the project activities, exceeding the original and revised targets
       of 50,000 and 60,000 respectively. 47.03 % of the beneficiaries were women, exceeding the original
       and revised targets of 20% and 40% respectively.

Given that the outcomes were either realized or exceeded, efficacy of this PDO is rated as substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
To improve livelihoods in areas affected by Hurricane Matthew.

Rationale
Theory of change. With the AF for the project, this activity was added in the wake of the Hurricane Mathew.
This activity aimed to help households receive support from the Crisis Response Window and sought to build
on the existing distribution platforms that had been established through the existing project.

Outputs. (ICR, page 38)

The outputs described above under the previous PDO were relevant to this objective. The activities were
aligned and consistent with the intended impact of the first two objectives.

Outcomes.

      27,958 households affected by Hurricane Matthew received support from the Crisis Response
       Window, slightly short of the target of 28,000.

                                                                                                   Page 9 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   HT Relaunching Agriculture: RESEPAG II (P126744)




      50, 888 households in the affected Southern region received support, exceeding the target of 50,000.

Efficacy of this objective is rated as substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 4
Objective
To enable the Recipient to respond properly and effectively to an eligible emergency.

Rationale
Theory of change. As the farmers faced high risks of adverse natural disasters and animal and plant health
emergencies, the project interventions sought to provide support for emergency assistance when such
disasters occur. The causal links between activities, outputs and intended outcomes were logical. Activities
such as reallocating funds to support reconstruction, implementing emergency recovery and rehabilitation
sub-projects and farmer subsidy scheme for eligible farmers were likely to ensure that farm households are
able to recover quickly in the wake of natural disasters.

Outputs (ICR, page 39).

In response to the August 14, 2021 earthquake and Tropical Storm Grace, which struck three days later, the
Bank provided its no objection on September 18, 2021, triggering the almost immediate release (within two
days) of US$2.24 million to respond to the emergency. The primary outputs supported were the repair and
dredging of irrigation channels in the irrigated perimeters supported under the project and repairs to
infrastructure and equipment of Rural Producers Organizations (RPOs) supported with the Market Support
Facility (MSF).

Outcomes.

This indicator measured the time taken by the Bank to disburse funds requested by the Government in the
wake of a natural disaster.

      The time taken by the Bank to disburse funds in the wake of the natural disasters described
       above was less than a week, as compared to the target of four weeks.
      The ICR (page 39) notes that the emergency component was also triggered following the 2012 pest
       infestation and the 2016 Hurricane Mathew, but since this indicator was only introduced with the 2017
       AF, the emergency outputs and activities supported prior to 2017 (such as the provision of seeds,
       fertilizers and plowing services to about 3,060 producers after the hurricane, in addition to basic
       repairs of irrigation systems and cash for work programs) were not disbursed within a week. Given the
       late addition of relevant indicators and the limited information on the importance of various policy
       measures, the efficacy of this indicator is Substantial.




                                                                                               Page 10 of 18
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                HT Relaunching Agriculture: RESEPAG II (P126744)




                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Given that the intended outcomes were either realized or exceeded for the most part, overall efficacy is rated
                            as Substantial.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   Economic analysis. A cost-benefit analysis was conducted for component two activities. This component
   accounted for 72% of the appraisal estimate and 70% of the actual cost. The quantifiable benefits were
   assumed to come from: (i) incremental agricultural production due to the farmer subsidy scheme; (ii) incremental
   cash flows from agricultural diversification, processing and value chain enhancement sub-projects; and iii)
   incremental animal production improvements due to the livestock recapitalization scheme. The Net Present
   Value (NPV) at project closure was US$25.00 million and the ex-post Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR)
   was 15%. The ex-ante EIRR was over 40%. The difference between the ex-post and ex-ante EIRR was partly
   due to the overly optimistic assumptions on both the speed and the overall adoption rates of improved
   agricultural technologies. The other benefits that were not factored into the economic analysis included: (i)
   restored production capacity and incomes derived from the emergency support to 5,500 farmers in the south
   who were hit by the August 2021 earthquake, and (ii) benefits from the rehabilitation of 2,244 hectares of small-
   scale irrigation schemes.

   Administrative and Operational issues during implementation. There were no cost overruns. The AF
   provided for the project funded a broader range of expanded activities and provided support for people impacted
   by Hurricane Mathew. Given that institutional capacity had to be built up over time in Haiti's fragile context,
   the project faced delays and disbursements were slow during the first two years. However, capacity was built up
   over time through training both the existing ministerial staff and hiring young consultants on a contractual basis,
   which offered them career opportunities to be hired as staff. This contributed to improved implementation in the
   latter years of the project. The initial delays were exacerbated by a diverse range of adverse external shocks,
   such as two powerful hurricanes, coffee rusk and by an unprecedented infestation of cochineal (white mealybug
   in the project areas in North/ North-East Haiti, political crisis with large demonstrations against fuel shortages, a
   sharp spike in gang violence and the COVID 19 pandemic. These factors partly contributed to the extension of
   the closing date.

   The project demonstrated good value for money, given the challenging operational environment. The original
   projection of 50,000 beneficiaries was reduced to 19,000 at the time of 2017 project restructuring, due to a
   combination of factors including, poor project performance and adverse exchange rate changes. With the AF,

                                                                                                                             Page 11 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      HT Relaunching Agriculture: RESEPAG II (P126744)



the target for the number of beneficiaries was raised to 60,000. By project closure, 78,242 people benefitted
from the project (30% increase relative to the AF target). Although the actual cost of component four activities
(Project Administration and Coordination) at US$14.23 million was 4% higher than the revised estimate with AF,
it still represented reasonable cost given the limited capacity and operational constraints.

In sum, efficiency is rated as substantial, given that most of the outcomes were realized, despite the fragile
conditions in Haiti which continued throughout the implementation period and continues to do so to date.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?              Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                       72.00
 Appraisal                                                   40.00
                                                                                        Not Applicable
                                                                                       70.00
 ICR Estimate                                                15.00
                                                                                        Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of the PDO to the Government strategy and the Bank strategy for Haiti is High. Both efficacy and
efficiency are rated as substantial. This review concludes that there were only minor shortcomings in the
project's achievement of its objectives or in its efficiency. Thus, the project's overall outcome is satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

There is a substantial risk to the sustainability of development outcomes due to the political environment,
macroeconomic conditions, and environmental risks.

Political risk. There is a substantial risk to the sustainability of development outcomes due to
political volatility. The ICR (para 65) notes that political and gang violence continue to hinder the ability of
farmers and local suppliers in the project areas to access inputs and reach final markets in Port-au-Prince,
due to blockages of key roads into and out of the capital (ICR, para 65).


                                                                                                       Page 12 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     HT Relaunching Agriculture: RESEPAG II (P126744)



Macroeconomic risk. There is a substantial risk to the sustainability of development outcomes due to the
macroeconomic challenges facing the country. These include inflation and a devaluation of the Haitian
Gourde, which affects fuel and access to inputs (ICR, para 65).

Exposure to Natural Disasters. There is a substantial risk to the sustainability of the development
outcomes, given that Haiti is one of the most vulnerable countries to natural disasters such as earthquakes,
hurricanes, flooding, and droughts, especially as most agriculture is rainfed.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The Bank prepared this project based on the experiences of the previous Bank-financed Strengthening of
  Public Services Project (RESEPAG 1) and the Community Driven Development Project. Lessons
  incorporated at design included: (i) Given the fragile context, focus on capacity building; (ii) Given that
  experience with donor-financed project units in the sector had shown that they do not ensure timely
  execution of activities, this project aimed at institutional strengthening and capacity building through
  working with existing MARNDR departments, rather than creating a free-standing project unit; (iii)
  designing farmer support mechanisms through working with existing private and civil society sector
  service providers. Unlike the RESEPAG 1 project, this project appropriately included an emergency
  response component, given the devastating consequences of the earthquake of January 2010.

  In addition, the Bank prepared this project in close collaboration with other donors financing
  complementary projects (especially the Inter-American Development Bank (IDB) to avoid duplication of
  project activities. The analytical underpinnings of the project were sound and based on the recent Bank's
  Systematic Country Diagnostic for Haiti.

  The implementation arrangements were appropriate, with the MARNDR responsible for implementing the
  project. MARNDR was already implementing the ongoing RESEPAG 1 project, and hence was familiar
  with the Bank's fiduciary requirements.

  The Bank identified several risks at appraisal including environmental risks and social and political
  instability risks. With mitigation measures, the overall project risk was rated as medium (PAD, para 38
  and 39). The arrangements made at appraisal for safeguards and fiduciary compliance were appropriate
  (discussed in section 10).

  There were minor shortcomings at quality-at-entry. As the ICR (para 61) notes, there were some project
  readiness issues, as key technical consultant resources and certain procedures for M&E were not in
  place at approval. The EIRR calculations at appraisal proved to be overly optimistic.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory



                                                                                                  Page 13 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     HT Relaunching Agriculture: RESEPAG II (P126744)




b. Quality of supervision
 Twenty two Implementation Status and Results Reports (ISRs) were filed over the project lifetime of
 approximately eleven years (implying on average twice a year supervision missions. There were multiple
 field visits by a locally-based Task Team Leader (TTL) with relevant skills (Agricultural Specialist) who was
 associated with the project for almost the entire life of the project. As mobility restrictions due to the political
 violence and COVID-19 impeded movement into and out of Port-Au-Prince, the Bank ensured that the
 coordinating team had multiple internet service providers and technology tools to be able to engage with
 and monitor local implementation (ICR, para 62).

 The supervision team responded flexibly through four project restructurings to the implementation
 challenges and shocks in the external context, as well as changing priorities, for instance, by refocusing on
 SPS issues and expanding support through the Farmer Subsidy Scheme through the first project
 restructuring in 2015 and by the AF in 2017 in response to the damages provoked by Hurricane Matthew,
 which not only provided additional resources to improve livelihoods in the short term, but also a greater
 focus on long-term solutions (via agroforestry and water management systems) to enhance resilience.
 According to the Recipient's Completion Report (ICR, Annex 6), the recommendations of the Bank team
 during the supervision missions helped implement the project and make the necessary adjustments.

 In sum, overall Bank performance is rated as Satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The results framework was clear and the key original outcome indicators (discussed in section four) were
 appropriate for monitoring project performance. The outcomes were attributable to the project activities.

 The M&E system was designed to be housed in MARNDR's Directorate of Monitoring and Evaluation
 (DSE). A full-time DSE manager was responsible for M&E coordination. The design of the indicators and
 the results framework had to be revised to reflect changing priorities under components one and two
 activities. With the AF for the project, a new indicator was added for monitoring the performance of the
 added activity.



b. M&E Implementation
  The data for assessing the outcomes was drawn from the project's M&E system, using the Kobo
  Toolbox. The ICR (page 9) noted that this toolbox is a free and open-source platform for the collection,

                                                                                                         Page 14 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     HT Relaunching Agriculture: RESEPAG II (P126744)



  management and visualization of data used by thousands of organizations worldwide, including
  development actors, education and research organizations and non-governmental organizations (NGOs).

  The ICR (para 53) noted that MARNDR's unit lacked capacity at the start of the project. The absence of
  adequate consultant support and baseline data at approval constrained M&E in the early years. However,
  these issues were rectified during implementation and MARNDR's departments were able to closely
  monitor project outcomes. The ICR also noted that data had been gathered on key performance
  indicators by project closure, despite the extremely fragile and volatile context. However data on
  beneficiary impacts were not collected during implementation and had to be obtained via ex-post surveys.



c. M&E Utilization
  The ICR (para 54) observed that the M&E system was generally sufficient to assess the achievement of
  the objectives. The ICR also notes that the M&E system was used to prepare a new Haiti project. The
  ICR (para 24) noted that the effective use of the Kobo Toolbox was particularly useful for enhancing the
  monitoring of the emergency campaigns and to monitor the progress achieved in all indicators.

  Overall, M&E is rated as substantial, given the minor shortcomings in design and implementation.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as a Category B (partial assessment) under the World Bank Safeguard Policies.
   Four safeguard policies were triggered at appraisal: Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01); Natural
   Habitats (OP/BP 4.04); Forests (OP/BP 4.36); and Pest Management (Op 4.09) (PAD, page 6). In addition
   to these safeguards, the safeguards on Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) were triggered with the AF
   for the project.

   Environmental Assessment, Natural Habitats, Forests and Pest Management. The PAD (para 51)
   noted that the project did not support any activities with large-scale, significant or irreversible adverse
   impacts on the environment. Because exact investments were to be identified during implementation, the
   project updated and expanded the existing Environmental and Social Impact Framework (ESMF) prepared
   for the Bank-financed Strengthening Of Agricultural Public Service (RESEPAG 1) and the Prevention and
   Control of Avian Flu and other Zoonoses (PRECONIA) projects. The ESMF was publicly disclosed at
   appraisal (PAD, para 52).

   The ICR (para 57) observed that compliance with the environmental safeguards was rated moderately
   satisfactory or satisfactory throughout implementation. Environmental and Social Management plans
   (ESMPs) and an Integrated Pest Management Plan (ESMP) were approved as part of the ESMF to ensure




                                                                                                 Page 15 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     HT Relaunching Agriculture: RESEPAG II (P126744)



   compliance with the safeguards on Pest Management. There was compliance with the safeguards on
   environmental assessment, pest management, forests, and natural habitats.

   Involuntary Resettlement The project complied with the social safeguards. A resettlement Policy
   Framework (RPF) was prepared by MARNDR (ICR, para 56), and a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) was
   prepared for the affected eight persons. The affected people were duly compensated.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management. The Bank conducted an assessment of the financial management arrangements
   of MARNDR at appraisal (PAD, para 48). MARNDR had implemented previous Bank-financed projects in
   Haiti and was familiar with Bank procedures. Despite this, the key risk was the weak financial management
   capacity given the fragile context, and that coordination between several stakeholders including the non
   governmental organizations (NGOs) and the farmers was required to implement component two activities.
   Even with mitigation measures, the project risk was rated as substantial (PAD, page 36).

   The ICR (para 58) notes that overall financial management was rated as satisfactory. Although there were
   some delays, the project eventually complied with the legal covenants. There were also delays in
   submitting interim financial reports. There were no reports of ineligible expenditures.

   Procurement Management . The Bank conducted a procurement assessment of MARNDR at appraisal
   (PAD, page 41). MARNDR had experience with implementing Bank-financed projects. However, Haiti's
   overall public procurement system was relatively weak and lacked skilled personnel with knowledge of
   international norms. Despite mitigation measures, procurement risk was rated high at appraisal (PAD,
   page 30).

   The ICR (para 59) noted that procurement management was rated satisfactory by December 2019, more
   than two years before the project closing. However, there were delays in procurement due to capacity
   constraints in the early years. The ICR does not report any case of mis-procurement.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   There were no unintended impacts.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                             Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                      IEG
                                                                             Disagreements/Comment


                                                                                               Page 16 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     HT Relaunching Agriculture: RESEPAG II (P126744)



Outcome                         Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Bank Performance                Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                  Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                  ---                   High


12. Lessons

The ICR draws the following main lessons from the experience of implementing this project, with
some adaptation of language.

1. Building institutional capacity is important in fragile settings and while capacity-building
activities can slow the initial pace of implementation, they can yield significant long-term
benefits. This project sought to build the capacity of the Ministry of Agriculture, Natural Resources
and Rural Development (MARNDR) by placing the responsibility for coordination on the MARNDR,
rather than having a parallel Project Implementation Unit (PIU) and relying on relevant departments
for the technical supervision of project-supported activities in their areas of purview. While this
approach contributed to delays in the initial years, it resulted in significant improvements in how the
Ministry performed its mandate, as lines of responsibility were clear and capacities were reinforced.

2. The use of locally-based operators in delivering services and locally-based project
coordination staff can help in integrating local communities. In this project when restrictions on
mobility due to gang violence and the COVID-19 pandemic impeded close field-level follow-up by
the Central Project Coordination Unit, project implementation was able to continue, due to the
decentralized operators in the project areas and supervision by locally based teams of the Project
Coordination Unit. Such an approach can also help in building capacity in a fragile context.

3. Strengthening community capacity and facilitating civil engagement can help improve
results and reduce social risks. In this project, close collaboration between the Departmental
Agriculture Consultation Table, irrigators associations, rural producers organizations and other local
institutions helped prioritize and define interventions that yielded major dividends in terms of
commitment.

4. Adapting flexibly and responding rapidly to changing circumstances is especially
important in a fragile country context. The implementation of this project was undermined by
large and diverse external shocks (political, macroeconomic, climate-related, animal and plant-
related and by a global pandemic).The project's strong grounding in strategic priorities established
by the Ministry of Agriculture, Natural Resources and Rural Development and its flexibility in
responding to changing priorities and emerging challenges and the Bank's help through project
restructuring proved invaluable for its success.



13. Assessment Recommended?



                                                                                                    Page 17 of 18
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       HT Relaunching Agriculture: RESEPAG II (P126744)



  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is well-written and clear. The theory of change provided in the ICR articulates a clear storyline, from
project activities to outputs to short, medium and long-term outcomes and finally impact. The theory of change
explicitly states the underlying assumptions of the results framework. The ICR candidly discusses the
challenges faced by the project, given the fragile context. The evidence and analysis provided in the text is
adequate for assessing project performance. The ICR draws good lessons from the experience of implementing
this project. The Recipient's completion report in Annex 6 provides useful information.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       High




                                                                                                 Page 18 of 18
