     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     UY Sust.Mgmt Nat Res & Climate Change (P124181)



                                                                                Report Number: ICRR0023196

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P124181                                   UY Sust.Mgmt Nat Res & Climate Change

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Uruguay                                   Agriculture and Food


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-80990,IBRD-87940                     01-Mar-2017                                         63,331,542.74

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 17-Nov-2011                               16-Nov-2021

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           49,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                            64,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Actual                                        63,331,542.74                                              0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Samjhana Thapa             Avjeet Singh                 Christopher David Nelson       IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   As per the Project Appraisal Development (PAD, 2014) and Loan agreement (LA, 2012) the Project
   Development Objective (PDO) of the Uruguay Sustainable Management of Natural Resources and Climate
   Change Project was “to promote farmer adoption of improved environmentally sustainable agricultural
   and livestock practices that are climate smart”.

   The PDO was modified when the project received Additional Financing (AF) in November 2017. As per the
   ICR (paragraph 17), the revision aimed to simplify the PDO by deleting the term ‘environmentally sustainable”

                                                                                                 Page 1 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     UY Sust.Mgmt Nat Res & Climate Change (P124181)



   which was not clear or precise to measure outcomes. The revised PDO was “to support Uruguay’s efforts
   to promote farmer adoption of climate smart agricultural and livestock practices and improved natural
   resource management practices in project areas” (ICR, paragraph 17; AF Project paper Section III).

   This review agrees that the revised PDO was more well-defined, therefore will be used to assess the extent to
   which the revised objective of this project was achieved. The PDO will be divided into two parts, and will be
   referred to in Section 4 as Objectives 1 and 2 as follows:

   Objective 1: To promote farmer adoption of climate-smart agricultural and livestock practices in project areas

   Objective 2: To promote farmer adoption of improved natural resource management practices in project areas



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  30-Nov-2017

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   The project consisted of four components (PAD, ICR):

   Component 1: Establishment of an Agricultural Information and Decision Support System (IDSS;
   SNIA in Spanish, for Sistema Nacional de Informacion Agropecuaria) (Appraisal cost: US$6.20
   million; Actual cost: US$9.54 million. This component aimed to generate and integrate agriculture and
   climate-related information by supporting the following activities: (a) establishment of an online, public
   information system that integrated dispersed information on agriculture, natural resources management,
   and climate information for farmers, service providers, rural insurance, agricultural research and policy
   institutions; (b) improved methodologies and spatial resolutions for seasonal climate forecasts and early
   warning systems; (c) improved real time monitoring of climate, vegetation and other variables relevant to
   agriculture ; (d) simulation and evaluation of impacts of introducing adaptation technologies and policies; (e)
   training for General Directorate of Renewable Natural Resources (RENARE, later DGRN), National Institute
   of Agricultural Research (INIA) and the National Meteorological Directorate (DINAMA), as well as farmers
   and advisors; and (f) advice for improved targeting of Ministry of Livestock, Agriculture and Fisheries
   (MGAP)’s assistance to farmers.

   Once this system would be functional, the Additional Financing aimed to: (a) establish full interoperability by
   integrating and upgrading the system covering livestock traceability, agro-chemical use, soil; (b) expand the
   system dissemination nationwide; (c) link farmers to SNIA and making information on climate, soil,
   agrochemicals and water layers available for risk management and early warning (ICR, paragraph 19).


                                                                                                     Page 2 of 20
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    UY Sust.Mgmt Nat Res & Climate Change (P124181)



  Component 2: On-Farm Investments for Climate-Smart Agriculture and Livestock Management
  (Appraisal cost US$31.10 million; Actual cost: US$38.38 million). This component would finance
  demand-driven subprojects based on investment proposals submitted by individual farmers, groups,
  and producer organizations to an evaluation committee. Beneficiary contribution of a minimum of 20 percent
  was provided by family farmers, POs, and artisanal fishers, while 50 percent was contributed by medium-
  scale producers. The technical assistance and investments would aim to: (a) reduce farm vulnerability to
  extreme climatic events; b) improve farm productivity and sustainability; c) increase the availability of water
  resources for irrigation and livestock consumption; d) promote adoption of an integrated approach to natural
  resources management practices in agriculture and livestock production systems, including improved water
  use efficiency and generation of biodiversity benefits in natural pastures; and v) promote the adoption of
  energy efficiency measures and the generation of cost effective and clean biomass energy in the agriculture
  sector.

  Under AF, the component name would be revised as Territorial Interventions and on-farm investments for
  Climate Smart Agriculture and Livestock Management. Demand-driven investments to reduce pollution from
  dairy production, increased access to water (irrigation) for crops and livestock to strengthen resilience,
  water storage infrastructure to improve water use efficiency and savings, expansion of the pilot on indexed
  agricultural insurance for livestock were added and would be scaled up.

  Component 3: Capacity Building and Training (Appraisal cost; US$9.30 million; Actual cost:
  US$12.4 million). This component aimed to build the capacity of farmers and technical staff of advisory
  service providers on integrated natural resources and water management practices. Staff of RENARE
  would be supported to develop the MGAP’s web-based services related to land and water use,
  conservation and management, social mapping and cartography. Technical assistance would also be
  provided to improve the operational capacity of RENARE on water resources management and grasslands,
  on legal and policy issues, and on dissemination of activities.

  Component 4: Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation (Appraisal cost; US$5.90 million;
  Actual cost: US$9.41 million). This component would finance: (a) PMU operations to coordinate and
  manage the project; (b) project’s Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) system; (c) coordination and supervision
  of Component 3 training activities; and (d) design and implementation of a communications strategy to
  disseminate results and lessons.




e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project costs: The total project cost at approval was US$55 million (ICR, annex 3) which was revised with
  the additional financing and amounted to US$102.2 million (Project Paper – Additional Financing 2017).
  The actual cost at closing was US$69.73 million (ICR Data Sheet and communication with TTL). According
  to the ICR, due to the government’s fiscal austerity measures, US$27 million was cancelled under additional
  financing in May 2021.

  Financing: Per the Financing Agreements (FA, 2012 & FA Additional Financing 2018), IBRD credit (Credit
  No’s: 80990, 87940) of US$91 million was estimated to finance the project. At project closing, Bank
  financing amounted to $63.33 million. Several factors led to the deviation on financing. According to the ICR
  (paragraph 15), the differences were mainly due to: (a) inadequate annual Government allocation to the

                                                                                                    Page 3 of 20
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  UY Sust.Mgmt Nat Res & Climate Change (P124181)



project from 2014 to closing which led to slow implementation and disbursements; (b) economic downturn
that affected exports and other shocks (droughts); (c) reallocation of loan resources under AF; and d)
government’s austerity measures leading to AF cancellation of US$27 million.

Borrower Contribution: Borrower contribution during appraisal was estimated to be US$6 million. At
project closing, it amounted to US$6.4 million.

Dates: The project was approved on November 17, 2011 and became effective on February 24, 2012. The
Mid-term Review (MTR) was conducted on November 10, 2014. The original closing date was March 01,
2017, but with extension and additional financing, it closed on November 16, 2021.

Restructurings and additional financing: The project was implemented over a period of 9.5 years and
went through six restructurings (including AF). Detailed information of the changes is provided in Annex 1C
of the ICR.

First Restructuring: In August 2014, as part of the first restructuring, the project’s Results Framework was
revised to better reflect the project’s outputs and outcomes (ICR, Annex C). Three original PDO indicators
were deleted, and 4 new PDO indicators were added. Out of the 21 Intermediate Results Indicators (IRI),
except 1 IRI that was not changed, others were either deleted or revised, and added. In addition, two
targets were revised, and one additional safeguard policy (OP 4.09 Pest Management) was included to
allow activities related to Integrated Pest Management (IPM).

Second Restructuring: In March 2015, the Loan Agreement was revised to include preparation grants as
eligible expenses that would allow the project to partially finance preparation of subprojects (e.g., use of
consultant services to carry out feasibility studies), particularly those of smaller family farms to incentivize
them to participate in the project (Restructuring Paper 2015).

Third Restructuring: The Budget Act of 2015-2019 had reduced financial resources allocated to MGAP,
following which the Government requested the Bank to extend the project. A restructuring was done in
August 2016 which extended the project’s closing date by 6 months to June 30, 2018.

Fourth Restructuring and additional financing: The project was provided additional financing in
November 2017 which included the following changes: (a) increased investments by adding resources to
each of the four components, along with changes in component names to scale up successful agro-
environmental activities and piloting new CSA technologies and practices; (b) PDO was revised; (c) Results
Framework was modified by adding gender-disaggregated data, replacing indicators that had already been
met or modifying indicator wordings and redefining some indicators; (d) PDO indicators and IRI targets were
scaled up; (e) additional financing of US$42 million was made available, and some unallocated resources
were reallocated, and (f) a six-month extension was made of the closing date of the original loan from June
30, 2018 to December 31, 2018. The closing date of the AF would be November 16, 2021 (AF, paragraph
1, 12)

Fifth Restructuring: This restructuring (December 2018) revised the definition of an IRI which was found to
be difficult to measure. Further, targets for one of the indicators increased due to the revision of the
indicator. Further, because of the challenges faced by the Government on limited fiscal space, WB financing
for one of the expenditures increased from 80% to 100%.

Sixth Restructuring: The final restructuring took place in May 2021 (six months before the closing date)
which reduced the cost across the components by US$27 million due to the loan cancellation of

                                                                                                    Page 4 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     UY Sust.Mgmt Nat Res & Climate Change (P124181)



   undisbursed funds. Targets were reduced for 2 PDO indicators/sub-indicators and 3 Intermediate Results
   Indicators/Sub-indicators.

   Based on the changes introduced at the final restructuring that reduced the targets of the PDO indicators, a
   split evaluation will be conducted in assessing the achievements of the project in Section 4 of this review.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country and Sector Context. When the project was appraised, Uruguay enjoyed steady growth and
quickly recovered from the 2001-02 financial crisis. With increased domestic demand and exports, the
country's real GDP grew at an average of 5.5 percent during 2003-2010. The agriculture sector comprising
crops, livestock and forestry played an important role in this growth by contributing 10 percent to the
country’s GDP and 65 percent of exports (PAD, paragraph 4). Uruguay has a comparative advantage in
livestock production and agricultural products such as soybeans, dairy, and forestry. Yet, these sectors
were vulnerable to external shocks such as prices, foreign demand, and domestic shocks from weather-
related events and diseases. The country's drought in 2009 caused economic losses to the beef industry
totaling US$0.75-1.0 billion and to the agriculture sector, around US$340 million (ICR, paragraph 3). Due to
climate change, the country has been experiencing weather-related events – increased frequencies of
floods and droughts – negatively impacting rural livelihoods and production. Studies showed that
temperatures in Uruguay were expected to increase, along with other weather events such as rainfall,
winds, storms, hailstorms, etc. (PAD, paragraph 7). This has negatively impacted the country’s natural
resources base, with more than 80 percent of arable lands affected by soil erosion (PAD, paragraph 10).

Government Strategy. While the country had enjoyed growth during project appraisal, the country’s
economic situation deteriorated starting in 2014 due to the global economic downtown, particularly with the
decline in dairy prices in the country’s main trading partners – Brazil and Argentina (ICR, paragraph 7). As a
result of low international prices, Uruguay's sector debt continued to increase when the Government
decided to readjust its policies to put greater focus on water use and quality (effluent management), risk
management, livestock GHG emissions, and investment promotion, which were addressed through the
Additional Financing of the project (ICR, paragraph 7). Consequently, Uruguay became a signatory to the
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) and adopted the national response
plan to climate change in November 2017. The project’s investments, which focus on adaptation and
mitigation, are relevant for achieving the targets set for agriculture under the country’s Nationally
Determined Contributions (NDCs). The project is aligned with several other strategies and plans for climate
change mitigation and adaptation of the country (e.g., National Strategy for Bioeconomy to protect
watershed resources, National Plan on Water, Agrointeligente strategy, Sustainable Dairy Pans, Soil Use
Management Plans, etc. (ICR, paragraph 23). Finally, the project investments are also relevant for making
Uruguay competitive in sustainable production and maintaining its reputation as a ‘green producer’
(Uruguay Natural) in the products it exports (CPF 2010).

Bank Strategy. During project appraisal and closing, relevant Bank strategies for the project were:
(a) FY2010-2015 Uruguay Country Partnership Strategy; and (b) FY2016-2020 Uruguay Country
Partnership Framework. Due to the COVID-19 pandemic, the new CPF was still under preparation at
project closing. Therefore, the FY2016-20 was the governing strategic document when the ICR was

                                                                                                    Page 5 of 20
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      UY Sust.Mgmt Nat Res & Climate Change (P124181)



               prepared (ICR, paragraph 22). Under the FY2010-2015 strategy, the project was well aligned with the Pillar
               3 of “Protecting the Environment, Mitigating the Effects of Climate Change, and Strengthening Family
               Agriculture” by supporting investments in climate-smart agriculture, livestock, and water resources
               management to enhance productivity and reduce vulnerability to climate shocks. The focus on sustainable
               management of natural resources and climate change remained important under the Bank’s consequent
               strategy approved in 2016, which contributed towards Pillar 1 on “Building resilience to external and
               domestic shocks.” In particular, the project activities were relevant in meeting one of the strategy’s
               objectives: Increasing sustainability and efficient use of resources.

               Prior Bank experience. The Bank has had experience working in the NRM and livestock sector in the
               country. The design of demand-driven sub-projects financed by this project was based on a pilot experience
               under an earlier project - Integrated Natural Resources and Biodiversity Management Project (Proyecto
               Producción Responsable, PPR). Further, some of the incomplete sub-projects under the earlier project
               were transferred and financed under the new project, which scaled up activities nationwide with a focus on
               the northern and north/central regions (PAD, Annex 2).

               In summary, the project’s objectives aligned well with the Government and World Bank strategies and
               addressed some of the challenges related to sustainable agro-livestock productivity and climate change in
               the country. Some of the project activities were built on prior Bank experience. However, some aspects of
               the PDO ('environmentally sustainable') and intended outcomes were not clearly defined, leading to a
               revision of all PDO indicators during implementation. The relevance of this project’s objectives is rated by
               this review as Substantial.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To promote farmer adoption of climate-smart agricultural and livestock practices in project areas.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change (ToC). The ICR provided a retrospective Theory of Change (ToC) for the project (page
                             4). To achieve the objective, farmers, producer organizations, the Ministry of Livestock, Agriculture and
                             Fisheries (MGAP) and other sector staff, and technical service providers on project activities will be provided
                             training. Areas of training would include water, soil, natural grasslands, information technology, etc. Along
                             with training, technical assistance, diagnostic, planning, and management tools, information systems like
                             IDSS (SNIA) and financing of sub-projects in areas of water use efficiencies (water technologies) for crops,
                             water interventions for dairy and cattle production, water quality improvements in the watershed, etc. will be
                             implemented. These activities would support technology transfer and be expected to lead to farmer adoption
                             of climate-smart and livestock practices. Along with improved practices and Government decision-making

                                                                                                                               Page 6 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   UY Sust.Mgmt Nat Res & Climate Change (P124181)



based on updated information systems, the farm and livestock sector would be more resilient to climate
events.

Outputs

As per the ICR (Annex 1), the project achieved the following key outputs:

      Number of activities (as actions) financed under subprojects promoting sustainable natural resources
         management: 7,910 (93% of target)
        Percentage of farmers who benefited from actions that contribute to reducing soil and water pollution
         in prioritized river basins: 39 percent (98% of target)
        Area provided with new/improved irrigation or drainage services: 1,172 ha (39% of original target)
        Number of IDSS/SNIA users: 155,000 (103% of target)
        Number of Climate Smart on-farm subprojects funded by the project: 3,363 (84% of original target)
        Number of people (farmers, agro-livestock professionals/technicians) trained in project objectives:
         8,065 (101% or original target)

Outcome

To promote farmer adoption of climate-smart agricultural and livestock practices in project areas, the following
PDO indicators were measured:

      Farmers adopting improved agriculture technology: 5,533 (79% of original target). Technologies
       adopted included water and soil management and conservation, irrigation, sustainable extensive
       livestock production, and dairy production.
      Data products (e.g., drought early warning system, water deficit, etc.) generated by the interoperability
       of IDSS/SNIA and made available to users: 34 products (113% of original target)
      Number of decisions made by the public sector based on information from the IDSS: 13 (162% of
       target). Examples of some of the decisions were: the declaration of an agro-livestock emergency, the
       design of an indexed insurance for water deficits in agro-livestock activities, the determination of
       support for producers affected by floods, etc.
      Climate Change Adaptive Capacity Index (%): 0.39 (130% of original target). This multi-criteria index
       measures technology solutions adopted by producers and the changes registered in adaptive capacity
       over time. The variables in the index weighted combinations of activities in each Call for Proposals
       linked to livestock, dairy farming, and water supported by the project.

The project nearly met or surpassed the original targets of several outputs, except for the following outputs:
(a) Area provided with new/improved irrigation or drainage services: 1,172 ha (39% of original target); (b)
Number of Climate Smart on-farm subprojects funded by the project: 3,363 (84% of original target). As per
the ICR (paragraph 28), the irrigation target was not met due to inadequate government budget resources,
which impacted the call for proposals for water activities. Regarding outcomes, all targets were met while
there was a shortfall on the PDO indicator “Farmers adopting improved agriculture technology.”

The outcomes for this objective were assessed based on the project’s M&E and several evaluation studies
MGAP conducted on subprojects financed during the project period. The project fully funded some sub-
projects, while others were partially financed through other donors such as IADB and Adaptation Fund. As the


                                                                                                   Page 7 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   UY Sust.Mgmt Nat Res & Climate Change (P124181)



evaluation studies did not present results based on the source of financing, some of the higher-level results of
sub-projects used by the ICR can only be partially attributed to project interventions.

The results of the two evaluation studies, which were 100 percent financed by the project, are described
below (detailed results of the other sub-projects are provided in the ICR- Annex 4 and 7).

      The Estrategias Asociativas de Agua para la Producción (EAAP) supported irrigation and water use
       technologies to efficiently use and manage water to reduce climate vulnerability in the agro-livestock
       system. There were 21 sub-projects financed, out of which seven sub-projects were analyzed. In
       assessing impacts, the evaluation study covered treatment and control groups and included baselines.
       The results were: (a) EAAP feedlot animals (Treatment) had higher weight compared to animals in the
       control group; (b) irrigation subprojects where incremental yields could be calculated showed strong
       results, ranging from 52 percent to 450 percent.
      The Call for Proposal financed by the project was the Convocatoria de la Cuenca del Rio Santa Lucia
       (CCSL), which aimed to improve water quality in the Santa Lucia Watershed. The technologies
       adopted focused on effluent reduction, capture, treatment, reutilization systems, and nutrient recycling
       to improve water quality and quantity. The evaluation study measured dairy activities’ contribution to
       Eutrophication (a process when the body of water becomes enriched with nutrients and minerals
       harmful to the ecosystem) and Global Warming. The study showed there was: (a) a reduction in
       potential eutrophication of 172,080 kg of PO4 equivalent per year, 51 percent from a baseline of
       337,920 kg of PO4 equivalent; and (b) a 2.5 percent increase in GHG emissions or 198,549 kg of
       CO2. According to the ICR (paragraph 30), though there was an increase, this represented less than
       500th of 1 percent of net agro-livestock sector emissions.

While these evaluation studies are sound and have yielded positive results, this review notes that the target
for one of the PDO indicators, “Farmers adopting improved agriculture technology,” was not achieved,
considering the project's long duration (9.5 years). Further, the indicator of ‘area under improved irrigation and
drainage practices’ was also not achieved, which was critical in the adoption and effectiveness of several
technologies promoted by the project. The ICR provided several reasons for the under-achievement of this
indicator, such as global and national economic conditions starting in 2014 resulting in economic and financial
pressures on farmers suppressing demand for participation, recurrent drought, budget constraints, and
austerity measures of the Government, cancellation of 65% of the AF which halted progress (paragraph 41,
52). While most of these events were outside the project, the budget shortages could have been envisaged
as it was a recurrent problem faced by the project for several years (ICR, Annex 3, Section 3).

Given the shortcomings in achieving the outcomes, the efficacy of the first objective is rated as Modest pre-
restructuring.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
To promote farmer adoption of climate-smart agricultural and livestock practices in project areas.


                                                                                                    Page 8 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   UY Sust.Mgmt Nat Res & Climate Change (P124181)




Revised Rationale
The objective did not change, but there were changes to the PDO Indicator and two Intermediate
Results Indicator targets at the restructuring six months before the closing date. Some targets were
increased, while a few (listed below) reduced the level of ambition of the original objective. The key indicator
changes (see ICR, Annex 1) were:

      PDO indicator two targets (# of farmers adopting improved agricultural technology) was reduced from
       7,000 to 5,700;
      IRI indicator target (Climate-smart on-farm subprojects funded by the project) was reduced from 4,000
       to 3,400.
      The target for IR Indicator (Area provided with new or improved irrigation or drainage services, ha)
       was reduced from 3,500 ha to 1,800 ha.

The ICR notes that the project revised the targets when the Government proposed to cancel the remaining
loan balance in May 2021. Nonetheless, at project closing, both the revised IRI indicator and PDO were
nearly met – 3,363 subprojects financed (99%); 5,533 farmers adopted improved agricultural technology
(97%) though there was still a shortfall with the irrigation target – 1,172 ha of land with new/improved
irrigation or drainage services (65.1% of revised target). Given that the revised PDO indicator target was met,
this review rates the revised objective's efficacy as Substantial.



Revised Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To promote farmer adoption of improved natural resource management practices in project areas.

Rationale
Theory of Change (ToC). To achieve the objective of farmer adoption of improved NRM practices,
sustainable land management practices would be promoted through training and TA to farmers, producer
organizations, MGAP and other sector staff, and technical service providers on practices to increase land
quality and restore degraded lands, and enhance linkages between protected areas, forest land, grasslands,
and agricultural land (ICR, paragraph 36). Soil Management Maps (PUMS) and Sustainable Dairy Plans
(SDPs) would be prepared, requiring farmers to adopt biophysical soil management, precision fertilizer
application, improved grassland management, water systems for cattle, etc.

Outputs

As per the ICR (Annex 1), the project achieved the following key outputs:

      Soil Management Plans (PUMS) for agricultural producers with more than 100 ha under cultivation
       monitored by RENARE and presented in digital format (%): 96 percent (128% of original target)
      % Area of the country with cartographic (Soil Maps) updated; 85 percent (113% of target)


                                                                                                    Page 9 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   UY Sust.Mgmt Nat Res & Climate Change (P124181)




      Monitoring of Soil Management Plan Implementation (% of audited): 70 percent (175% of target)

Outcome

      Land area under sustainable landscape management practices (ha): 2,703,647 ha (75% of original
       target)

According to the ICR (paragraph 36), “Sustainable landscape management practices refers to a combination
of at least two technologies/approaches to increase land quality and restore degraded lands, for example,
agronomic, vegetative, structural, and managerial measures that, applied in combination, increase the
connectivity between protected areas, forest land, grasslands, and agricultural land.” In terms of interventions,
the project promoted the use of Soil Management Plans (PUMS) to address the hydraulic erosion of soils,
leading to reduced agricultural land productivity (ICR, paragraph 38). MGAP staff trained technicians and
producers on implementing PUMS on their land, which was monitored through a fully digitized system
supplemented by visits from extension workers.

In assessing the results of project interventions, several approaches were followed. The digital system was
able to produce maps and showed real-time compliance progress. In addition, extension works verified the
results on the ground by visiting the farmers. Further, as hydraulic erosion of soils was one of the main
causes of soil degradation in the country, a study was conducted in 2020 based on satellite imagery of
selected agricultural areas, available soil maps, rainfall as well as water flow data that estimated water-
caused soil erosion on farmers field from 2000 to 2020. According to the ICR (paragraph 38), the study found
that the fields selected - particularly those that implemented PUMS - had decreased water-caused erosion
per land unit.

At project closing, targets for all output indicators were met. There was a moderate shortcoming in achieving
the original target for the PDO outcome indicator. The ICR (paragraph 36) provided the following explanations
for not achieving the target: (a) there was a smaller than expected average size of beneficiaries’ farm
properties under a demand-driven approach; (b) due to adverse economic conditions and droughts, fewer
producers than expected submitted proposals to participate; (c) project’s continued challenge with budget
constraints.

Given the substantial achievement of the outcome targets, the efficacy of the second objective is rated as
'substantial' pre-restructuring.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
To promote farmer adoption of improved natural resource management practices in project areas.

Revised Rationale



                                                                                                  Page 10 of 20
                                 Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                 UY Sust.Mgmt Nat Res & Climate Change (P124181)



                              The objective did not change, but there were changes to the PDO indicator and IRI targets at the restructuring
                              six months before the closing date. Some targets were increased, while a few (listed below) reduced the level
                              of ambition of the original objective. The key indicator changes were:

                                    The target for the PDO indicator (Land area under sustainable landscape management practices, ha)
                                     was reduced from 3.6 to 2.8 million ha
                                    The target for IRI (Area of the country with soil maps updated) was reduced from 75% to 45%. At the
                                     time of the restructuring, the project had already achieved 70 percent (93 percent of the target for the
                                     IRI), and as per the ICR (Table 2.2(b), Annex 1), it was not clear why the target was reduced to 45
                                     percent.
                                    The project nearly met the revised target outcome indicator “Land area under sustainable landscape
                                     management practices” (97 percent).

                              Given that the revised targets were met, this review rates the achievement of the second objective as
                              Substantial.




                              Revised Rating
                              Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Before the restructuring, the first objective was rated as Modest, and the second objective was rated as
                            Substantial based on the achievement against the original targets; this review rates the overall efficacy of pre-
                            restructuring to be Substantial with moderate shortcomings.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial

                  OBJR1_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
                            Following the final restructuring, the targets for key outcome indicators were revised and substantially met.
                            This review rates the revised efficacy rating to be Substantial.



                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating

                                                                                                                               Page 11 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      UY Sust.Mgmt Nat Res & Climate Change (P124181)



  Substantial



 5. Efficiency
An Economic and Financial Analysis was not conducted during project appraisal citing difficulty in determining
ex-ante costs and benefits of investments that the project would make given the demand-driven nature of
activities. Nonetheless, economic returns were calculated based on a sample of subprojects financed under a
project (Integrated Natural Resources and Biodiversity Management Project) under implementation then. The
calculations were based on farm models, including the cost of incremental on-farm productive investments and
recurrent expenditures for adopting sustainable agricultural production systems promoted under the project
(PAD, paragraph 37). The analysis estimated the economic returns to exceed 18 percent. Further, an EIRR was
calculated for the activities funded under Additional Financing, which had estimated the EIRR to be 17.5 percent
and an NPV of US$44 million.

Ex-post

The ICRR stated that due to an absence of an ex-ante EFA, there was a gap in the information available to
prepare an ex-post EFA. Nonetheless, an ex-post EFA was conducted based on data from several impact
studies conducted by the Office of Agricultural Planning and Policy (MGAP), the project’s M&E, and Borrower’s
Completion Report. For the EFA, estimates were calculated from benefits generated under Component 2’s Calls
for Proposals (7 out of 9 subprojects that had data), including scenarios of ‘with’ and ‘without’ project
interventions. Specifically, yield changes that the project’s M&E unit monitored were used for sample areas
before the project and during project implementation. In the absence of a control area, the ‘without project’
scenario was taken as the situation before the project was implemented (ICR, Annex 4, paragraph 8). All project
costs (including additional financing) were included even though quantifiable benefits were only assessed for
activities under Component 2. Based on this information, a financial analysis was undertaken for all seven
projects, which showed positive results (See details, ICR, Annex 4).

Further, the economic analysis aggregated the net incremental benefits of all sub-projects derived from the
financial models. It covered a 20-year period with an opportunity cost of capital of 12 percent. Based on this
methodology, the project’s EIRR was 16.5 percent, with an NPV of US$11.5 million. A sensitivity analysis was
conducted, which confirmed the robustness of the results and the financial viability of the project.

Administrative and Institutional Efficiency: The project was implemented over nearly ten years with six
restructurings, including an AF that revised and scaled up some targets. The ICR stated that the project was
technically and operationally complex, which this review concurs with. Further, the project periodically faced
challenges with limited or delayed budget allocation from the Government. As a result, activities such as Calls
for Proposals were delayed, or critical project officials were not hired on time.

In summary, despite the limitation on budget and implementation delays that the project faced, the ERR of 16.5
percent was reasonable, and some of the delays were also attributed due to the scaling up of the activities
during the AF. The Efficiency is rated as Substantial.




                                                                                                    Page 12 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      UY Sust.Mgmt Nat Res & Climate Change (P124181)



Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     0
 Appraisal                                                  0
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     0
 ICR Estimate                                              16.50
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The Outcome Rating is based on a split rating assessment.

    1. Substantial rating for Relevance of the PDO: The project’s objectives were well aligned with both
       Government and World Bank strategies for Uruguay. There were shortcomings in defining certain
       aspects of the PDO and intended outcomes, which were subsequently revised. The relevance of the
       PDO was rated as Substantial.
    2. Substantial ratings for Efficacy: The efficacy rating was substantial before the restructuring, with
       moderate shortcomings. Following the restructuring that reduced targets, the efficacy rating was
       substantial against the revised objective/targets.
    3. Substantial Rating for Efficiency: While the project did not have an ex-ante EFA to compare, the financial
       and economic analysis conducted by the project was sound, with a positive EIRR (16.5 percent)

Based on the split evaluation, the overall outcome is “Moderately Satisfactory.” Since less than 1% was
disbursed post-restructuring, increased weightage is given against the original targets. Details on the derivation
of this rating are provided in the table below.

                                                                         Objectives at
Rating Dimensions                              Original Objectives      Sixth Restructuring
                                                                        (May 2021)
1. Relevance of Objectives                                           Substantial
Efficacy - Objective 1                         Modest                   Substantial
Objective 2                                    Substantial              Substantial
                                               Substantial (with
2. Overall Efficacy                                                    Substantial
                                               moderate shortcomings)
3. Efficiency                                                     Substantial
Outcome Rating                                 Moderately Satisfactory Satisfactory
Outcome Rating Value                           4                       5


                                                                                                    Page 13 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     UY Sust.Mgmt Nat Res & Climate Change (P124181)



Amount Disbursed                              US$62.99 million        US$0.34 million
Disbursement (%)                              99%                     1%
Weight Value                                  3.96                    0.05
Total Weights                                 4.01 (4)
Overall Outcome Rating                        Moderately Satisfactory
a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The ICR (Paragraph 70) discussed several risks, out of which the key ones that could potentially impact the
project’s sustainability are highlighted below:

    1. Financial risk. While there was a commitment from the Government to continue with climate actions
       related to water quality, strengthening of the National Agriculture Information System or Sistema
       Nacional de Informacion Agropecuaria (SNIA), animal traceability and NRM, etc., the ability of MGAP
       to continue with these actions are not certain given the budget cuts of most Ministries including of
       salary cuts of technical consultants who have been instrumental in project implementation.
    2. Technical risk. The potential financial constraints that may impact the continued engagement of
       contracted specialists to support activities such as maintaining SNIA are mentioned by the Borrower
       Completion Report as potentially high risk.
    3. Institutional risk. The project’s support in building the capacity of rural organizations yielded some
       good results in strengthening the organizations' social capital. However, the evaluation report found
       that investments in training on building human capital may not sustain when the project’s technical
       teams cease their activities.
    4. Stakeholder risk. MGAP mainly financed project activities, though a few activities, such as PUMS
       and SDPs, were completed in collaboration with the private sector. Further, the call for
       proposals included beneficiary contributions. To sustain the achievements of project activities,
       similar engagements, and continued ownership by the private sector and beneficiaries to continue
       adopting improved practices for climate actions will be required.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  As highlighted in Section 3, the project was well aligned with the country and sector strategies. It aimed to
  address climate vulnerabilities the country faced related to natural resources such as soil and water.
  Given that the activities to be financed by the project were cross-cutting, the project appropriately made
  one agency (MGAP) the lead agency, with cooperation arrangements planned with other agencies to
  collaborate under the Inter-Ministerial Coordination Committee.

  During project appraisal, key institutional, stakeholder, and project risks (which included climate-related
  stress at the farm level) were identified and were determined to be low. However, the key risk the project

                                                                                                    Page 14 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     UY Sust.Mgmt Nat Res & Climate Change (P124181)



  confronted on budget allocation from the Government that impacted project implementation was
  excluded. Risks such as inadequate budget allocations, the electoral cycle, technical staffing, and
  economic downturns, which had a significant influence on the Project, were not identified. The ICR notes
  that the mitigation measures also tended to be generic. An economic recession or weak global markets
  impacted farmer commitment and were also not identified (ICR, paragraph 52). The M&E design
  (discussed in Section 8) was weak, and the project had to revise the RF and the PDO. Overall, the
  project design was technically and operationally complex consisting of several sub-projects, some of
  which were pilot tested across resources. Finally, the ICR (paragraph 52) indicated that the project’s
  readiness was incomplete because the transition from the predecessor project was not smooth as
  planned. With the closing of the earlier project, the contract of the technical staff had come to an end, and
  they had to be re-hired, which the project appraisal did not pay attention to.

  Based on the above-mentioned assessment, Quality at Entry is rated Moderately Unsatisfactory. This
  rating reflects several shortcomings, including project design, M&E, limited assessment of possible risks,
  and implementation readiness at project entry.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 During implementation, the Bank supervised the project consisting of 20 staff missions (ICR, paragraph
 68). The ICR notes that the missions were well-staffed. Fiduciary and safeguards supervision was regular
 and rigorous. The Aide Memoirs and Implementation Status and Results reports were comprehensive. The
 Bank was proactive, and several restructurings were processed in response to client demand. The RF,
 including all the PDO indicators, was revised to allow the project to monitor project activities better and
 measure impacts. The Bank also processed an AF, which increased targets and scaled up activities that
 showed results. The ICR also notes that even though the AF may have been over-dimensioned given the
 government budget situation, it nevertheless provided flexibility to adapt to new approaches and GOU
 priorities, clarify the PDO, potentially scale up activities with demonstrated results, leverage additional
 innovation, and where possible, complete lagging investments.

 The Bank conducted the MTR on time, and the project took the recommendations provided on board.
 However, during implementation, there was a high turnover among Bank TTLs, and the project was
 managed by six TTLs. The ICR noted that these changes from the Bank may have affected the quality and
 consistency of Bank assistance to the borrower (ICR, paragraph 53). Thus, the Quality of Supervision was
 rated Moderately Satisfactory.

 Overall, the Bank’s performance is Moderately Satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory



                                                                                                    Page 15 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     UY Sust.Mgmt Nat Res & Climate Change (P124181)




  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 A Theory of Change (ToC) was not included in the PAD as it was not required at the time of project
 appraisal. The RF developed at project appraisal had included three PDO indicators and 21 intermediate
 outcome indicators (PAD. Annex 1). The RF was found to be weak as the intended outcomes were not
 clearly defined and all PDO indicators were revised. Four new PDO indicators were introduced during the
 project’s first restructuring. According to the Restructuring Paper (2014), the revisions were made to
 improve the measurement of project’s results and its achievements. Several Intermediate Indicators were
 either revised, amended, or eliminated as they were not well-aligned to the PDO. Further, the original PDO
 was not clear, particularly the term “environmental sustainability” which was difficult to measure and was
 revised during the project’s fourth restructuring.

 Overall, this review agrees with the ICR that the M&E design of the project had several shortcomings, with
 a weak Results Framework that required revision of the PDO and multiple changes with indicators over the
 project period.



b. M&E Implementation
  At an early stage of project implementation in 2014, the project made a timely decision to revise the RF
  and change PDO indicators and Intermediate Indicators. The other significant revisions were made
  during the fourth restructuring based on lessons from the project and in response to Government’s
  resilience strategy. According to the ICR (paragraph 56), even with the revisions of the indicators in 2014
  and 2017 (AF), “some indicators still had high monitoring value but limited evaluative use.” Also, one of
  the PDO indicators on ‘people trained’ was output oriented. Further, the ICR notes that the project could
  have better measured the outcome of some interventions, such as those that measure GHG emissions,
  water use efficiency and savings, and farm productivity.

  During appraisal, it was envisaged that the project would conduct an impact evaluation. The project
  planned to collect a baseline for one of the programs. Still, as per the ICR (paragraph 57), due to the
  pilot's complexity and the project's demand-driven nature, a formal impact evaluation was not
  administered.



c. M&E Utilization
  The project used various evaluation studies conducted by MGAP that assessed the results of the sub-
  projects. Further, the project used innovative technologies such as satellites and drones to monitor
  results on the ground (e.g., soil quality), supplemented by extension workers' validation visits.

  In summary, M&E quality is rated Modest. The M&E at design had significant shortcomings, leading to
  the revision of all PDO and several intermediate indicators. The PDO also had to be revised to drop the

                                                                                                   Page 16 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     UY Sust.Mgmt Nat Res & Climate Change (P124181)



  "environmentally sustainable" dimension. While M&E implementation progressed well, the project’s final
  restructuring, which reduced the targets, was conducted just six months before closing.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Two safeguard policies were triggered at project appraisal: Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) and
   Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04). An additional safeguard policy (Pest Management OP 4.09) was triggered
   when the project received Additional Financing. Further, under AF, two more safeguard policies were
   triggered - Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12) and Projects on International Waterways (OP 7.50).

   Environmental Safeguards: According to the PAD (paragraph 47), the project was not expected to impact
   the environment negatively. Instead, the project activities related to natural resources management,
   especially on-farm soil, and water management, would have a positive environmental impact. During project
   preparation, the MGAP prepared an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF), which
   included a detailed assessment of environmental and social aspects relevant to the project. The ESMF
   included environmental screening procedures and developed a negative list of investments not to be
   financed by the project. (PAD, paragraph 49). During project implementation, environmental safeguards
   compliance was consistently rated as Satisfactory. No negative environmental impact was reported, or
   safeguard actions were required. The project consistently complied with Bank’s safeguard policies with
   environmental action plans developed for all subprojects with negative potential, monitored until completion
   (ICR, paragraph 61). Towards the later stage of the project, an MIS was also developed for monitoring
   social and environmental safeguards.

   Social Safeguards: The PAD (paragraph 46) stated that the project was not likely to have any negative
   social impacts. The project provided financing and technical assistance to family and medium-scale farmers
   to adopt technologies that would help them increase farm productivity and be resilient to climate variability
   and shock, which was expected to yield positive results. During project preparation, a social assessment
   reviewed gender issues, resettlement, land title, and tenure issues. On gender, the M&E system would
   include relevant indicators and monitor its progress. Further, during project preparation, consultations were
   held with key agriculture and livestock sector stakeholders who strongly support the project. During
   implementation, the project consistently complied with social safeguards. The project’s participatory
   approaches of consultations with local people and its own monitoring helped mitigate any adverse impacts
   that could have occurred. Finally, the Grievance Response Mechanism (GRM) was operational and was
   responsive to queries or grievances received from project beneficiaries, including broader citizens, which
   were resolved




b. Fiduciary Compliance


                                                                                                  Page 17 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     UY Sust.Mgmt Nat Res & Climate Change (P124181)



   Financial Management: During project implementation, there were no significant financial management
   issues reported, which affected the performance of the project though a few times, delays were
   experienced. FM compliance was rated either Moderately Satisfactory or Satisfactory through most of the
   project period, except in 2014, when it was downgraded to Moderately Unsatisfactory because of a non-
   renewal of the project accountant’s contract, which caused delays. The Bank closely monitored the
   country-wide financial transfers for sub-projects and provided technical support to strengthen the PMU’s
   FM team’s capacity. Even so, in 2018, due to the delays, the project faced in the execution of subprojects,
   financial management reporting was delayed, which was exacerbated by the delayed budget allocation
   from the government due to its austerity measures. Other than that, audit reports were prepared on time,
   were unqualified, and there was no evidence of misuse of project funds.

   Procurement: As per the ICR (paragraph 64), the project was rated Satisfactory for Procurement until
   2018, when the rating was reduced to Moderately Satisfactory when the Procurement Plan was not
   updated on time. At the start of the project, the PMU had weak procurement capacity as procurement staff
   working in the predecessor project were on a contract basis and were let go. Hence, from the Bank,
   periodic training was provided to PMU on Bank policies and guidelines and procurement processing and
   contracting. While the procurement functions and processes improved, the PMU did not always adopt the
   processes advised (e.g., the “commercial practices” method of procurement) (ICR, paragraph 64).
   Towards the later part of the project, the procurement plan was again delayed due to the Pandemic and
   the Government restrictions on the procurement of new equipment. As a result, the project’s procurement
   rating at closing was Moderately Satisfactory.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                               Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                    IEG
                                                                               Disagreements/Comment
                                                                               There were moderate
Outcome                        Satisfactory          Moderately Satisfactory   shortcomings in efficacy prior to
                                                                               final restructuring.
                               Moderately
Bank Performance                                     Moderately Satisfactory
                               Satisfactory
                                                                               There were significant
Quality of M&E                 Substantial           Modest
                                                                               shortcomings in M&E Design.
Quality of ICR                 ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

                                                                                                  Page 18 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     UY Sust.Mgmt Nat Res & Climate Change (P124181)




The ICR included six lessons. This review has highlighted the following four with some adaptation of
language with broader applicability.

Sustainability and use of the digital information system (DSS/SNIA) that the project helped
establish should be built based on long-term financial investment and Government
commitment. During project implementation, the DSS/SNIA project was developed and
made interoperable with other databases in the country. Stakeholders in the field used it to make
decisions about their farming practices. There was also evidence that Government’s decisions and
declarations (e.g., emergencies) used information from this system. For such a system to be more
effective and increase utilization, outreach and communication activities should be constantly held.
Further, longer-term financial investments are needed to retain technical teams of various skill sets
to manage and maintain such a system requiring periodic updates and innovations.

Digital traceability systems can have multiple usages besides phytosanitary monitoring and
control. Uruguay’s cattle traceability system is globally recognized. The SNIA system has also
incorporated the traceability of honey, rice, and fruit containers. Based on Uruguay’s experience,
such traceability system’s use can be enhanced for phytosanitary monitoring and control and as a
monitoring tool in measuring progress towards international goals, enforcing laws and policies, and
promoting a country’s products in international markets.

To promote a country as a ‘green/sustainable producer,’ greater collaboration between public
and private sector agencies is needed. This project was led by MGAP, which invested in
technologies and practices that aimed to promote and retain Uruguay’s reputation as a
sustainable/green producer. To get an independent assessment of MGAP practices, increased
collaboration with agencies such as the Ministry of Environment with the mandate for monitoring
environmental issues (e.g., water quality emissions, among others) is essential. Further, private
sector buy-in is critical, and they would also need to be a key partner to take responsibility for
promoting sustainable intensification and climate adaptation.

Pilot projects can benefit from good quality impact evaluation. MGAP conducted impact
evaluation studies of Call for Proposals. Considering that the project financed many pilots that
attempted to demonstrate proof of concepts related to technologies and practices in water and land
resources management, irrigation, livestock management, dairy, etc., the impact evaluation was
helpful not only for assessing results but also for document learnings so that future interventions can
be improved.

IEG adds the following lesson:

During project preparation, greater effort is required in designing a Results Framework with
measurable PDO and outcome indicators. In this project, soon after implementation, it was
recognized that several PDO and Intermediate Results Indicators were weak in reflecting the
project’s outputs and outcomes. All PDO indicators had to be revised; most IRIs were changed,
deleted, or revised as part of the project’s first restructuring. Such situations can distract the project
and delay project activities, while projects with good results frameworks can focus on project
implementation and achieving results.




                                                                                                        Page 19 of 20
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       UY Sust.Mgmt Nat Res & Climate Change (P124181)



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR was a detailed document, which provided adequate information about the project, the various
restructurings and the revisions that were made to the indicators and targets. The information was also
adequately presented in tables in the Annex. IEG noted that there was a discrepancy between the project costs
included in the main text of the ICR and the annex which was corrected by the team following communication
with IEG.

The ICR reported on the outcomes and outputs based on the project’s M&E and summarized well the
evaluation studies conducted by MGAP. The document candidly reported on the shortcomings in the project
design, such as design issues related to M&E and Bank performance during implementation. The lessons
included in the ICR were comprehensive and were based on project experience.

Overall, the Quality of the ICR is rated Substantial since shortcomings were minor.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                 Page 20 of 20
