     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Pacific Islands Regional Oceanscape Prog (P131655)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0023352

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P131655                                    Pacific Islands Regional Oceanscape Prog

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Pacific Islands                            Environment, Natural Resources & the Blue Economy


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-D0230                                 30-Sep-2020                                            4,901,329.40

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 22-Dec-2014                               30-Sep-2021

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                             3,970,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                              3,576,479.96                                              0.00

 Actual                                          3,367,483.56                                              0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Stephen Porter             Christopher David             Avjeet Singh                   IEGSD (Unit 4)
                            Nelson




 P153429_TBL
 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P153429                                    Pacific Islands Regional Oceanscape Prog ( P153429 )



 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
                                                                                                   1533845.84

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)


                                                                                                  Page 1 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Pacific Islands Regional Oceanscape Prog (P131655)



 22-Dec-2014

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                         Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                                       0.00                                      2,190,000.00

 Revised Commitment                                        0.00                                      1,533,845.84

 Actual                                                    0.00                                      1,533,845.84




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   As mentioned in the Financing Agreement (January 29, 2015, page 5) and GEF grant agreement for P153429
   (January 29, 2015, page 6), the project development objective (PDO) was to strengthen the shared
   management of selected Pacific Island oceanic and coastal fisheries, and the critical habitats upon
   which they depend. The PDO was stated the same way in the Project Appraisal Document (PAD). The
   Project Development Objective is for a regional project and this ICRR only reviews results in the Pacific
   Islands Regional Oceanscape Program (PROP) Forum Fisheries Agency - P131655.

   Please refer to the Implementation Completion Report Reviews (ICRRs) for the PROP for Marshall Islands
   (P151760), PROP for Federated States of Micronesia (P151754) and PROP Solomon Islands project
   (P151777) for a complete overview of the regional project.

   There are three objectives contained within this PDO:

   i) strengthen the shared management of selected Pacific Island oceanic fisheries; and

   ii) strengthen the shared management of selected Pacific Island coastal fisheries.

   iii) strengthen the shared management of critical fishery habitats

   There are four components to implementing the objective of the project

   Component 1: Sustainable Management of Oceanic Fisheries

   Component 2: Sustainable Management of Coastal Fisheries

   Component 3: Sustainable Financing of the Conservation of Critical Fishery Habitats

   Component 4: Regional Coordination, Implementation Support and Program Management

   The project was restructured on June 28, 2018 and September 14, 2020 (ICR paragraph 3.), the details are
   provided below.


                                                                                                      Page 2 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Pacific Islands Regional Oceanscape Prog (P131655)




b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   The project was designed with four components and was restructured twice. In both restructurings the total
   commitments across components remained at $6.16 million.

   The components for the Solomon Island's project are detailed below. The financial figures presented here
   differ from the ICR. The ICR appears to have drawn information from the project financial reports, whereas
   here the figures are drawn from the audit reports. The main differences is that approximately $70k moves to
   Component 1, from Component 4.

   Component 1: Sustainable Management of Oceanic Fisheries (Total cost at appraisal US$1.27m IDA,
   revised in restructure to US$1.13m IDA, actual US$1.63m IDA)

   The objective of this component was to help participating Pacific Island countries strengthen the
   management of the region’s purse seine and long-line tuna fisheries. Towards this objective, this
   component included regional activities. First, technical assistance, for example, to strengthen the capacity
   of national and regional institutions to sustainably manage Pacific Island tuna fisheries through technical
   assistance to the Parties to the Nauru Agreement Organization and countries to take actions to strengthen
   the Vessel Day Scheme purse seine fishery. Second, ensure an equitable distribution within Pacific Island
   countries of the benefits of sustainably managed tuna fisheries through regional technical advisory services
   for the establishment of hubs throughout the Western Pacific for services and value addition (PAD page 75-
   77, paragraph 6 & 7).

   In the 2018 restructuring the overall scope of the component was reduced. First activity on strengthening
   the capacity of regional institutions was reduced to legal advice and three workshops (two workshops on
   Persons of Interest and one workshop on Observer Insurance) and undertaking the Annual Disbursement
   Linked Indicator (DLI) verification process for the national projects in the Pacific Islands Regional
   Oceanscape Program. Further, technical assistance activities with countries were further defined specifying
   the compliance activities to be undertaken. The regional technical advisory services to manage the
   equitable distribution of benefits with the establishment of hubs was dropped.

   Component 2: Sustainable Management of Coastal Fisheries (Total cost at appraisal US$0.5m GEF,
   maintained in restructure at US$0.5m GEF, actual cost US$0.248m GEF)

   The objective of this component is to support participating countries to sustainably manage defined coastal
   fisheries, focusing on those with the greatest potential for increased benefits, i.e. coastal fisheries such as
   bêche-de-mer (BDM) that (i) can generate export earnings for the country, and/or (ii) support livelihoods,

                                                                                                      Page 3 of 20
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  Pacific Islands Regional Oceanscape Prog (P131655)



food security and dietary health. Towards this objective, this component includes activities to: (i) empower
stakeholders to sustainably manage targeted coastal fisheries in participating countries, working at the
smallest scale feasible in order to generate a response from the fish stocks (e.g. in some cases this might
work at the single or multi-community scale around defined reef fisheries); and (ii) link sustainable coastal
fish products to regional markets (PAD page 77, paragraph 8).

This component was not changed in the 2018 restructuring.

Component 3: Sustainable Financing of the Conservation of Critical Fishery Habitats (Total cost at
appraisal US$1.0m IDA and US$1.69m GEF, revised to in restructuring US$0.71 IDA and US$1.69 m
GEF, actual cost US$0.52 IDA and US$1.29m GEF)

The objective of this component was to help identify revenue streams to sustainably finance the
conservation of critical habitats that underpin oceanic and coastal fisheries in the region. Towards this
objective, the component would include both regional and national activities. First, establishing Pacific
Marine Conservation Development Financing Mechanisms to support fishery habitat conservation, including
(among other things) the establishment of large scale oceanic marine protected areas (MPAs),
remediation/mitigation projects, integrated ocean management and mechanisms for cost and benefit
sharing. Second the support was to help establish a pilot Pacific Blue Carbon regional program for small to
medium scale fishery habitats. This component was to provide support to the Office of the Pacific
Oceanscape Commissioner within the Pacific Islands Forum Secretariat (as a beneficiary), with technical
guidance from the Marine Sector Working Group and Council of Regional Organizations of the
Pacific agencies (PAD page 78, paragraph 11-13).

In the 2018 restructuring, the GEF funded activities were unchanged with continued implementation on
assessing sites for large scale marine protected areas, technical assistance for the establishment of a
Pacific Marine Conversation Development financing mechanism and technical assistance, training and
exchange of lessons learned. The IDA funded activities were all dropped with a new activity of designing a
Regional Ocean Finance and Governance Program with activities to develop ocean finance profiles for
selected Forum Fisheries Agency member Pacific Island Countries and to deliver a Pacific Ocean Finance
Capacity Building Program to benefit selected countries.

Component 4: Regional Coordination, Implementation Support, Training and Monitoring and
Evaluation (Total cost at appraisal US$1.7m IDA, revised to US$2.13m IDA, actual cost US$1.22m
IDA)

The objective of this component was to provide regional coordination, implementation support and program
management, to ensure a coherent approach to program implementation and wide dissemination of results
and lessons learned; as well as regional and national implementation support and training as needed for the
program to achieve its objectives (PAD page 81, paragraph 14).

In the 2018 restructuring, the scope of component 4 was reduced to focus on the Forum Fisheries Agency
needs only with a full staffing complement.

One PDO indicator was dropped, namely, 'direct project beneficiaries (number), of which are female (%)
(Number)'. This was dropped as it had little relevance to the activities of the project and was no longer
mandatory.



                                                                                                  Page 4 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Pacific Islands Regional Oceanscape Prog (P131655)




e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Financing

   The total project commitment throughout the life of the project was a total of US$6.16m. Made up of
   US$3.97 IDA grant and $2.19M GEF grant.

   Project Cost

   Total disbursement for the project at close was US$4.9m made up of USD$3.37 million against the IDA
   grant and US$1.53 million against a GEF grant. This represents a disbursement rate of 80 percent against
   the project commitments. As above, the project was restructured on June 28, 2018 and September 14,
   2020 (ICR paragraph 3). The 2018 restructuring reduced the scope of components - see above - while
   maintaining the overall levels of commitments. The 2020 restructuring extended the date of the IDA grant to
   allow for activities to be completed due to delays caused by COVID-19 related restrictions.

   Given the reduced ambition of the project this review concurs with the ICR and a split rating will be
   undertaken.

   Borrower Contribution

   While no government contribution is discussed, there is recognition in the PAD that the Forum Fisheries
   Agency received funding from a wide-range of bilateral and multilateral development partners, though none
   are cited as making a specific financial contribution to this project.

   Dates

   The project was approved on December 22, 2014 and became effective on June 1, 2015. The second
   restructuring (June 11, 2020) changed the closing date by 12 months from September 30, 2020 to
   September 30, 2021 to account for COVID-19 restrictions and did not revise any of the components.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The objectives of the project with the Forum Fisheries Agency are relevant against the applicable regional
strategies, which seeks to strengthen the shared management of selected Pacific Island oceanic and
coastal fisheries, and the critical habitats upon which they depend. As described above this can be
split into three objectives: i) strengthen the shared management of selected Pacific Island oceanic
fisheries; (ii) strengthen the shared management of selected Pacific Island coastal fisheries; and (iii)
strengthen the shared management of critical fishery habitats



                                                                                                    Page 5 of 20
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Pacific Islands Regional Oceanscape Prog (P131655)



               At the regional and global level the project reflects international commitments. The project’s objectives are
               aligned with the GEF, which promotes sustainable fishing practices and wider ecosystem stewardship . At
               the regional level, the project objective also remains highly relevant and aligned with the Convention on the
               Conservation and Management of Highly Migratory Fish Stocks in the Western and Central Pacific Ocean.

               For the Forum Fisheries agency the objectives are well aligned, though there are areas for enhanced
               alignment. The Forum Fisheries Agency's mission in its strategic plan 2020-2025 is to drive regional
               cooperation to create and enable the maximum long term social and economic benefit from the sustainable
               use of our shared offshore fishery resources. The Outcomes of the strategic plan are very well aligned to
               Objective 1 which is focused on oceanic fisheries. Objective 3 focused on critical habitats links to
               Outcome 4 of the Forum Fisheries Agency strategy that seeks to ensure the economic and social benefits
               are optimized for member countries within the context of ecologically sustainable fisheries.
               Meanwhile Objective 2 focused on sustainable management of Coastal Fisheries, is not well represented in
               the Outcomes of the Forum Fisheries Agency's strategy and there are no linked activities to coastal
               fisheries.

               The objectives remain consistent with the most recent Regional Partnership Framework: For Kiribati,
               Republic of Nauru, Republic of The Marshall Islands, Federated States of Micronesia, Republic of Palau,
               Independent State of Samoa, Kingdom of Tonga, Tuvalu, and Vanuatu, FY17–FY21 (Report No. 100997-
               EAP) particularly with Focus Area 1 ‘Fully exploiting the available economic opportunities’, through the
               project’s contribution to Objective 1.1 ‘Improved management of oceanic and coastal fisheries’. Through the
               RPF, the World Bank also committed to platform-based approaches offering a menu of investment and TA
               options, which support a common objective and are tailored to country contexts and the Country
               Partnership Framework (CPF) for Solomon Islands 2018–2023 (Report No. 122600-SB) (ICR Page 17
               paragraph 34).

               Two areas relevant to country conditions that are missing in the objectives of the project are the
               incorporation of gender and the FCS status. The project has not mainstreamed gender in its objectives as
               committed to in the Regional Partnership Framework. Further, all four of the countries where the project is
               being implemented (Marshall Islands, Federated States of Micronesia, Solomon Islands and Tuvalu) have
               been identified as fragile and conflict affected small states with high institutional and social fragility. This
               issue is not reflected in any part of the project development objective or corresponding elaborations. This
               means that the objective fails to reflect a project working in a set of diverse and difficult operating
               environments, that can experience frequent and fast changes on the ground, reversals, security and active
               conflict risks.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                                                                                                                         Page 6 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Pacific Islands Regional Oceanscape Prog (P131655)




Objective
Strengthen the shared management of selected Pacific Island oceanic fisheries

Rationale
The PAD does not include a theory of change and the ICR reconstructs the theory of change for the regional
project Forum Fisheries Agency project, consistent with its objectives, approach and activities of the project
both before and after restructuring (ICR, Figure 1, paragraphs 9 & 10; Figure 2, paragraph 26). The PAD and
ICR define a rationale for the project based on a regional context of increasing cooperation and coordination
in fisheries and the need to strengthen national and regional elements to optimize the protection of fisheries
and their natural habitats, while enhancing the economic benefits. In strengthening the national and regional
benefits the PAD identifies the need to address a range of issues, for example, weaknesses in the institutions
responsible for managing the use of fisheries, the fragile process of collective action in the oceanic purse
seine fishery and initial progress in the long-line fisheries, threats to coastal fisheries and the degradation of
natural coastal habitats.

Theory of Change (ToC) objective 1: Linked to Objective 1, the ToC defined in the ICR proposes that the
project contribute a long-term outcome to enhance livelihoods, habitats and fish stocks in Pacific countries
through the Forum Fisheries Agency on (i) observing of collective practices in fisheries surveillance
monitoring and enforcement; (ii) carrying out effective and sustainable fishing practices and value addition. To
contribute to these outcomes the project for this objective seeks to support an expanded and enforced
regional access regime, as further detailed below.

The various elements of the ToC are reasonable, yet the translation of outputs into outcomes at the regional
level is weakened as assumptions regarding the roles and connections between the web of different
implementing agencies are not unpacked and their specific measurement is not covered by the theory of
change. The main assumption that could have been further unpacked is how the regional technical
assistance by the forum fisheries agency will be applied by the four countries and the Parties to the Nauru
Agreement Organization. For example, the PAD requires that the governments engage in implementing and
maintaining a regional procurement evaluation committee (page vi) and accept technical, fiduciary, monitoring
and implementation support from the regional entity in the Forum Fisheries Agency (page vii), but does not
demonstrate that this is viable. Another relationship that is not unpacked is whether Parties to the Nauru
Agreement Organization would work with the Forum Fisheries Agency to implement recommendations of a
regional review and whether both parties had the relevant commitment and cooperation capacity.

Outputs pre 2018 restructuring (ICR paragraphs 44-55)

There are no indicators included in the Results Framework that explicitly tracked FFA’s regional contribution
to Outcome 1. The ICR therefore collected complementary evidence to demonstrate FFA’s contribution to the
achievement of this outcome (ICR page 18 paragraph 42). The PAD envisaged five clusters of deliverables
that would contribute to improving competencies of national and regional institutions to manage Pacific
Islands oceanic fisheries sustainably (see table 2). Three clusters of deliverables were not achieved, one was
achieved, and one was partially achieved.

* The implementation of the recommendations of a regional review of the VDS and PNAO was not supported
by the project

* The coordinated technical assistance to countries to strengthen the VDS for purse seine fishery and
expanding similar zone-based management systems to long-line fisheries, partially achieved its

                                                                                                    Page 7 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Pacific Islands Regional Oceanscape Prog (P131655)



deliverables including delivery of workshops and legal advisory services on, for example, European Union
(EU) sanitary regulations and assurance of disbursement linked indicator verifications

* The technical assistance to identify surveillance and enforcement tasks was substantially achieved, for
example, through vessel management systems being provided and delivering observer, and compliance
monitoring training delivered

* Regional technical advisory services to PNAO were not delivered

* Community VDS funds were not piloted

Following restructuring no indicators were added that track the regional institutions contribution to the
objective. The outputs post-restructuring are further detailed below. Progress is rated as modest as before
restructuring only one output was achieved and one partially achieved. After restructuring there is a likely
contribution to strengthened shared management of oceanic fisheries, but the evidence to support this is
limited, for example, there was no measurement of the quality of fishing observers and so there is no
evidence that the quality of the training led to enhanced behaviors in the observer programs (ICR, Figure 3,
Page 24)



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
Strengthen the shared management of selected Pacific Island oceanic fisheries

Revised Rationale
In the restructuring paper it was recognized that there was a fundamental mismatch between the original
design (which required delivery by FFA of non-technical project management support to external entities) and
FFA’s institutional mandate and technical focus, the project experienced ongoing challenges initiating core
activities. Further the restructuring paper goes on to highlight that activities under Components 1, after three
years of delay, were no longer aligned with their priorities. Specifically, the continuous delays with onset of
core project activities resulted in several of the original activities being financed with other Donor funds or
deemed no longer strategically relevant to FFA. Consequently, the scope of implementation was reduced.
The technical assistance to the PNAO was dropped. The technical assistance to countries to strengthen the
Vessel Day Scheme (VDS) for the purse seine fishery and expand this system to the long line fisheries was
reduced in scope. The activities to support surveillance and enforcement tasks and needs for countries to
collaborate to ensure compliance with the VDS, and a network of compliance experts to support the countries’
in their efforts was further specified. The community vessel day scheme was also dropped.

Neither the original nor the updated results framework contained any specific indicators to measure and
report on progress against these activities. Instead, indicators are focused on changes in a countries’
compliance with the Vessel Day Scheme. In lieu of project level measurement the ICR compiles reports of
progress against the activities undertaken (ICR page 19-22, paragraph 44-51), namely:


                                                                                                  Page 8 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Pacific Islands Regional Oceanscape Prog (P131655)



* About 360 national officers (29 percent women) participated in capacity development events delivered by
Forum Fisheries Agency and financed by the project that sought to enhance monitoring and compliance
enforcements skills of national officers and their competencies, for example, the investigation of illegal,
unregulated, and unreported (IUU) fishing; dockside boarding and food safety control; and fisheries
monitoring data management. This training received good ratings from participants. Overall, participants
rated the relevance of the training for their work, their confidence increase, and the degree of application of
what was learned in their daily work as very high—on a scale of 1–5, the average rating was 5.0 for relevance
(that is, highly relevant), 4.9 for new skills or knowledge gained, 4.8 for confidence gained, and 4.8 for
applying the knowledge acquired in their daily work.

* Supported a regionally harmonized compliance regime and developed regionally relevant Boarding
Inspection Guidelines and standard operating procedures that have been endorsed at the Monitoring, Control,
and Surveillance Working Group Meeting in May 2020 and adopted by 17 members

* Prepared COVID-19 operating protocols for the fishing sector in the Pacific to minimize the risk of
transmitting COVID-19 in the fisheries sector at sea and in ports,10 which were adopted by Cook Islands and
Solomon Islands and integrated into their national SOP

* Expanded the coverage of the Vessel Monitoring System by training national officers on its use and then
provided them with access to the information system

* Coordinated annually four regional fisheries MCS operations together with member countries

* Provided technical assistance through training (for example, on dockside boarding and inspection) to
support member countries in complying with EU’s sanitary and illegal, unregulated, and unreported
regulations, and thereby helped in ensuring that fish exports to Europe are properly documented and caught
legally. With the help of FFA, some PICs managed to (re)establish a CA and/or have their EU yellow or red
carding warning lifted (for example, Solomon Islands, Fiji, and Kiribati).

* Published an Annual Tuna Fishery Report Card with the Pacific Community by that reports on progress
made with respect to four goals established in the Regional Roadmap for Sustainable Pacific Fisheries

From these outputs there is a likely contribution to strengthened shared management of oceanic fisheries. As
described in the ICR (page 23 paragraph 52) Fishery observers in a well-functioning program can play an
important role in an integrated system of fisheries management as primary (source) and secondary
(validation) information providers. However, a large part of the success of a program depends on the skills
and competencies of the observers. High standards are required for hiring, training, certifying, and monitoring
observers, to assure stakeholders and decision-makers that the data collecting is of high quality. Observers
mostly work on their own, and it is therefore important to create a structure, training, and monitoring system
that encourages and rewards superior performance. There was no measurement of the quality of fishing
observers and so there is no evidence that the quality of the training led to enhanced behaviors in the
observer programs (ICR, Figure 3, Page 24). Consequently, the contributions to ameliorate issues identified
in the PAD and the outcomes sought related to collective practices in fisheries surveillance monitoring and
enforcement and carrying out effective and sustainable fishing practices are not well evidenced. As a result,
the progress against this objective is rated as modest.




                                                                                                  Page 9 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Pacific Islands Regional Oceanscape Prog (P131655)




Revised Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Strengthen the shared management of selected Pacific Island coastal fisheries.

Rationale
As described under objective 11, the PAD does not include a theory of change and the ICR reconstructs the
theory of change for the regional project Forum Fisheries Agency project, consistent with its objectives,
approach and activities of the project both before and after restructuring (ICR, Figure 1, paragraphs 9 & 10;
Figure 2, paragraph 26). In strengthening the national and regional benefits the PAD identifies the need to
address a range of issues, for example, weaknesses in the institutions responsible for managing the use of
fisheries, threats to coastal fisheries and the degradation of natural coastal habitats.

Theory of Change (ToC) objective 2: Linked to objective 2 the ToC defined in the ICR proposes that the
project contribute a long-term outcome to enhance livelihoods, habitats and fish stocks in the project
countries supported by the Forum Fisheries Agency by (i) carrying out effective and sustainable fishing
practices and value addition and (ii) having improved access to regional markets.

For this objective the results across the entire period will be considered as there was no change in either
restructurings to the activity or relevant indicators, which are as follows.

* Direct project beneficiaries (number), of which are female (%) (Number) - this indicator was not measured
and dropped in the 2018 restructuring

* Regional bêche-de-mer grouping of Pacific Island Countries formed to better manage this fishery and link to
the regional market - met throughout the period.

Throughout the period the target was met for the Regional bêche-de-mer grouping of Pacific Island Countries
to meet and function to better manage this fishery and link to the regional markets. Yet as the ICR states,
although the indicator was achieved there was only a modest contribution to the achievement of strengthened
shared management of selected Pacific Islands coastal fisheries. It is noted in the ICR that the formation of
the bêche-de-mer fisheries grouping does not necessarily result in Outcome 2 and depends on assumptions
on information, know-how, political will, implementation of policy and regulations as well as the adequacy of
dissemination efforts. The implementation of the Forum Fisheries Agency contributions to Component 2 was
subcontracted to the SPC in 2017. The Secretariat of the Pacific Community worked with the Melanesian
Spearhead Group in conducting and commissioning a series of knowledge pieces, including reviews, briefs,
(market) studies, production guides, and management plans, to better understand the bêche-de-mer
management systems and markets in selected member countries. While no formal bêche-de-mer fishery
grouping was formed per se, the Melanesian Spearhead Group was used instead as a vehicle to facilitate
knowledge sharing and harmonize bêche-de-mer fishing and marketing practices. This group is linked with
complimentary outputs at the country level, through which the regional grouping may contribute to enhanced
management of Pacific Island coastal fisheries. For example, Solomon Islands (an Melanesian Spearhead
Group member) has complemented the SPC-led BDM work with (a) assessments and management plans for
coral and clams and (b) preparation and issuing of provincial ordinances—both financed through Pacific
Islands Regional Oceanscape Program (ICR page 24-25, paragraph 57-60). Yet, the success of these

                                                                                                 Page 10 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Pacific Islands Regional Oceanscape Prog (P131655)



activities is subject to risks on adequate know-how to implement, political will, prevalent tenure system and
capacity to enforce regulations. Evidence is not provided to show that these risks have been built into and
mitigated in project design.

Given the challenges in connecting the knowledge and convening actions at the regional level with country
level change and lack of evidence on the implementation or success of complimentary actions that address
issues in institutions and outcomes in coastal management progress against, this objective is rated as
modest.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
Strengthen the shared management of critical fishery habitats

Rationale
As described under Objective 1, the PAD does not include a theory of change. Aas a result, the ICR
reconstructs the theory of change for the regional project Forum Fisheries Agency project, consistent with its
objectives, approach and activities of the project both before and after restructuring (ICR, Figure 1,
paragraphs 9 & 10; Figure 2, paragraph 26). In strengthening the regional agencies to work with the national
institution, the PAD identifies the need to address a range of issues, for example, weaknesses in the
institutions responsible for managing the use of fisheries, threats to coastal fisheries and the degradation of
natural coastal habitats.

Theory of Change (ToC) objective 3: Linked to objective 3, the PAD and ToC defined in the ICR proposes
that the project contribute a long-term outcome to enhance livelihoods, habitats and fish stocks in the project
countries supported by the Forum Fisheries Agency by (i) carrying out effective and sustainable fishing
practices and value addition and (ii) having improved access to regional markets.

Outputs pre 2018 restructuring (ICR paragraphs 44-55)

Objective 3 was measured through three indicators:

* 3 large marine protected or marine managed areas conserving habitat critical to support Pacific fisheries, for
which sustainable revenue streams are identified against a target of 3

* Criteria was developed for the establishment of a Pacific Marine Conservation Development Fund as
targeted

* No ‘blue’ carbon financing proposals pilot sites were identified

With the restructuring of the project, the Blue Carbon-related activities were removed from the project design
and the third indicator on blue carbon financing proposals was dropped. The project was redesigned to
establish a ‘Regional Ocean Finance and Governance Program for Pacific Island Countries’ for which no

                                                                                                  Page 11 of 20
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Pacific Islands Regional Oceanscape Prog (P131655)



                            indicators were added to the Results Framework, but some results were generated (ICR page 27, paragraph
                            65.) These are described below.

                            Against the objective progress is rated as modest. Although knowledge pieces were produced there is no
                            evidence that the shared management of critical fishery habitats was strengthened



                            Rating
                            Modest


                            OBJECTIVE 3 REVISION 1
                            Revised Objective
                            Strengthen the shared management of critical fishery habitats

                            Revised Rationale
                            Outputs post 2018 restructuring (ICR paragraphs 42-49)

                            The ICR notes that although the indicator was met for 'large marine protected or marine managed areas
                            conserving habitat critical to support Pacific fisheries, for which sustainable revenue streams are identified'
                            there is only a potential contribution to outcomes. The knowledge pieces produced by the project may inform
                            the establishment of three potentially feasible marine protected area financing mechanisms in the future, but
                            such outcomes have not ‘materialized’ because of the project (ICR page 27, paragraph 67). These knowledge
                            pieces financed through this objective have, however, contributed to work to help start a conversation on the
                            topic and build basic capacity for ocean financing and culminated in a Pacific Ocean Finance Conference.
                            Though the ICR notes that the use of the knowledge has yet to materialize and consequently the project has
                            not established results that would contribute directly to strengthen the shared management of critical fishery
                            habitats, progress is therefore rated as modest.



                            Revised Rating
                            Modest


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The overall efficacy of this project is rated as Modest, in alignment with the ICR. The restructuring process did
                            help to remove some activities and contain the scope of the project, but results show that the Forum Fisheries
                            Agency had limited capability to support and enable substantive change at country level and in other
                            agencies that would demonstrably feedback to regional results did not happen. It is notable that the PAD
                            essentially envisages the Forum Fisheries Agency as a hub in a regional change effort, but does not fully map
                            out the range of partnerships required between the four countries (the Federated States of Micronesia,
                            Republic of the Marshall Islands, the Solomon Islands and Tuvalu) and at least five other regional bodies

                                                                                                                              Page 12 of 20
             Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
             Pacific Islands Regional Oceanscape Prog (P131655)



         involved in implementation in some way whose membership extends beyond the four countries in the project
         (Western and Central Pacific Fisheries Commission, Parties to the Nauru Agreement Office, Secretariat of the
         Pacific Community, Melanesian Spearhead Group, Marine Sector Working Group). The PAD also does not
         provide a diagnostic of the Forum Fisheries Agencies capability to secure commitment, coordinate different
         actors who work to a variety of incentives or support cooperation between different agencies working across
         countries experiencing fragility, conflict and violence. These capabilities are instead assumed instead of
         embedded in defined activities, the ICR touches on these issues in highlighting the technical nature of the
         Forum Fisheries agencies and complex relationships.



         Overall Efficacy Rating                                  Primary Reason
         Modest                                                   Low achievement
 OBJR1_TBL




         OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
         Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
         Following the restructuring enhanced outputs were achieved under objective 1, but due to weakness is
         project design there is limited demonstrated contributions to the two relevant objectives following
         restructuring.



         Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating                       Primary Reason
         Modest                                                   Low achievement


 5. Efficiency
Economic Analyses: The project is estimated over its lifetime to have yielded net benefits of US$6 million and an
internal rate of return estimated to be 45 percent. No net benefits specific to the Forum Fisheries Agency were
calculated at design. The economic analysis of the program was based on a cost benefit analysis that took a
conservative approach by focusing on the net economic benefits from the purse seine tuna fisheries over the six
years of project implementation because of the project and a strengthened VDS, under the ‘with project’
scenario. This was based on a study reduction of annual losses due to illegal, unregulated and unreported
fishing based on a study by the Forum Fisheries Agency. No benefits from the achievement of targets under
objective 2 and 3 are included in these estimates.

There are shortcomings in this economic analysis. First, as indicated under efficacy, the assets of the project
under objective 1 were realized incrementally, with training being conducted across the time period and not data
to show changes of behavior. This means the contribution of the project to the benefits from the purse seine
tuna fishery will be limited for much of the project to the role of compliance officers. Second, there is a poor
connection between the measured results of the project and the overall objectives.

Implementation Efficiency: The project was inadequately designed for the context and appears to have had
insufficient support during initial implementation leading to delays in the first two years that were not fully
mitigated even after the restructuring. The original project design made a range of assumptions on adequacy
of support on the Forum Fisheries Agency on procurement, technical, fiduciary, monitoring and implementation
support which did not hold when tested. Evidence is either lacking to show that completed activities (e.g.


                                                                                                       Page 13 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Pacific Islands Regional Oceanscape Prog (P131655)



training) led to a change of behavior or shows that knowledge engagement efforts missed opportunities or have
yet to lead to changes in behavior.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?              Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                       0
 Appraisal                                                   0
                                                                                        Not Applicable
                                                                                       0
 ICR Estimate                                               45.00
                                                                                        Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Based on the project's substantial relevance, modest ratings for efficacy before and after restructuring and
modest rating for efficiency this project is rated as 'Moderately Unsatisfactory'. The overall rating is aligned to
the ICR. The Outcome Rating is based on a split evaluation of the performance of the project's objectives, which
are the same . The evidence used for providing this overall rating is as follows.

A split overall outcome rating is applied because the scope of the project changed considerably as part of the
first restructuring. In particular, the scope was changed through replacement of the original ouputs under
objective 3 and through substantial revisions of Forum Fisheries Agency's expected deliveries under under
objective 1 and in relation to project management expectations.

1) Substantial rating for relevance of PDO. The lack of mandate for coastal fisheries reduces the relevance of
the project, further the project objectives insufficiently reflect the fragile operating context and the mainstreaming
of gender concerns.

2) Modest rating for efficacy, for both original and restructured projects the Forum Fisheries Agency had limited
capability to support and enable substantive change at country level and in other agencies that would
demonstrably feedback to regional results did not happen.

3) Modest rating for efficiency, as the results of the project, economic efficiency indicators and overall objective
of the project are not well connected. The project was inadequately designed and had implementationdelays in
the first two years that were not fully mitigated even after the restructuring.


a. Outcome Rating


                                                                                                       Page 14 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Pacific Islands Regional Oceanscape Prog (P131655)



   Moderately Unsatisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The main risks to development outcomes relate to the maintenance of gains in fisheries monitoring, control
and surveillance and the use of knowledge generated. Maintenance of monitoring, control and surveillance
depends on individual countries that experience institutional and social fragility. The theory of change
provides a limited account for how the project responds to issues of fragility and assumed sufficient
coordination capacity and commitment from regional and national bodies in policy development and
implementation. As highlighted in the ICR, the regional and the national elements will need continuous
reinforcement and shared learning and the momentum created by the Ocean Finance Fellowship Program
and the Regional Ocean Financing Conference, and the launch of the knowledge pieces, is at risk if no
follow-up engagement and no investments supporting conservation financing are undertaken (ICR page 39
paragraph 124).




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The strongest feature of the World Bank's performance for quality at entry was the strategic relevance of
  the project. The project attempted to undertake a new level of regional collaboration. In 2014, at the time
  of project preparation, the Pacific Islands Forum Secretariat had just began to develop a new strategic
  framework to streamline the development agenda and prioritize the key challenges for the region. Further
  the project aligned to regional priorities.

  Yet, as documented throughout this review the technical, institutional, implementation and M&E
  arrangements were not aligned with the context and hindered project performance initially and needed
  increased focus after restructuring from the World Bank team. The project was misaligned with the Forum
  Fisheries core mandate. The project design failed to address in its design risks as noted at appraisal on
  institutional capacity for implementation and sustainability and stakeholders, which were rated as
  substantial. The design did not accurately reflect the regional bodies readiness and did not consider
  appropriately the country's systems (ICR page 38 paragraph 117).

  The project components were designed in a manner that would contribute to the project objectives,
  though as highlighted under the section 2, the monitoring indicators, where present, were disconnected
  from project implementation.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Unsatisfactory




                                                                                                  Page 15 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Pacific Islands Regional Oceanscape Prog (P131655)




b. Quality of supervision
 The World Bank's supervision came to identify and resolve issues that would constrain the achievement of
 relevant development outcomes three years into the project with the first restructuring, which may have
 meant that it was too late to ensure it met its objectives. The project became effective in April 2015 and
 from 2017 the project had a dedicated task team leader who led a restructuring mission in March 2018,
 with the restructuring completed by June 2018. This restructuring reshaped the procurement,
 implementation and monitoring and evaluation processes and reduced the scope of the project.

 As reported by the ICR (paragraph 115), the team intensified its support following restructuring 2018 in a
 range of areas. This enabled the project to meet a range of output indicators and deliver useful activities in
 fisheries monitoring and observation. The World Bank fulfilled its fiduciary role through adjusting the scope
 of expectations at the regional level and addressing cost overruns in the project implementation unit. The
 project reporting provides useful assessment of these performance and
 supportive interventions undertaken.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The complex intervention architecture was only moderately reflected in the M&E design. With no explicit
 theory of change and complex implementation arrangements the indicators defined across the project did
 not adequately reflect the contributions made by the project, the design of a more explicit M&E architecture
 would have been instrumental in facilitating timely progress and results monitoring during implementation.
 For example, the original results framework did not capture significant results that are important for
 strengthening shared management institutional reforms, better fisheries monitoring, compliance and
 surveillance infrastructure at the regional level. Following restructuring indicators still did not measure the
 efforts at the regional level and not the quality of implementation. The project did not include an M&E Plan
 and/or manual with operational details about what, how, who, and when to monitor project progress and
 results indicators (for example, precise indicator definitions, data collection methodologies, monitoring and
 reporting arrangements, templates for [technical] progress reporting, data management, and learning and
 adaptation reviews).



b. M&E Implementation
  The challenges in M&E implementation reinforced that there were weakness in project design. It was
  assumed that the regional Forum Fisheries Agency would be able to coordinate M&E, but it only
  attempted to fulfill its agreed responsibility for coordinating the verification of DLIs. Yet, coordination of

                                                                                                        Page 16 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Pacific Islands Regional Oceanscape Prog (P131655)



  capacity strengthening in project M&E at the country level did not materialize (ICR page 35 paragraph
  101).

  Intermediate outcomes from FFA’s capacity development support (that is, learning outcomes),
  contributing to improved shared management of fisheries resources, were neglected in the Results
  Framework. Similarly, the subsequent FFA-specific Results Framework (after restructuring) was not a
  good reflection of the inferred ToC (ICR page 36, paragraph 99).

  After restructuring in 2018, M&E responsibility shifted to the country, and again reflected project
  implementation challenges. After this the semiannual progress reports that address Forum Fisheries
  Agency M&E were found to be thorough.



c. M&E Utilization
  In the absence of systematic progress and results data collection, documentation, and reporting, the
  M&E utilization was consequently low. Nonetheless, the survey of the Oceans Finance Fellowship
  Program helped demonstrate accountability for the investment made. Other satisfaction surveys are
  being used to improve the relevance and delivery of the training and workshops.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Negligible

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
    The project was classified as a Category B (partial assessment) at appraisal, triggering the following World
   Bank operational policies:
   (a) OP 4.01 - Environmental Assessment was triggered because some planned investments may generate
   minor to moderate site-specific and time-bound adverse environmental impacts. Activities were screened for
   environmental and social impacts and mitigation measures were put in place to address potential site-
   specific impacts such as noise, waste, health and safety risks for workers, and discharges to the marine
   environment.
   (b) OP 4.04 - Natural Habitats was triggered because the program activities took place in marine areas
   (coastal and ocean), which are known sites rich in biodiversity. All program activities were designed to
   enhance positive and sustainable returns to these important habitats.
   (c) OP 4.36 - Forests was triggered because the broader PROP includes TA to support the development of
   financing mechanisms for MPAs and ocean finance mechanisms (through the FFA PROP), both of which
   could influence conservation incentives for coastal communities to conserve mangrove habitats. The project
   had no reported impact on mangroves in the Pacific.
   (d) OP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples was triggered because specific sites and activities were not identified at
   the project preparation stage, and it was deemed possible that the project will affect indigenous peoples to
   some extent. Because the project beneficiaries were expected to be mostly indigenous peoples, the
   approach adopted was to incorporate the elements of an indigenous peoples plan into the overall project
   design.

                                                                                                  Page 17 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Pacific Islands Regional Oceanscape Prog (P131655)



   (e) OP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement was triggered because project activities may have required small-
   scale coastal land acquisition. However, this was not required during the project as no resettlement was
   required.

   The project completion complied with the environmental and social policies and requirements described in
   the ESMF. The key environmental and social risks/issues were low risk as the TA activities included
   identifying financing mechanisms for supporting MPAs and strengthening the capacity of institutions to
   manage tuna fisheries. No occupational health and safety incidents were reported during implementation
   (ICR page 36-37 paragraphs 109-111).




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   As part of project preparation, a financial management assessment was carried out for Forum Fisheries
   Agency. It was recommended that a dedicated project accountant be hired to ensure maintenance of
   acceptable arrangements. The project accountant was hired and interim financial reports and audit reports
   were submitted with minor delays. The project audit Management Letters did not identify any compliance
   issues.

   The procurement performance of the implementing agency was rated Moderately Unsatisfactory for the
   first half of the project, but improved following restructuring. The main reasons were the implementation
   delays of critical procurement activities under the project and no updating of the status and supporting
   documents for procurement activities. These problems were largely due to weak procurement capacity
   including lack of familiarity with the World Bank’s procurement procedure and policy, and an ineffective
   PMU procurement consultant. However, the procurement performance of the PMU significantly improved
   since 2018 and implementation accelerated.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None identified.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                   IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
                                Moderately           Moderately
Outcome
                                Unsatisfactory       Unsatisfactory
                                Moderately           Moderately
Bank Performance
                                Unsatisfactory       Unsatisfactory


                                                                                                   Page 18 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Pacific Islands Regional Oceanscape Prog (P131655)



                                                                                    No monitoring system was
                                                                                    defined at the regional level to
Quality of M&E                   Modest                 Negligible
                                                                                    capture its contributions to
                                                                                    objectives throughout the project
Quality of ICR                   ---                    High


12. Lessons

This review reiterates the lessons provided in the ICR (paragraphs 120-126), with some minor
additions

1. Long-term engagement. Pacific Islands Regional Oceanscape Program needs to be considered
as a long-term multiphase process and engagement. From this ICRR we noted that regional projects
can benefit from being grounded first in a diagnostic of country issues rather than overall regional
issues.

2. Region-specific challenges and implementation readiness. PROP was the World Bank’s first
engagement in Pacific Islands oceanic and coastal fisheries. Participating countries and institutions
had little to no experience with managing World Bank-financed projects. Region-specific challenges,
in part due to the fragile institutional context there are capacity constraints, significant hands-on-
support needed, and the overall challenges of reaching stakeholders beyond capital cities due to the
dispersed nature of the countries must also be considered at design.

3. The theory of change was overly complex, not well articulated at design and employed a hub and
spoke regional model where a country led approach could have avoided the need for restructuring in
2018. The program’s theory of change was demanding, complex, and ambitious given the
institutional capacity, time, political, geographical, and financial constraints by the client country. The
idea of leveraging regional institutional capacities (from the FFA, SPC, and others) for effective
implementation of national project results chains was weakly developed, poorly understood, and/or
owned by countries and thus operationalized suboptimally.

4. There very limited consideration of gender equality in the project design, which is a critical
dimension when implementing effective CBRM. Continued financing of the CBRM process through
the MFMR and project can be informed by (a) new research and lessons learned about the adoption
of CBRM in the region; (b) consultation with SPC’s ‘Pacific Framework for Action on Scaling up
Community-based Fisheries Management: 2021–2025’, to assess how to best engage in either
direct community-based fisheries management or/and its enabling work; and (c) recent analytical
work about gender inequalities in access to productive resources, assets, services, and
opportunities, such as the Country Gender Assessment of Agriculture and the Rural Sector in
Solomon Islands, conducted by the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) and SPC in 2019.2

5. The Forum Fisheries Agencies convening power as a regional organization is limited by its
mandate. The organization is a regional advisory body providing expertise, technical assistance,
training and other support to its members who make sovereign decisions about their tuna resources.
Thus, the role that FFA was expected to play according to the PROP design that was political and



                                                                                                       Page 19 of 20
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Pacific Islands Regional Oceanscape Prog (P131655)



involved coastal management was not aligned with the its mandate and created expectations that
could not be met.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is candid in its assessments explains ratings and provides additional evidence to substantiate claims
of performance beyond project indicators. The ICR could have more thoroughly reflected upon the incomplete
assessment of the project operating across countries identified as small states that experience high levels of
institutional and social fragility.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       High




                                                                                                  Page 20 of 20
