     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GN: Economic Governance Technical Assist (P125890)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0023373

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P125890                                   GN: Economic Governance Technical Assist

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Guinea                                    Governance


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)                 Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-D2000,IDA-H7650,IDA-V0860,TF-         31-Dec-2016                                           26,418,925.46
 12640

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 20-Mar-2012                               30-Jun-2022

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                       Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                          10,000,000.00                                         647,004.00

 Revised Commitment                           27,003,082.49                                         136,288.30

 Actual                                       26,418,925.46                                         136,288.30




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Paul J. Kaiser             Clay Wescott                  Jennifer L. Keller              IEGEC (Unit 1)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the original Financing Agreement dated April 23, 2012 (page 5), the project development
   objective (PDO) of the Economic Governance Technical Assistance and Capacity Building Project was: "to re-
   establish and strengthen basic systems and practices to improve the management of public financial and
   human resources".



                                                                                                   Page 1 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GN: Economic Governance Technical Assist (P125890)



   According to the Additional Financing (AF) Agreement dated July 26, 2017, the revised PDO was: "to
   modernize public financial and human resource management and enhance statistical capacity".



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  08-Jun-2022

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   Original Project

   The original project comprised three components (Financing Agreement, pages 5-6) (US$10 million,
   US$1.34 million European Union [EU] Trust Fund [TF] estimate at appraisal)

   Strengthening Basic Expenditure Management (US$2.72 million + US$1.34 million EU TF estimate at
   appraisal) aimed to: (i) strengthen the public procurement framework; (ii) build public financial management
   (PFM) capacity; and (iii) promote efficient and affordable public investments.

   Improving Human Resource Management (HRM) (US$6.13 million estimate at appraisal) aimed to: (i)
   support the development and adoption of a Public Administration Reform Strategy; (ii) conduct a biometric
   identification for civil servants; (iii) build capacity for human resource data management and control; and (iv)
   interface the human resource management system with the payroll system.

   Project Management (US$1.15 million estimate at appraisal) aimed to support overall project
   implementation, management, coordination, administration, monitoring and evaluation, and fiduciary
   capacity.

   Revised Project

   The revised project: (i) comprised the same three components, but with some activities dropped, and new
   ones added; (ii) added one new component; and (iii) revised cost allocations accordingly (Additional
   Financing Agreement, pages 1-4) (US$22 AF, total estimated project cost US$32 million at AF). A split
   evaluation was undertaken to reflect the new component on strengthening statistical capacity development.

   Strengthening Basic Expenditure Management (US$12.5 million additional funds estimate at AF) aimed to:
   (i) improve public financial management (PFM) and public investment management (PIM) planning and
   multi-year, annual budgeting at both the central and sectoral levels; (ii) strengthen the recipient's public
   procurement framework; and (iii) automate government business processes in investment planning and


                                                                                                      Page 2 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GN: Economic Governance Technical Assist (P125890)



   monitoring, procurement and for the gradual introduction of an integrated financial management information
   system (IFMIS).

   Improving Human Resource Management (US$4.0 million additional funds estimate at AF) aimed to: (i)
   support an additional biometric census of the civil service to cover retirees, temporary staff, and newly
   recruited staff; (ii) interface the human resource management system with the payroll system; and (iii)
   strengthen the capacity of the government to implement on-going public sector modernization reforms.

   Statistical Capacity Development (US$4.0 million additional funding estimate at AF) aimed to: (i) update the
   basis of national accounts and the gross domestic product (GDP), estimate the new poverty rate, and
   provide data for evidenced-based policy analyzes; (ii) increase the capacity of the National Statistical
   Institute (Institut National des Statistiques) and the National Statistics System; and (iii) improve its capacity
   for producing economic and social statistics and archiving and dissemination of statistical information.

   Project Management (US$1.5 million additional funding estimate at AF) aimed to support overall project
   implementation, management, coordination, administration, monitoring and evaluation, and fiduciary
   capacity.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project Cost: The original project cost, including contingencies, was US$10 million. The AF reallocated the
   cost across components, with a total revised project cost of US$32 million.

   Financing: IDA financed SDR 6.5 million (US$10 million equivalent) and the EU TF financed US$1.34
   million for the original project (US$136,200 for Component 1 activities). IDA provided SDR 16,100,000
   (US$22 million equivalent) for AF in 2017.

   Borrower Contribution: The Republic of Guinea did not provide counterpart funding.

   Dates: The project was approved on March 20, 2012, became effective on October 17, 2012, and was
   restructured three times along with one AF. The first restructuring (approved on August 9, 2016) extended
   the project closing date until June 30, 2017, to allow for the finalization of AF which was approved on June
   9, 2017. The second restructuring (approved September 10, 2020) aimed to reinforce results and support
   interventions to address the COVID-19 health crisis. There were changes in the results framework (RF),
   components and cost, and closing date. The third restructuring (approved June 7, 2022) cancelled some
   parts of the project, allowing undisbursed funds to be reallocated to other World Bank (WB) operations.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Original Project




                                                                                                       Page 3 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GN: Economic Governance Technical Assist (P125890)



The objective of the project at approval -- to re-establish and strengthen basic systems and practices to
improve the management of public financial and human resources – was relevant to the political context,
economic conditions, and development priorities of the Government of Guinea (GoG).

Political Context: At the time of approval, the country had recently transitioned to democratic rule after over
five decades of autocratic rule (PAD, p. 2). Following a military coup in December 2008, the WB put Guinea
under OP 7.30 status until February 2010, suspending most of its operations except for some emergency
and humanitarian assistance. Guinea’s first-ever competitive elections were held in 2010 when Professor
Alpha Condé was elected President and nominated a new coalition government. The Condé administration
requested the WB to support public financial management (PFM) and human resource management (HRM)
reforms.

Economic Conditions: Between 2008-2010, per capita income in Guinea declined. After the election in
2010, GDP growth turned positive, driven by the resumption of investment in mining and trade, but it
remained constrained. The first priority of the newly elected government was to re-establish basic controls
over public finances and civil service management, by enforcing compliance with existing rules and
regulations.

Development Priorities: During the first two years of the new government (2010-12) Guinea was in Fragile,
Conflict, and Violence (FCV) affected status. The government faced enormous challenges of consolidating
and fostering the recent democratic gains and restoring state functions and institutions. The reform agenda
centered on reducing the internal stress that fed state fragility and building the foundation for effective
institutions which were instrumental in improving governance and enhancing transparency, accountability,
and the rule of law in the public sector. To anchor this reform agenda, a Priority Action Plan PAP was
endorsed by the GoG in 2011. The 2011-2014 Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper PRSP confirmed the
GoG's focus and commitment to improving economic governance, specifically focusing on reforming the
public and security sectors. The WB's strategy at approval was to maximize the impact of its support for the
newly elected government's reform priorities in PFM and HRM.

Revised Project

In 2017, the GoG requested additional financing from the WB to consolidate and deepen PFM and
HRM reforms and introduce a new component focusing on statistical capacity development in response to
an emergent objective of improving national economic management.

Political Context: President Condé was reelected in 2015, and again in 2020 after a new constitution was
approved in a national referendum that changed presidential term limit rules. The GoG’s request for AF was
conveyed to the WB after President Condé was elected for a second term and it reflected the GoG’s PFM
and HRM reform priorities at the time. He was serving his third term when he was deposed by a military
coup on September 5, 2021.

Economic Conditions: At the time of AF approval, the national poverty rate was declining (from 48.5 percent
in 2014 to 43.7 percent in 2018/19), but annualized consumption growth of the bottom 40 percent of the
population was negative. 32 percent of the population suffered deprivations in education, health, and
access to basic infrastructure in 2018 and based on COVID-19 surveys, about 35 percent of the population
experienced severe food shortages. Economic growth averaged 6.2 percent during 2017-21 (3.3 percent
per capita), helped by the mining sector (bauxite, gold) and low fiscal deficits (2.5 percent). (Macro Poverty
Outlook for Guinea: October 2022).


                                                                                                     Page 4 of 19
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      GN: Economic Governance Technical Assist (P125890)



               Development Priorities: In August 2020, the government launched the second National Plan for Economic
               and Social Development. Emerging themes included the: (i) role of innovation as a driver of structural
               transformation; (ii) acceleration of the digital economy in Guinea; (iii) promotion of the green economy; need
               to strengthen resilience; and (iv) importance of maximizing and realizing the value of Guinea's human
               capital.

               Overall, the objectives of the original and revised projects remained relevant to the political context,
               economic conditions, and development priorities in Guinea. In 2012, the project focused on supporting the
               new administration’s efforts to stabilize the economy and improve the effectiveness of state institutions. In
               2017, the revised project focused on further consolidating PFM and HRM reform priorities while responding
               to the emerging national priority of improving economic management. Both projects were responsive to the
               administration's evolving development priorities and its efforts to consolidate PFM and HRM in the country.

               Original Project Rating for Relevance of Objectives: High

               Revised Project Rating for Relevance of Objectives: High


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Improve Management of Public Financial Resources

                             Rationale
                             Re-establish and Strengthen Basic Systems and Practices to Improve the Management of Public Financial
                             Resources.

                             Targets for two of the three original PDO indicators were achieved (one indicator changed to intermediate
                             results indicator [IRI] at AF).

                                        Public contracts procured through open competition. Baseline: 15 percent in 2011. Target: 55 percent
                                         in 2017. Revised target: 80 percent in 2022. The proportion of contracts procured through open
                                         competition was 100 percent at closure (achieved).
                                        Budget preparation occurs according to the new PFM Legal Framework. Baseline: No in 2012. Target:
                                         Yes in 2017. Target was met in 2016 but the indicator was erroneously dropped in AF (achieved).
                                        Public investment proposals prepared in accordance with agreed procedures. Baseline: 0 percent in
                                         2012. Target: 75 percent in 2017. This was changed to an IRI with a new target of 90 percent. The
                                         PDO target for the original project was not achieved, but the IRI target for the revised project was


                                                                                                                                Page 5 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   GN: Economic Governance Technical Assist (P125890)



       achieved, with 100 percent of public investment projects prepared in accordance with agreed
       procedures at closure (original target not achieved as a PDO indicator; revised target achieved as an
       IRI).

Targets for three of the original five project IRIs were achieved.

      New procurement code and legal texts adopted Baseline: No in 2012. Target: Yes in 2017 (achieved).
      Publication of regular reports concerning public contracts. Baseline: No in 2012. Target: Yes in 2017
       (achieved).
      The legal framework governing the Investment Fund adopted. Baseline: No in 2012. Target: Yes in
       2017 (achieved).
      Budget is presented for legislative approval according to the budget calendar. Baseline: Yes in 2012.
       Target: Yes in 2017 (not achieved).

      PFM practitioners trained. Baseline 0 in 2012. Target: 400 in 2017. 85 PFM practitioners were trained
       with project support, well short of the end-project target (not achieved).



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
Modernize Public Financial Resource Management

Revised Rationale
One revised PDO Indicator was achieved.

      Proportion of the public investment proposals (PIPs) compliant with public investment manual (PIM)
       investment budget. Baseline: 0 percent in 2016. Target: 40 percent in 2022. 100 percent of PIPs were
       compliant with PIM at closure (achieved).

Two of four revised Project IRIs were achieved.

      Upgrade of the Expenditure Chain in compliance with Lio Organique Relative au Lois de Finance
       (LORLF). Baseline: No in 2016. Target: Yes in 2022 (achieved).
      Public investment proposals prepared according to agreed procedures. Baseline: 0 percent in 2016.
       Target: 90 percent in 2022. The project achieved 100 percent, surpassing end-project target
       (achieved).
      Number of sectors implementing Aggregate Citizen Report Card scores. Baseline: 0 in 2017; Target: 3
       in 2021 (not achieved).




                                                                                                   Page 6 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   GN: Economic Governance Technical Assist (P125890)



Average rate of execution of public procurement commitment plans in the targeted three sectoral
ministries. Baseline: 30 percent in 2016. Target: 85 percent in 2022. The project achieved 81.5 percent,
falling short of end-project target (partially achieved).



Revised Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Re-establish and Strengthen Basic Systems and Practices to Improve the Management of Human
Resources.

Rationale
Targets for one of two original PDO indicators was achieved.

      Discrepancy between the Ministry of Employment and Public Service (MEPS) civil service database
       and the payroll. Baseline: 8 percent in 2012. Target: 2 percent in 2017. Revised Target of .06 percent
       in 2022 (achieved).
      Direct project beneficiaries, of which percent are women. Baseline: N/A. Target: 400, 10% women in
       2017. Revised Target 259, 24% women in 2021. The project reached 259 direct beneficiaries, well
       short of the end-project target of 400. This indicator fulfilled the gender-disaggregated sub-PDO
       indicator, with 24 percent of project beneficiaries being women against an end target of 10 percent.
       This indicator was dropped at AF (project beneficiaries not achieved; percent women achieved).

Targets for one of three original project IRIs was achieved and two were partially achieved.

      Regular Government employees identified. Baseline: 0 percent in 2012. Target: 100 percent in 2017.
       Revised target 90.2 percent (partially achieved).
      Irregular civil service cases resolved. Baseline: 100 percent in 2011. Target 100 percent in 2017.
       Revised target 90 percent in 2022. The irregular civil service cases that were resolved reached 90
       percent at closure (partially achieved).

Existent disciplinary cases resolved. Baseline: 78 percent in 2011. Target 80 percent in 2017 (achieved).



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 2 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
Modernize Human Resource Management



                                                                                                Page 7 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   GN: Economic Governance Technical Assist (P125890)




Revised Rationale
Target for one revised PDO indicator was achieved.

       Number of Ministries equipped with remote work tools. Baseline: 10 in 2020. Target: 30 in 2022. A
        total of 40 ministries were equipped with remote work tools (achieved).

Targets for one of two revised project IRIs was achieved.

       Additional public agents registered in the biometric census. Baseline: 0 in 2016. Target 30,000 in
        2022. 17,985 additional public agents were registered at closure (not achieved).
       Number of Ministries holding virtual meetings. Baseline: 0 2017. Target 10 in 2022. 50 virtual
        meetings were held at closure (achieved).



Revised Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
None.

Rationale
N/A



Rating
Not Rated/Not Applicable


OBJECTIVE 3 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
Enhance Statistical Capacity

Revised Rationale
Target for one revised PDO indicator was partially achieved.

       Number of statistical products (household survey, enterprise census, national accounts) completed
        and published by INS following international standards. Baseline: 0 in 2016. Target: 3 in 2022. By
        project closure, two statistical products had been prepared against a target of 3 (partially achieved).

Targets for two of two revised project IRIs were achieved.




                                                                                                    Page 8 of 19
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                GN: Economic Governance Technical Assist (P125890)




                                  New poverty indices (poverty incidence, poverty gap, poverty severity). Baseline: No in 2016. Target:
                                    Yes in 2022. A household survey that provided the required data was successfully completed
                                    (achieved).

                                  Statisticians or equivalent trained from regional statistics or demography schools. Baseline 0 in 2016.
                                    Target 5 in 2022. 24 statisticians were trained, surpassing the end target of 5 (achieved).



                            Revised Rating
                            Modest


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Original Project

                            Project efficacy under the original and revised objectives was Modest. Uneven but notable progress was
                            made across all three of the project's outcome areas.

                            The original PDO focused on re-establishing and strengthening basic systems and practices to improve the
                            management of public financial and human resources. There was no Theory of Change (ToC) described in
                            the PAD but there was a narrative on how the PDO was to be achieved. The ICR developed a ToC based on
                            this narrative and attempted to establish causal relationships between the evidence presented (based on the
                            PDO indicators and IRIs) and each objective/outcome area. The ICR ToC traced the planned activities
                            (organized by component) described in the PAD to outputs (based on IRIs), short-term outcomes (based on
                            PDO indicators), and expected outcomes (based on the PDO). Overall, the assumptions underlying this ToC
                            were clear, but weaknesses were revealed in the original design of the project. The ICR notes on page 20
                            that the PDO was overly ambitious and did not effectively capture the "discrete scope and magnitude of
                            project activities."

                            Regarding the PDO on PFM (Component 1), the activities initially focused on public expenditure and
                            investment management and procurement, while the PDO focused more broadly on the entire PFM system
                            by “establishing and strengthening basic systems and practices.” Two PDO indicators were output-oriented
                            and more appropriate for the IRI level (focusing on public contracts procured and public investment proposals
                            prepared). This undermined the logical flow from activity inputs to output targets (at the IRI level) to outcome
                            targets (PDO level). While these indicators were appropriate, they should have been at the IRI level, with
                            more robust outcome indicators developed for the PDO level.

                            One of the two HRM PDO indicators (Component 2) was a core World Bank indicator that tracked direct
                            project beneficiaries (along with the percentage of women). This indicator did not measure the project’s
                            intended contribution to the PDO and did not capture the higher-level reforms originally envisaged in the PAD,
                            specifically improving the management of GoG human resources through the preparation of a public
                            administration reform strategy and the verification and consolidation of the regular civil servant database.


                                                                                                                                  Page 9 of 19
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            GN: Economic Governance Technical Assist (P125890)



        The outputs reported in the RF can be reasonably attributed to the project, but they did not clearly
        demonstrate the achievement of the PDO. Regarding Component 1, targets for two of the three PFM PDO
        indicators were achieved (one of the indicators downgraded to IRI at AF), and targets for three of the five IRIs
        were achieved. For Component 2, the target for one of two HRM PDO indicators was achieved, one of three
        IRI targets was achieved and two were partially achieved.



        Overall Efficacy Rating                                   Primary Reason
        Modest                                                    Low achievement
OBJR1_TBL




        OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
        Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
        Revised Project

        The updated PDO focused on modernizing public financial and human resource management and enhancing
        statistical capacity. An updated ToC for the revised project demonstrated similar weaknesses to the project as
        the one for the original project. The new PDO indicator focused on measuring the number of statistical
        products, which is output and not outcome based.

        As part of the AF, three of the project's five original PDO indicators were modified, as follows: (i) the PDO
        indicator on "Budget preparation (that) occurs according to the new PFM legal framework" was erroneously
        dropped in response to its full achievement in 2016; (ii) the PDO indicator on "Direct project beneficiaries, of
        which percentage of women" was dropped; and (iii) the PDO indicator on "Public investment proposals (PIP)
        prepared according to agreed procedures" was downgraded to IRI level and replaced at the PDO level by a
        new indicator capturing "Proportion of the PIP [Public Investment Project/Proposal] complaint with PIM [Public
        Investment Management] manual investment budget." Reflecting the project's expanded scope, the AF
        introduced a new PDO indicator capturing the "Number of statistical products completed and published by
        INS following international standards." The two-remaining original PDO indicators on "Public contracts
        procured through open competition" and "Discrepancy between MEPS civil service database and the payroll"
        were maintained without change as part of the AF. The second project restructuring dropped "Discrepancy
        between MEPS civil service database and the payroll" and replaced it with a new PDO indicator capturing the
        "Number of Ministries equipped with remote work tools.”

        The revisions to the RF at AF attempted to address shortcomings in the original RF. The Component 1 PDO
        indicator on public investment proposals was downgraded to an IRI indicator, with a new PDO indicator
        added to focus on PIP compliance with the PIM. The second PDO indicator on public contracts remained,
        even though it was more appropriate as an IRI. The revised RF added a third outcome focusing on enhancing
        statistical capacity.

        Overall, the outputs reported in the RF can be reasonably attributed to the project, but they did not clearly and
        reasonably demonstrate progress toward achievement of the PDO. Targets fpr PDO indicators for PFM and
        HRM were achieved, but the target for the new PDO focusing on enhanced statistical capacity was only
        partially achieved. The pause in disbursements resulting from OP7.30 prevented access to the resources
        needed to develop a General Census of Enterprises. Targets for two of four IRIs for PFM and one of two
        indicators for HRM were achieved, along with both IRIs for enhanced statistical capacity.



                                                                                                           Page 10 of 19
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       GN: Economic Governance Technical Assist (P125890)




  Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating                           Primary Reason
  Modest                                                       Low achievement


 5. Efficiency
The efficiency of the project is rated as Modest, given the lack of an economic efficiency measure at appraisal,
and based on the economic and financial analysis conducted for the ICR.

Economic Efficiency: Economic rate of return (ERR) and internal rate of return (IRR) analyses were not
calculated at appraisal. The PAD said they were "not applicable to this project." Instead, the PAD referenced a
2007 Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability assessment and cited a positive GDP trend following the
election. To address this gap in economic analysis, the ICR team retroactively conducted the economic and
financial analysis (EFA) of the project both at appraisal (ex-ante) and at completion (ex-post). Two types of
economic benefits were considered in the EFA: (i) the impact of improved procurement and public investment
on GDP growth; and (ii) the fiscal multiplier resulting from wage bill savings. A detailed analysis of the EFA and
the assumptions used was included as Annex 4 of the ICR. The underlying assumptions and methods of the
EFA were reasonable and relevant to the original and revised project PDOs.

Based on this analysis, the estimated economic and financial impact of the project at completion was lower than
the impact estimated at appraisal. At appraisal, it was estimated that the project, through improved public
investment efficiency and execution rate, would yield important economic gains with: (i) a Net Present Value
(NPV) of US$4,155.6 million (representing 60 percent of the GDP at the start of the project in 2012); (ii) an IRR
of 362.2 percent; (iii) a ratio of public investment to GDP moving from an average of 7 percent before the project
to an estimated level of 10.8 percent by 2025; and (d) a GDP growth reaching an annual rate of 7 percent by
2025, compared to 3.9 percent before the project. Wage bill savings were estimated to lead to a financial NPV of
US$190.37 million and a financial IRR of 434.89 percent at appraisal (low scenario). The extra resources gained
by the government from cleaning the wage bill would yield important economic gains through the fiscal multiplier
that showed potentially important economic benefits from the wage bill by 2030, amounting to US$250.4 million
(3.6 percent of GDP) in the low scenario and up to US$1,001.7 million (14.3 percent of GDP) in the high
scenario. However, these scenarios could not be adequately adjusted to reflect the GoG’s implementation
capacity, ownership, and willingness to reform, critical factors required for the wage bill savings to materialize.

Operational Efficiency: The project took ten years to implement while its overall financing increased over three-
fold, from US$10 million at effectiveness to US$32 million after AF. The project had an original closing date of
December 31, 2016, but closed on June 30, 2022, following three extensions totaling five and a half years. AF of
US$22 million, five years into what was originally intended to be a four-year implementation, substantially
expanded the original project scope. The Ebola outbreak, COVID-19 pandemic, and political uncertainty leading
up to and immediately following the 2020 national elections and the 2021 military coup created significant
implementation delays that contributed to the need for a further closing date extension. The final restructuring,
which occurred in the final month of implementation, canceled the following activities that could not be
completed across three project components.

Component 1: (i) acquisition of a fiscal administration system; (ii) fiscal training for agents of the Tax Directorate
(Direction Nationale des Impots); (iii) training of Ministry of Planning and sectorial ministries staff related to PIM;
and (vi) training on the new procurement code.



                                                                                                         Page 11 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      GN: Economic Governance Technical Assist (P125890)



Component 2: technical assistance and training activities.

Component 3: (i) General Census of Enterprises (RGE) statistical product; and (ii) high-frequency COVID-19
telephone survey.

The financing envelope was reduced by US$ 5 million to US$27 million. Project management costs totaled
US$2.2 million, representing 12.9 percent of the final disbursed amount, of which US$1.42 million was charged
for staff time.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?               Point value (%)         *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     0
 Appraisal                                                   0
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     0
 ICR Estimate                                                0
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Original Project

The relevance of objectives is rated as High. The efficacy of the project is rated as Modest. The efficiency of the
project is rated as Modest. The outcome of the original project is assessed as Moderately Unsatisfactory.

Revised Project

The relevance of objectives is rated as High. The efficacy of the project is rated Modest. The efficiency of the
project is rated Modest. The outcome of the revised project is assessed as Moderately Unsatisfactory.

Split Rating Table

                                                                    Before second         After second Project
                                                                    Project Restructuring Restructuring
  Relevance of PDO                                                  High (rated Substantial in ICR)
  Overall Efficacy Rating                                           Modest
  Project Efficacy Assessment under the Original Objectives         Modest



                                                                                                     Page 12 of 19
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       GN: Economic Governance Technical Assist (P125890)



  Project Efficacy Assessment under the Revised Objectives
                                                                      Modest
(original outcome targets)
  Project Efficacy Assessment under the revised objectives
                                                                      Modest (rated Substantial in ICR)
(revised outcome targets for both PFM and HRM outcomes)
  Efficiency Rating                                                   Modest
                                                                       Moderately           Moderately
1      Outcome Ratings (ICR Guidelines, Appendix H)
                                                                      Unsatisfactory       Unsatisfactory
2      Numerical Value of the outcome ratings*                        3                    3
3      Disbursement                                                   $16.71 Million       $7.88 Million
4      Share of Disbursement                                           67.9%               31.63%
5      Final Outcome Rating                                            Moderately Unsatisfactory (3)

*Highly Unsatisfactory (1); Unsatisfactory (2); Moderately Unsatisfactory (3); Moderately Satisfactory (4);
Satisfactory (5); Highly Satisfactory (6)

Overall, the ICR ratings were consistent with the ICRR assessment, except for project efficacy of the revised
project. The ICR rating was rated as Substantial. This ICRR rates this as Modest, due in large measure to the
limited progress that was made on the additional PDO added during the second restructuring that focused on
enhancing statistical capacity, which was only partially achieved.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Unsatisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The risk to the sustainability of the development outcome is assessed as Substantial.

Despite the overall strengthening of the legal, regulatory, and human resource aspects of PFM institutions in
Guinea, the country will likely continue to exhibit the characteristics of an FCV-affected state. While the
project restructuring enabled the GoG to ensure remote connectivity and business continuity during COVID-
19, and statistics activities enabled the GoG to develop basic tools to measure and assess the incidence of
poverty in the country, the sustainability of these and other project achievements will be constrained by (i)
overall weak governance, (ii) low staff capacity, and (iii) political uncertainties associated with the country's
tenuous transition to democracy that was impacted by the 2021 coup.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
    At the time of appraisal, there was a lot of optimism in the country, with the election of the first-ever
    democratic government in Guinea in 2010. The Condé administration embarked on a comprehensive
    reform agenda centered on building the foundation for effective institutions, including PFM, HRM, and

                                                                                                      Page 13 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GN: Economic Governance Technical Assist (P125890)



  broader public sector management. The WB partnered with a new administration committed to
  meaningful PFM and HRM reform. The project that was developed reflected this optimism.

  Project design was informed by several analytical works, including the 2007 PEFA assessment and the
  2018 PEFA and PIMA assessments for the restructuring. The lack of political economy and/or
  stakeholder analyses focusing on PFM, HRM and more generally at the national level (at appraisal and
  during project implementation) was a missed opportunity to better understand contextual political and
  FCV dynamics. The absence of a standard cost-benefit analysis at appraisal was also a missed
  opportunity to better understand the economic context. The lack of a ToC at appraisal made it difficult to
  establish causal linkages between the indicators and project objectives.

  While the project was aligned with the GoG's PFM and national development strategies, the ICR notes
  that this resulted in an overly ambitious and scattered project scope, with separate and distinct PFM and
  HRM components that did not lend themselves to supporting a comprehensive reform program (See
  Section 4).



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The Bank conducted regular supervision of the project, with support missions generating 19 ISRs from
 November 2012 to June 2022. However, there were four TTLs over a ten-year period from project
 preparation to closure. This relatively high turnover of TTLs compromised institutional memory and
 implementation continuity. A Midterm Review was not conducted, which could have identified
 implementation challenges and questioned the advisability of additional financing given the slow progress.
 They would have enabled the WB Team to develop more realistic PDO indicators and IRI targets that more
 closely reflected component-level activities and were more directly aligned with the project’s overall PDO.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The ICR notes several shortcomings that affected the quality of M&E design in both the original and revised
 projects: (i) the PDOs were overly ambitious and too general, resulting in fragmented and disconnected
 components not clearly linked to the broader reform agenda; (ii) the PAD did not provide a theory of
 change (ToC) to capture the link between the PDO and objective- and IRI-level indicators; (iii) many of the

                                                                                                   Page 14 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GN: Economic Governance Technical Assist (P125890)



 indicators were output driven, making it difficult to trace and establish project outcomes; (iv) the project's
 second restructuring dropped several key activities for COVID-19 reprioritization, further diluting the
 project's notional ToC developed at the second restructuring; and (v) the PDO and IRI-level indicators did
 not capture some key activity-generated results (See Section 4).



b. M&E Implementation
  Project M&E arrangements were adequate, with ministries and agencies involved in collecting and
  sharing this data with the Project Coordination Unit (PCU), which maintained a local M&E specialist.
  However, these arrangements were disrupted by frequent institutional changes and changes to the PCU.
  The overall supervision of the PCU changed twice, from the Ministry of Economy and Finance to the
  Minister of Planning and Economic Development, and then to the Prime Minister's office. Frequent
  changes characterized the PCU itself. Due to turnover, the preparation of M&E reports was delayed but
  delivered in compliance with Bank requirements. Better monitoring of beneficiaries and relevant ministries
  should have been carried out to ensure the objectives were achieved. The large number of beneficiaries
  and the frequent changes to the project results framework also added complexity to M&E implementation.
  While an M&E manual was drafted at the beginning of the project, it was not revised to reflect the
  changes to the RF based on the AF and project restructurings.



c. M&E Utilization
  M&E data on performance and results progress could have been better used to inform strategic
  redirection, resource reallocation (especially given the large AF envelope), project management, and
  decision-making. This information should have been collected and analyzed in an MTR, which the
  project team did not conduct.

  While ISRs were regularly prepared, they did not accurately track the changes to the RF that were made
  in project restructurings and at AF. Some of the indicators were not reported, making it difficult to assess
  the progress and impact at project closure. For example, the final ISR (Sequence #19, June 30, 2022)
  reported on 4 PDO indicators and 7 IRIs which did not account for the 8 PDO indicators and 16 IRIs that
  the ICR lists on pages 13-14 (the original PDO indicator on public investment proposals prepared that
  was downgraded to an IRI at AF is counted as an IRI). The ICR notes that project management and
  institutional changes, coupled with frequent revisions to the project results framework, challenged M&E
  utilization. There was no mention in the ICR if project findings were communicated to stakeholders
  beyond regular WB reporting (including Aide Memoires, Management Letters, ISRs, and dialogue with
  the GoG on project restructurings and the AF).

  Original Project: Modest

  Revised Project: Modest



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest


                                                                                                     Page 15 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GN: Economic Governance Technical Assist (P125890)



10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Environmental Safeguards: The project did not include any activities that involved significant social risks,
   nor did it deal directly with the population at large. The project financed consulting services, goods, training,
   and workshops.

   Social Safeguards: No civil works or activities with negative environmental implications were undertaken.
   The project was classified under category C, with no environmental safeguard policies triggered.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Throughout implementation, the project effectively complied with the financing agreement covenants. The
   PCU submitted periodic Interim Financial Reports with a quality (content, format, and depth of information)
   satisfactory to the Bank. It provided relevant information to help management in decision-making on using
   funds. In addition, acceptable audit reports and management letters were prepared and timely submitted to
   the Bank in acceptable form and substance. The PCU, for the most part, fully implemented the external
   auditors' recommendations. Some financial management (FM) weaknesses were identified, mainly related
   to budget monitoring and the overrun in some budget lines. This, even if on a regular basis, would not have
   impacted the quality of the FM system. Overall, based on supervision missions, review of the financial
   statements, and annual audit reports, despite some irregularities noticed, project FM's performance was
   adequate and satisfactory.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   The ICR noted several unintended positive impacts that were not captured by the results framework but
   contributed to the overall PDOs for the original and revised projects. They included: (i) implementation of
   the Treasury's digital platform; (ii) development of the national strategy for the fight against COVID-19; and
   (iii) the revision of the public procurement code. See the Efficacy Section above for additional unintended
   impacts in Components 1 and 2.



d. Other
   The ICR raised no other issues.



11. Ratings
                                                                                   Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                    IEG
                                                                                   Disagreements/Comment


                                                                                                      Page 16 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GN: Economic Governance Technical Assist (P125890)



                                Moderately            Moderately
Outcome
                                Unsatisfactory        Unsatisfactory
                                Moderately            Moderately
Bank Performance
                                Unsatisfactory        Unsatisfactory
Quality of M&E                  Modest                Modest

Quality of ICR                  ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The following five lessons are informed by the ICR and project documents (ICR, pages 24-25).

Political economy matters, and it is important to be cognizant of vested interests and manage them
carefully, especially for projects promoting complex and sensitive reforms. Comprehensive PFM and
HRM reforms require adequate preparation including political economy analysis, wide political and
social ownership, consensus-building efforts, and feedback loops. Without such thorough
preparation, the likelihood of success is low, undermining the achievement of potentially substantial,
long-run gains for the country and society. While the initial design was aligned with government
strategy, providing a sound policy base and relevance, it was not realistic relative to the context. It
benefited from some analytical underpinning, but no political economy analysis was conducted to
better understand the enabling environment for PFM and HRM reforms.

Ensuring realism, prioritization, and sequencing of PFM and HRM reforms and testing the credibility
and commitment of the government in pursuing such reforms is essential. The first-ever
democratically elected government in Guinea developed a comprehensive and ambitious
governance reform program to address the enormous challenges ahead. In attempting to support
GoG priorities, project implementation suffered from a highly complex and overly ambitious project
design (and re-designs) that did not adequately account for the political economy of PFM and HRM
reform nor the credibility, commitment, and consistency of the government in pursuing such reforms.
In such contexts, it is important not to take for granted that a democratically elected government
would be fully committed to pursuing reforms. The government’s political commitment and
ownership should be analyzed and tested and be reflected accordingly in the project design. Design
should also adequately account for existing capacity limitations and the overall fragile environment.

For operations with a long duration and high staff turnover, it is necessary to ensure candid
reporting, which can help to mitigate institutional memory loss and provide reliable data for decision-
making. Throughout implementation, there was a high turnover of TTLs and procurement specialists,
which meant the project could not maintain and benefit from the institutional memory on the part of
the WB. Three restructurings and one AF over ten years made it difficult for new project team
members to track activities, indicators, and results, thus undermining the use of data for informed
decision-making.

A clear ToC, informed by rigorous analytical products, should be the foundation for developing
project activities that provide data for a coherent M&E framework. The absence of rigorous and
targeted political and economic analyses conducted at appraisal and the lack of a ToC were major
shortcomings that undermined the utility of the M&E for informing implementation and measuring


                                                                                                    Page 17 of 19
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       GN: Economic Governance Technical Assist (P125890)



impact. This made it difficult for the ICR team to develop a coherent and comprehensive storyline for
the ten-year project.

WB Task Teams should be encouraged to close underperforming operations and develop follow-on
projects that incorporate lessons learned, especially in countries that experience protracted and
unpredictable political transitions. The numerous changes made to the project across an AF and
three separate restructurings in a country beset by a challenging transition to democratic rule made
it difficult to keep focused on the higher-level reform PDOs. The project's financing more than tripled
and its implementation timeline expanded from four to ten years, while repeated redirection of its
scope and resourcing contributed to uneven efficacy across all areas that the project attempted to
engage. In such situations of substantial re-set and re-design, it would be better to initiate dedicated
and organic policy dialogue and analytical underpinning that could lead to new project/program
design.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR presented a clear and coherent narrative of the project, which was long in duration (ten years) and
very complex, with multiple restructurings and an AF that substantially increased the project budget. The ICR
provided seven annexes that provided ample data and analysis to understand implementation challenges and
demonstrate project successes, even without a ToC and standard cost-benefit analysis at appraisal. The
analysis was comprehensive and balanced, providing an honest and thoughtful understanding of project
outputs and outcomes, both intended and unintended. The lessons learned were clear, comprehensive, honest,
and on target. They logically flow from the data and analysis provided in the ICR. The final lesson learned
candidly reflects on the need for Task Teams to carefully weigh the costs and benefits associated with
restructuring or closing underperforming operations. The ICR also identifies some of the limitations of the RF,
providing clear and actionable ways that could have improved the monitoring of outputs and outcomes and
better connected to the original and revised project PDOs. ICR guidelines and methodology were followed in a
concise and consistent way.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                     Page 18 of 19
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
GN: Economic Governance Technical Assist (P125890)




                                                                                  Page 19 of 19
