     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Regional Pastoral Livelihoods Resilience (P129408)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0023405

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P129408                                     Regional Pastoral Livelihoods Resilience

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Eastern and Southern Africa                 Agriculture and Food


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-53850,IDA-53880,IDA-55450,IDA-          31-Dec-2019                                        178,168,342.87
 H9190

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 18-Mar-2014                                 31-Dec-2021

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            122,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                             197,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Actual                                         178,168,342.87                                              0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Hassan Wally                Vibecke Dixon                 Avjeet Singh                   IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) of the Regional Pastoral livelihoods Resilience Project (RPLRP) as
   articulated in the Financing Agreement (FA, page 5) for Kenya, Uganda and Ethiopia was identical to the one
   stated in the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, paragraph 20) and aimed to:




                                                                                                   Page 1 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Regional Pastoral Livelihoods Resilience (P129408)



   "enhance livelihood resilience of pastoral and agro-pastoral communities in cross-border drought
   prone areas of Selected Countries and improve the capacity of the Selected Countries' governments
   to respond promptly and effectively to an Eligible Crisis or Emergency."

   Parsing the PDO. The PDO will be parsed based on the following two objectives:

   1. To enhance livelihood resilience of pastoral and agro-pastoral communities in cross-border drought prone
   areas of Selected Countries.

   2. To improve the capacity of the Selected Countries' governments to respond promptly and effectively to an
   Eligible Crisis or Emergency.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The PDO was supported by the following five components:

   1. Natural Resources Management (appraisal cost: US$29.50 million, actual cost:US$65.03 million).
   This component aimed to enhance sustainable management and secure access of pastoral and agro-
   pastoral communities to natural resources (water and pasture) with trans-boundary significance. It included
   the following three sub-components:
   1.1. Water Resources Development to design, build and rehabilitate water resources access facilities; and
   capacity building for communities for operations and maintenance.
   1.2. Sustainable Land Management in pastoral and agro-pastoral areas, supporting mapping, restoration
   and management, and harmonization of policies on rangeland management across RPLRP countries.
   1.3. Securing Access to pastoral-related Natural Resources, aimed to prevent conflicts and build peace
   among communities.

   2. Market Access and Trade (appraisal cost: US$26.90, actual cost: US$40.59 million). This
   component aimed to improve the market access of the agro-pastoralists and pastoralists to the intra-
   regional and international markets of livestock and livestock products. It included the following two sub-
   components:
   2.1. Market Support Infrastructure and Information System, to strengthen national livestock marketing
   information and integration at regional level; rehabilitation and equipping market infrastructure along trade
   routes; and to build relevant capacity.
   2.2. Livestock Value-Chain Support and Improving Livestock Mobility and Trade, support for research on
   and the development of selected livestock-related cross-border value chains, specifically in arid and semi-
   arid areas.

   3. Livelihood Support (appraisal cost: US$25.40 million, actual cost: US$38.84 million). This
   component aimed to enhance livelihoods of pastoralist and agro-pastoralist communities. It included the
   following three sub-components:

                                                                                                     Page 2 of 22
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Regional Pastoral Livelihoods Resilience (P129408)



  3.1. Livestock Production and Health, financed region-wide harmonized vaccination campaigns for priority
  diseases such as Peste des petits ruminants (PPR), Foot and Mouth Disease (FMD), Contagious bovine
  pleuropneumonia (CBPP), Contagious Caprine Pleuropneumonia (CCPP), Rift Valley Fever (RVF) and
  Newcastle disease (ND) and enhanced disease and vector control and surveillance in targeted drought-
  prone areas.
   3.2. Food and Feed Production, improvements in fodder bulking and conservation, establishment of small-
  scale irrigation and water management schemes for crop and fodder production and dry season grazing;
  provision of relevant training; and construction and rehabilitation of storage and post-harvest facilities
  adapted to pastoral conditions and agricultural production.
  3.3. Livelihoods Diversification through identification of alternative livelihood opportunities.

  4. Pastoral Risk Management (appraisal cost: US$10.20 million, actual cost: US$20.98 million). This
  component aimed to enhance drought-related hazards preparedness, prevention and response at the
  national and regional levels. It included the following three sub-components:
  4.1. Pastoral Risk Early Warning and Response System to establish and operationalize a region- and
  nation-wide Early Warning System (EWS) to collect, analyze and disseminate early warning reports and
  inform decision makers
  4.2. Drought Disaster Risk Management (DDRM) including region, nation and county-level training and
  capacity building on DDRM related key policies and guidelines.

  4.3. Contingency Emergency Response to support mitigation, response, recovery and reconstruction in the
  event of a disaster that affects the livelihood of pastoral and agro-pastoral communities in project areas.

  5. Project Management and Institutional Support (appraisal cost: US$25.00 million, actual
  cost:US$30.88 million). This component would support project management including monitoring
  safeguards mitigation measures and institutional strengthening at national and regional levels for drought
  resilience. It included the following two sub-components:
  5.1. Project Management, M&E, Learning Knowledge Management and Communication to support the
  implementation of national project coordination units (PCU) in project countries.
  5.2. Regional and National Institutional Support to provide technical and investment support to enhance
  provision of services by relevant national and regional institutions on drought resilience.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost. The total project cost at appraisal was estimated at US$122.00 million, including 2% physical
  contingencies and 3% price contingencies. The actual project cost was US$178.17 million. The increase
  was from an additional financing that the project received after Ethiopia joined the project (see below). The
  ICR team clarified that the difference in the project financing (US$197million) and the actual amount
  disbursed (US$178.17 million) was due to the exchange rate fluctuations against the SDR.

  Financing. The project was financed through IDA for the participating countries. The financing for the first
  phase project was as follows: Kenya (US$77.00 million equivalent); and Uganda (US$40.00 million
  equivalent). Also, an IDA grant was provided to IGAD (US$5.00 million equivalent) to ensure smooth
  coordination and harmonization of interventions at the sub-regional level. In October 2014, Ethiopia joined
  the project with an Additional Financing worth US$75.00 million equivalent. The total Financing amount was
  US$197.00 million. The Kenya financing disbursed US$70.15 million, Uganda financing disbursed


                                                                                                  Page 3 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Regional Pastoral Livelihoods Resilience (P129408)



   US$36.30 million, IGAD financing disbursed US$4.56 million, and Ethiopia financing disbursed US$67.16
   million. The total amount disbursed was US$178.17 million (ICR, Data Sheet, page 2).

   Borrower Contribution. The project was fully financed through IDA financing with no contribution from the
   Borrowers.

   Dates. The project was approved on March 18, 2014 and became effective nine months later on December
   15, 2014. The Mid-Term Review (MTR) was conducted on November 13, 2017, which was about three
   years into effectiveness. While the PAD did not include a specific date for the MTR, this Review finds that
   the MTR was conducted in a reasonable time after effectiveness. The project closed on December
   31, 2021, which was two years after the original closing date on December 31, 2019. The two year
   extension was needed to "to enable all countries to complete key strategic infrastructure sub-projects and
   other activities (ICR, paragraph 28)." The project was restructured four times, all Level 2, and received one
   additional financing as follows:

   1. On 27 June, 2018, when the amount disbursed was US$63.92 million, in order to introduce changes to
   components and cost; and reallocate funds between disbursement categories. This restructuring involved
   project activities in Kenya.

   2. On October 16, 2018, when the amount disbursed was US$72.23 million, in order to revise the Results
   Framework; and introduce changes to components and cost. This restructuring involved project activities in
   Ethiopia and Uganda.

   3. On November 28, 2019, when the amount disbursed was US$139.93 million, in order to revise the
   Results Framework; and extend the Loan closing date by 15 months from December 31, 2019 to March 31,
   2021. This restructuring involved all three countries and IGAD.

   4. On March 4, 2021, when the amount disbursed was US$170.01 million, in order to extend the Loan
   closing date from March 31, 2021 to December 31, 2021. This restructuring involved all three countries and
   IGAD.

   5. An Additional Financing of US$77.00 million was approved in October 2014 for Ethiopia. This expanded
   project activities to reflect specific interventions that were targeted for Ethiopia. The project design did not
   change but the results framework and overall project costs were revised accordingly.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Context at Appraisal. At the time of appraisal, arid and semi-arid lands (ASALs) in the Horn of Africa
(HoA) represented and still are more than 60% of the total area with a pastoral population estimated
between 12 and 22 million. In Ethiopia, Kenya and Uganda more specifically, ASALs were home to a

                                                                                                      Page 4 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Regional Pastoral Livelihoods Resilience (P129408)



relevant percentage of the population and livestock herd, contributing about 50% to agricultural Gross
Domestic Product (GDP). Despite their considerable economic contributions to African countries,
pastoralists lived under enormous stress and constituted the most vulnerable segment of Africa's
population. The RPRP aimed to develop regional solutions to the challenges faced by the pastoralists
residing in the ASALs of Kenya, Uganda and other countries from the HoA such as Ethiopia, to enhance
available opportunities for livelihood development.

Previous Bank Experience. The Bank has had implementation experience in the three participating
countries. The Bank also would draw on similar initiatives financed by the Bank and development partners
to support pastoralists' livelihood resilience. Most notable Bank-financed projects in the region were Kenya's
Arid Lands Resources Management Project (ALRMP), Uganda's Water Management Project and the Lake
Victoria Environmental Management Project (LVEMP), the Agro-Pastoral and Land Management Project in
Cameroon, and the Pastoral Community Development Project (PCDP) series in Ethiopia.

Consistency with Bank Strategies. The PDO aligned with the Bank's Agriculture Action Plan (2013-15) at
appraisal. The project was expected to support the Bank's efforts towards aiding clients to define and
harmonize early action frameworks and interventions to mitigate key climate-sensitive infectious diseases.
The project also was expected to contribute to supporting the global goals of the World Bank of fighting
extreme poverty and shared prosperity. At the country level, the PDO aligned with the principal objectives
articulated in the national development strategies and policies in the Country Strategies of the three
participating countries. The PDO aligned with the Bank's Country Partnership Strategy for Kenya (CPS,
FY2010-FY2013) which aimed to deepen regional integration. The PDO was also in line with the Bank's
Country Assistance Strategy (CAS, FY2011-FY2015) for Uganda which featured four strategic objectives:
to promote inclusive and sustainable economic growth; to enhance public infrastructure; to strengthen
human capital development; and to improve good governance and value for money. Finally, the PDO was
in line with Bank's Country Partnership Strategy (CPS, FY2013-FY2017) for Ethiopia as the project
would contribute to a number of strategic objectives of the CPS, including broad-based economic growth,
reduction of vulnerabilities and improved environmental sustainability.

At completion, the PDO continued to align with the Bank’s Country Partnership Framework (CPF, FY2016-
FY2021) for Uganda. The CPF's key focus areas and objectives included: improving service delivery by
reducing regional gaps in social services, and uplifting the living standards of the most lagging regions. The
CPF also supported raising incomes in rural areas through productivity enhancement to generate growth
and reduce poverty and vulnerability. The PDO remained in line with the Bank’s Country Partnership
Framework CPF (FY2018-FY22) for Ethiopia. The CPF's strategic focus areas included building resilience
and inclusiveness and enhancing the management of natural resources and climate risks by addressing
land degradation. While the ICR did not report on Kenya's CPF at completion, this Review found that PDO
remained in line with the Bank’s CPF (FY2023-FY2028) for Kenya. Specifically, the project would contribute
to the CPF's Objective 6 (increase household resilience to, and national preparedness for, shocks); and
Objective 7 (reduce Kenya’s water insecurity).

Also, at the regional level the PDO remained in line with the IGAD ’s strategy pillars and the IGAD Drought
Disaster Resilience and Sustainability Initiative (IDDRSI) priority areas, which emphasized raising the well-
being of pastoralists and agro-pastoralists. The PDO was also in line with the Africa Regional Integration
Strategy (FY18-FY23) which highlighted the importance of regional value chains along key economic
corridors and underscores development of functioning regional markets as part of the strategic priorities.




                                                                                                    Page 5 of 22
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                       Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Regional Pastoral Livelihoods Resilience (P129408)



               Consistency with Government Strategies/Priorities. At appraisal, the PDO was in line with
               Kenya's Medium-Term Investment Plan (MTIP) for Growth and Food Security through Increased
               Agricultural Productivity and Trade (2010- 2015). The MTIP aimed to promote sustainable land and
               natural resources management; increase market access and trade, and (iii) ensure effective coordination
               and implementation. The PDO was also in line with Uganda's Agriculture Sector Development Strategy and
               Investment Plan (2010/11-2014/15), and specifically, with sub-programs on production and
               productivity, market access and value addition, enabling environment, and institutional strengthening.
               Finally, the PDO aligned with Ethiopia's development policies articulated in the Growth and Transformation
               Plan (GTP1 2010/11-2014/15), which sets a long-term goal for Ethiopia to become a middle-income country
               by 2023 and aims to develop livestock production and other pastoral resources.

               At completion, the PDO continued to align with the Africa Regional Integration Strategy (FY18-23) which
               highlighted the importance of regional value chains along key economic corridors and underscores
               development of functioning regional markets as part of the strategic priorities. The PDO also aligned with
               Uganda's National Development Plan III (2020/21 – 2024/25) whose key strategic objective was
               accelerating poverty reduction in lagging regions by addressing critical challenges such as climate change
               effects. The PDO remained in line with Ethiopia's Growth and Transformation Plan (GTP2 2015-2020),
               which sets a long-term goal for Ethiopia to become a middle-income country by 2023 and aims to develop
               livestock production and other pastoral resources. Finally, the PDO remained in line with Kenya's Big 4
               Agenda that emphasized focusing on food security.

               Summary of Relevance of Objectives Assessment. While the term "enhance livelihood resilience" in
               the PDO statement was vague, the PAD (paragraph 21) provided a clear definition of the term. The PDO
               was pitched at an adequate level of ambition. The PDO was also in line with the Bank strategies for the
               participating countries at completion. The PDO also remained in line with Government priorities at
               completion regarding pastoral systems. Addressing issues related to mobility, cross-border trade, drought
               risk mitigation, climate change and resilience were all expected to continue to be priorities for the
               participating countries. Therefore, the Relevance of Objectives is rated High.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To enhance livelihood resilience of pastoral and agro-pastoral communities in cross-border drought prone
                             areas of Selected Countries.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change (ToC). To achieve the stated objective, the project would support three sets of activities:
                             (i) map a baseline of groundwater resources; build and rehabilitate water resource facilities; re-seed degraded

                                                                                                                              Page 6 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Regional Pastoral Livelihoods Resilience (P129408)



areas, build rehabilitate forage structures; provisions to guarantee access to water points and grazing areas,
safeguard against encroachment; (ii) build, rehabilitate, equip primary market infrastructure; provide
equipment and train stakeholders to use Livestock Management Information System (LMIS); finance, ratify
and implement regional policies and regulations and provide appropriate training; and (iii) support region-wide
harmonized vaccination campaigns; train Community Animal Health Workers (CAHWs) and support them
with equipment; support fodder bulking and conservation; and identify and strengthen alternative livelihood
opportunities. The expected outputs would be: (i) mapped groundwater resources along cross-border
pastoralist routes, infrastructure developed for access to water resources, sustainable land management
implemented in pastoral and agro-pastoral areas, and access to pastoral-related natural resources secured;
(ii) market infrastructure developed, market information system made operational, regulatory framework for
the livestock value chain in place, and training on regional and regulatory policies provided to stakeholders;
and (iii) harmonized vaccination campaigns for priority diseases carried out, vets and para professional vets
trained in disease detection and reporting, fodder bulking and conservation improved, and alternative
livelihood opportunities identified and undertaken. The expected intermediate outcomes would be: (i)
minimized animal stress/deaths and improved animal health, improved land and water management
practices, localized conflicts in pastoral regions minimized/prevented, and peacekeeping initiatives enhanced;
(ii) access to economic activities for targeted communities increased, markets' access for livestock
improved, quality standards of livestock improved; and (iii) health and productivity of livestock improved, the
resilience of livestock improved, and access to economic opportunities and resilience of targeted communities
increased. The activities above combined were expected to contribute to achieving the project's objective of
enhancing the livelihood resilience of pastoral and agro-pastoral communities in target areas.

The achievement of the PDO was underpinned by four critical assumptions: (a) Timely delivery of project
intervention, (b) Quality of program implementation, (c) Sustainability of Government commitment, and
(d) Continuity of Donor Support.

The activities stated in the ToC were directly related to the stated outcomes in a plausible causal chain. Also,
the stated assumptions were realistic.

Outputs/Intermediate Results

(Note that not all indicators had revised targets)

1. Number of water infrastructures along cross-border migration routes rehabilitated or newly built under the
project that were operational and sustainably managed: In Uganda 102 (original target of 116, revised target:
102) (achievement rate 88%, 100%), in Kenya 118 exceeding both the original target of 95 and a revised
target of 78, and in Ethiopia 138 (original target of 174, revised target: 146). According to the ICR (paragraph
38), "At the regional level, 487 boreholes, 250 water pans/dams, 56 springs, and 973 other water-related
infrastructures were mapped to facilitate livestock movement during droughts and cross border trade."

2. Percentage of pastoral households with improved access to water through project infrastructures
rehabilitation and development: in Uganda, 60% compared to an original target of 70%; in Kenya, 61.20 %
exceeding the original target of 50%; and in Ethiopia, 38.68% compared to an original target of 50%.

3. Land area where sustainable land management practices were adopted as a result of the project: in
Uganda, 900 hectares (ha) exceeding both the original target of 600 ha and the revised target of 480 ha; in



                                                                                                   Page 7 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Regional Pastoral Livelihoods Resilience (P129408)



Kenya, 2,494 ha exceeding the original target of 2,400 ha, in Ethiopia 10,436 ha exceeding the original target
of 8,000 ha.

4. Number of platforms solving cross-border natural resources management conflicts formed and operational:
in Uganda, 12 platforms compared to an original target of 1 and a revised target of 12 (target achieved); in
Kenya, 16 platforms compared to an original target of 16 (target achieved), in Ethiopia 10 platforms compared
to an original target of 21 and a revised target of 10.

5. Number of regional or cross-border market infrastructures rehabilitated or newly built under the project that
are operational and sustainably managed: in Uganda 12 markets compared to an original target of 12 (target
achieved); in Kenya, 30 markets substantially exceeding the original target of 16, in Ethiopia 24 markets
compared to an original target of 14 and a baseline of 10 (target achieved).

6. Twenty one regional protocols about sanitary and phytosanitary standards were ratified by the participating
countries exceeding the target of 12 (target exceeded).

7. Number of suspicions of outbreaks of selected diseases of regional importance (PPR and FMD) reported
and tested in central laboratories: in Uganda 2,439 cases compared to the original target of 2,412 cases
(target achieved); in Kenya 109,439 cases compared to the original target of 87,304 cases and a baseline
of 14,300 (target achieved), in Ethiopia 90 cases compared to an original target of 55 cases (target
exceeded).

8. Percentage households targeted by the project satisfied with livestock health services: in Uganda, 79%,
Kenya 86% compared to an original target of 70% for both countries (target exceeded), and in Ethiopia, 70%
compared to an original target of 90% (target not achieved).

9. Number of new technologies demonstrated in the project area: in Uganda, 6 compared to an original target
of 5; in Kenya, 9 compared to an original target of 8; in Ethiopia, 6 compared to an original target of 5 (targets
exceeded for the three countries).

10. Number of alternative livelihood sub-projects realized and sustainably managed two years after initial
investments: in Uganda 4 sub-projects compared to an original target of 3 (target exceeded); in Kenya 5 sub-
projects compared to an original target of 5 (target achieved), in Ethiopia 11 sub-projects compared to an
original target of 10 (target exceeded).

Outcomes

The following elements are discussed under the stated objective with achievements for each
participating country:

1. Enhancing Livelihood resilience of pastoralists and agro-pastoralists. This was achieved through
improved disease control and surveillance, and availability of infrastructure and other livestock services that
reduced the incidence of livestock deaths and strengthened the livestock value chain, enabling them to
realize higher returns.

      In Ethiopia community access to veterinary drugs was higher in project intervention areas (35%)
       compared to control areas (31%). Throughout the life of the project, more than 7 million (cattle and
       goats) were vaccinated. The construction of water infrastructure also minimized the travel time to

                                                                                                    Page 8 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Regional Pastoral Livelihoods Resilience (P129408)



       livestock water points. According to the ICR (paragraph 35) a project survey showed that 54% of
       communities in intervention areas traveled on average one hour or less to reach their closest water
       sources compared to 51% in control areas. Also, the livestock death rate (PDO-1) was reduced to
       0.25% for cattle and 0.35% for goats (below the 1.8 and 2.2 targets, respectively for cattle and goats),
       which exceeded end of project targets.
      In Kenya the construction of water infrastructure for livestock reduced distances to access points and
       reduced water-induced stress of animals. At baseline, pastoralists walked an average of 13.7 km to
       access water resources, which was reduced to 7.0 km by project completion (ICR, paragraph 36).
       Also, the average queuing time at watering points for intervention groups was found to be 4.5 minutes
       less than the average queuing time for control groups. The livestock death rate (PDO-1) was reduced
       to 1.6% for cattle and 4.3% for goats (below the 7% and 8.4% targeted, respectively for cattle and
       goats), which exceeded end of project targets (ICR, paragraph 36).
      In Uganda, accessibility to vector control services was higher when compared to baseline (52%
       percent compared to 43% at baseline). Also, 37,900 households directly benefitted from water
       infrastructure and reduced distances for their livestock (less than 5km). The impact evaluation survey
       showed that 79% of households reported satisfaction with accessibility of animal related services
       compared to 27% at baseline. The livestock death rate (PDO-1) was reduced to 0.075% (below the
       target of 0.3%) in Uganda, exceeding end of project targets (ICR, paragraph 37).

2. The Development of market infrastructure and Livestock Market Information System (LMIS). This
resulted in higher access and participation in the market and diversified income sources for pastoralists and
agro-pastoralists thereby contributing to enhanced livelihood resilience (ICR, paragraph 38).

      In Ethiopia, the development of market infrastructure translated into higher participation rates for
       communities in project areas compared to control areas. For ruminant trade 91% of goat sellers
       participated in the markets in intervention areas compared to 88% from control areas. Also, market
       participation for cattle traders reached 59% in project areas compared to 56% in control areas.
       Overall, households in project areas showed a marked increase in market access and participation
       compared to baseline results (52% at the end of the project compared to 47% at baseline). The survey
       also showed that 50% of households in project areas had access to livestock price information
       compared to 37% of households in control areas, making selling livestock at competitive prices easier.
       Market infrastructure investments reduced the role of middlemen and contributed to better pricing and
       a higher share of income benefits that went to pastoralist communities. The survey showed that the
       number of cattle and shoats (young pigs) traded in selected markets (PDO-2) was 829 and 2,186
       (above targets of 758 and 2,093) while the real value of animals traded (PDO-3) exceeded the
       targeted increase by 163% and 209.4% for cattle and shoat, respectively (ICR, paragraph 39).
       Overall, the achievements of both the volume and value of livestock traded exceeded the end of the
       project targets set.
      In Kenya, 90% of households reported having access to livestock market information with the
       improvement of LMIS by the end of the project compared to a baseline of 71%. By project
       completion, the volume of cattle and shoats (PDO-2) traded in selected markets was 1,102 and 2,661,
       above the project targets of 1,061 and 1,908, respectively. The real value of livestock (PDO-3)
       increased by 116.6% percent and 229.2% which exceeded end of project targets for cattle and shoats
       (ICR, paragraph 40).
      In Uganda, the average monthly collection at markets increased to UGX7.6 million from UGX3.4
       million per month following infrastructure upgrades. The increase in cattle and goat trade also
       increased trade and its related products of meat and milk. Livestock volumes and values (PDO-2 and

                                                                                                   Page 9 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Regional Pastoral Livelihoods Resilience (P129408)



       PDO-3) were exceeded. According to the survey, cattle and shoats increased by 7%, above the end-
       of-project target of 5%, while the value of cattle and shoats increased by 22.6% above the target (ICR,
       paragraph 41).

Summary of Efficacy Assessment. The independent evaluations performed at completion showed that all
three countries met and exceeded outcome indicator targets as noted above. The project successfully
reduced livestock death rates (PDO-1) by investing in water infrastructure that ensures the availability and
accessibility of water for pastoral communities in a sustainable manner. The ICR also claimed that the
project strengthened livestock disease control and vector surveillance of FMD, PPR, and CBPP through
vaccinations, including synchronized cross-border vaccinations that reduced the incidence of disease among
livestock. However, no data was provided on the number of animal vaccination administered under the project
in the ICR. Based on the information shared by the ICR team (email dated June 2, 2023), the project
interventions facilitated the vaccination of about 49.4 million livestock in the region. The Livestock
Management Information System (LMIS) provided information on livestock pricing for different markets across
all three countries. This in turn enhanced access to markets for traders based on favorable pricing and
reduced the role of middlemen, enabling pastoralists to realize better prices for their livestock. The volumes
(PDO-2) and values (PDO-3) of livestock increased over the life of the project due to improved market
infrastructure attracting a high number of traders while grading of animals at the markets facilitated attractive
prices for different animals. Therefore, the efficacy with which this objective was achieved is rated
Substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To improve the capacity of the Selected Countries' governments to respond promptly and effectively to an
Eligible Crisis or Emergency.

Rationale
Theory of Change (ToC). To achieve the stated objective, the project would establish and operationalize a
region and nationwide Early Warning System (EWS); procure equipment, Information, and Communication
Technologies (ICT) platforms, and vehicles; build capacity on Geographic Information System (GIS)
and Drought Disaster Risk Management (DDRM) related policies and guidelines, develop contingency plans;
reallocate financing from components to cover emergency response partially. The expected outputs included:
establishing and operationalizing a region and nationwide early warning system; carrying out country-level
training and capacity-building activities on DDRM key policies and guidelines; developing contingency plans;
and mitigation, response, recovery, and reconstruction activities carried out following adverse natural event
(Contingent Emergency Response sub-component activated). Intermediate outcomes included:
preparedness, prevention, and response to drought and other disaster-related hazards enhanced at national
and regional levels; and improved and timely response to addressing drought and disaster-related risks.
These activities would improve the government's capacity to respond to crises promptly and effectively.




                                                                                                  Page 10 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Regional Pastoral Livelihoods Resilience (P129408)



The achievement of the PDO was underpinned by four critical assumptions: (a) Timely delivery of project
intervention, (b) Quality of program implementation, (c) Sustainability of Government commitment, and
(d) Continuity of Donor Support.

The activities stated in the ToC were directly related to the stated outcomes in a plausible causal chain. Also,
the stated assumptions were realistic.

Outputs/Intermediate Results

1. 1,233 stakeholders were trained on policy and regulations in the region exceeding the original target of
1,200.

2. 313 stakeholders were trained on policy and regulations in Ethiopia which was below the original target of
477.

3. Reliable information from Early Warning System (EWS) was disseminated timely for the three participating
countries (target achieved).

4. DDRM policies from the participating countries were harmonized and mainstreamed for the three
participating countries (target achieved).

5. Contingency plans were in place in the participating countries and IGAD: in Kenya, 15 plans (target
achieved); in Uganda, 12 plans (exceeding the original target of 1 and meeting the revised target of 12); and
in Ethiopia, One plan was in place (original target achieved).

6. IGAD supported the establishment of a region-wide emergency warning response platform to guide
national authorities in their actions based on collected data. Regional hazard maps were developed through
the project and used to develop the Kenya Food Security Steering Group biannual food and nutrition
assessment reports.

Outcome

      The project activities improved pastoral risk management and strengthened country Governments’
       capacity to respond and address crises and emergencies effectively. This was achieved through the
       development of reliable early warning systems and emergency fodder banks that ensured feed
       availability for livestock during emergency periods.
      In Ethiopia, the completion survey showed that 32% of households interviewed in the intervention
       areas reported facing major shocks. Of these, 33% reported receiving information that a disaster
       would happen compared to a baseline start of 22%. The time lapse between early warning and
       response time (PDO-4) was 6.3 days, below the end of project target of 7 days. The project also
       rehabilitated 10,437 Ha of rangelands exceeding the target of 8000 Ha, and established 836 Ha of
       emergency fodder banks (no target provided). An additional 500 Ha of fodder banks were developed
       to mitigate against drought disasters, where 81,835 hay bales were harvested, stored in hay stores,
       and distributed to beneficiaries. As a result of these interventions, feed availability was ensured for at
       least three months during drought periods, which provided sufficient feed for livestock during the
       emergency periods. M&E data showed that 401,726 individuals benefitted from these facilities. The
       ICR (paragraph 45) noted that storage facilities contributed to reducing incidences of conflict among
       communities due to a shortage of feed and water resources.

                                                                                                   Page 11 of 22
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Regional Pastoral Livelihoods Resilience (P129408)




                                  In Kenya, the completion survey showed that the time lapse between early warning and response time
                                   was reduced to 2 weeks, below the end-of-project target of 4 weeks (PDO-4 target exceeded). The
                                   Contingency Emergency Response Component (CERC) was activated in November 2017 to support
                                   urgent drought response interventions in Kenya that included the provision of supplementary feeding,
                                   disease surveillance, supportive treatment, livestock restocking, and restoration of water resources.
                                   US$5.591 million was reallocated for this purpose (ICR, paragraph 46).
                                  In Uganda, the completion survey showed that districts' responses to emergency mortality outbreaks
                                   were 5.6 days on average, significantly lower than the estimated target of 15 days for a response
                                   (PDO-4 target exceeded).

                            Summary of Efficacy Assessment. The evidence provided in the ICR point to the success of the project in
                            improving the capacity of the selected countries' governments to respond promptly to an eligible crisis or
                            emergency. However, the effectiveness of the response could not be adequately assessed due to the lack of
                            relevant indicators to measure this aspect. The project achieved or exceeded the outcome targets for PDO-4
                            in the three countries. Therefore, the efficacy with which this objective was achieved is rated Substantial.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Overall Efficacy is rated Substantial with minor shortcomings. The project achieved or exceeded its objectives
                            of enhancing the livelihood resilience of pastoral and agro-pastoral communities in cross-border drought-
                            prone areas of the three participating countries and improving the government's capacity to respond promptly
                            to eligible crises or emergencies. However, the effectiveness of the response could not be assessed
                            adequately due to the lack of specific indicators to measure this aspect.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



   5. Efficiency
   Economic and Financial Analysis (EFA)

   ex-ante




                                                                                                                            Page 12 of 22
         Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
         Regional Pastoral Livelihoods Resilience (P129408)



      The analysis estimated the internal rate (IRR) of return for Uganda and Kenya at 17.6% and 16.6%,
         respectively, and the Net Present Value ranged between US$10.00-15.00 million. According to the
         Additional Financing paper, the IRR for Ethiopia was estimated at 18.8%.
        Expected project benefits included: the reduction of animal mortality rates and increases in calving and
         off-take rates, improved access to shared natural resources (water and pasture) between
         countries, enhanced access to productive infrastructure and livestock-related services, improved
         availability of animal feeds and breeds, more robust regional systems for surveillance and control of
         diseases (such as trans-boundary animal diseases), and improved early warning and response
         mechanisms.
        Positive externalities included institutional strengthening, enhanced capacities of stakeholders, natural
         resources protection and biodiversity conservation. However, these benefits were not fully quantified due
         to the difficulty of attributing a monetary value to their contribution to the PDO.
        Sensitivity Analysis. The project was sensitive to changes in some of the project's variables (parturition
         and mortality rates), but returns are expected to be maintained if the investments aiming to enhance
         livelihood resilience are sustained.
        The PAD (paragraph 67) explained that the lack of accurate baseline data combined with the need to
         make numerous assumptions to describe the "with-project" scenario, the ex-ante results should be
         considered indicative rather than final.

ex-post

      A cost-benefit analysis was conducted following the same approach as done at appraisal to ensure
       methodological consistency and comparability. The economic internal rate of return (EIRR) for the overall
       project was estimated at 44.23%, and the NPV at US$197.58 million at a 12% discount rate. The NPV
       was significantly higher than the appraisal stage because the ex-post analysis used 2022 prices and
       captured the actual project impacts of improved access to water and pasture and animal health in
       general.
      The analysis was based on twelve financial models, of which six were for cattle, and the remaining six
       were for small ruminants (goats), both species for pastoral and agro-pastoral systems. There were four
       models for each country: (i) cattle in the pastoral system; (ii) cattle in the agro-pastoral system; (iii) goats
       in the pastoral system; and finally, (iv) goats for the agro-pastoral system.
      Project benefits were the same as mentioned above. According to the ICR (paragraph 52), "all these
       benefits contributed to increased rural incomes, economic resilience of livestock-based livelihoods and
       improved food and nutrition security."
      Implementation Efficiency. The project experienced a two-year delay. In Uganda and Ethiopia,
       there were delays due to security concerns. Procurement challenges also contributed to delays,
       particularly in remote areas (ICR, paragraph 71). In 2020, delays resulting from conflicts were
       exacerbated by the impact of COVID-19 and the associated restrictions, which disrupted project
       operations at regional, national, and county levels (ICR, paragraph 72). In Kenya, financial management
       was challenging and contributed to implementation delays (ICR, paragraph 90). The ICR (paragraph 57)
       noted that the project was implemented using project existing government systems and procedures,
       which was a cost-effective option in comparison to developing parallel implementation structures.

Summary of Efficiency Assessment. While the ex-post overall EIRR of 44.2% was lower than the appraisal
estimate at 53%, it was significantly higher than the 12% discount rate. The ex-post analysis did not provide the



                                                                                                        Page 13 of 22
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Regional Pastoral Livelihoods Resilience (P129408)



EIRR estimate for each country. While the project faced implementation delays, those were mostly beyond the
project's control. Overall, Efficiency is rated Substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?            Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     0
 Appraisal                                                 44.23
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     0
 ICR Estimate                                              53.00
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The Relevance of Objectives was rated High. Overall Efficacy was rated Substantial with minor
shortcomings. The project achieved or exceeded its objectives of enhancing the livelihood resilience of pastoral
and agro-pastoral communities in cross-border drought-prone areas of the three participating countries and
improved the government's capacity to respond promptly to eligible crises or emergency. However, the
effectiveness of the response could not be assessed adequately, and relevant indicators could have been
clearly defined to measure this aspect. Efficiency was rated Substantial. While the ex-post EIRR at 44.2% was
slightly lower than the 53% appraisal estimate for the three countries combined, it was significantly above the
12% discount rate.

Based on the assigned ratings for the three criteria, the Outcome is rated Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The following risks could potentially impact the development outcome:

1. Financial risk. There is a risk that after the project closes, the budget for maintaining the upgraded
infrastructures and various platforms might be inadequate. This needs close cooperation between the
national and regional authorities, the private sector, and local beneficiaries on appropriate and acceptable
approaches to ensure they can fully cover operation and maintenance (O&M) costs. In Kenya, user fees

                                                                                                    Page 14 of 22
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Regional Pastoral Livelihoods Resilience (P129408)



are charged for the maintenance of developed water infrastructure, communities pay fees for the use of
facilities, and revenues generated are invested in sustaining infrastructure operations (ICR, paragraph 98). In
Ethiopia, additional support has also been sought through other Bank-financed operations that are currently
working in the space, such as the Lowland Livelihoods Resilience Project, to continue critical activities such
as the support for water user associations to strengthen their capacity to sustain water resource
infrastructures (ICR, paragraph 99).

2. Government ownership/commitment risk. The sustainability of market infrastructure was likely through a
co-management model of revenue sharing between community associations and local governments. Given
the increased revenues generated through livestock trade, this model demonstrated clear incentives for both
parties to maintain and manage the facilities. These partnerships between community associations and local
governments need to be supported and formalized through legal contracts with clear roles and
responsibilities for the parties involved (ICR, paragraph 101). In Kenya, the project signed an agreement
with the Kenya Livestock Marketing Council to promote a co-management model of markets with farmers
and county governments to improve the management of the livestock markets. The co-management model
facilitated the development and implementation of revenue-sharing legislation between farmers and counties
based on contractual agreements. Also, management committees were established and linked to relevant
county government service providers for all project investments. For example, water user associations were
linked to the Department of Water and Irrigation, which will facilitate their access to continuous training and
resources to maintain water resource investments for which they have responsibility (ICR, paragraph 98). In
Ethiopia, all project activities were implemented through existing government structures, so resources have
continued to be dedicated to ensuring the continuation of investments (ICR, paragraph 99). In Uganda, all
infrastructure developed by the project has been taken over by the District Local Governments and
integrated into district plans and annual budget cycles (ICR, paragraph 100). However, resources for
complete operations and maintenance plans of water infrastructure may not be sufficient (ICR, paragraph
100).

3. Institutional support risk. While the regional strategies have been adopted, their implementation varied in
the three countries. The Livestock information system (supported by the project) is fully institutionalized in all
three countries. The regional SPS Strategy (developed under the project) is fully adopted by all IGAD
countries in the region. Harmonization of cross-border animal vaccination, grading of live animals, and meat
standards have continued as a core function of the IGAD Centre for Pastoral Areas and Livestock
Development (ICPALD). The Organization of African Standards has taken up harmonized livestock grading
and meat standards introduced by the project to scale up as a tool for the African Continental Free Trade
Area agreement for implementation (ICR, paragraph 102).




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
        Strategic relevance and approach. The project was strategically relevant to the three countries
          as it sought to develop regional solutions to challenges faced by pastoralists who reside in the
          ASALs of Kenya, Uganda and Ethiopia and to enhance opportunities for livelihood development
          available to them. The PDO aligned with Bank strategies and Government priorities (section 3
          provides more details). The project featured a regional approach and ensured coordination with a


                                                                                                       Page 15 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Regional Pastoral Livelihoods Resilience (P129408)



           trusted partner, the Inter-Governmental Authority on Development (IGAD), which was mandated
           to coordinate regional interventions to build drought resilience in the Horn of Africa.
          Technical, financial, and economic aspects. The project aimed to support a comprehensive
           package of investments and services to targeted cross-border clusters across Kenya, Uganda,
           and Ethiopia, which joined later. The project design supported collective and coordinated regional
           investments in shared natural resources and sub-regional infrastructure networks and sought to
           enhance knowledge and information exchange, monitoring and response to shocks and conflicts
           on transboundary and zoonotic diseases, shared rangelands, and water resources. The design
           also aimed to improve market information and cross-border trade. The economic analysis in the
           PAD provided enough evidence to justify the project investments in Kenya and Uganda.
          Poverty, gender, and social development aspects. The project was expected to minimize the
           impact of drought on pastoral and agro-pastoral communities through key infrastructure
           investments and support for early warning systems. Investments supporting alternative livelihoods
           enabled female beneficiaries to actively participate in project activities and earn incomes to
           address many social constraints.
          Environmental and Fiduciary aspects. The reporting on environmental and fiduciary aspects in
           the ICR indicated that those were adequate at appraisal.
          Implementation arrangements. The project coordinated with IGAD as a regional partner. It was
           to be implemented using existing government systems and procedures, which was expected to
           be a cost-effective option compared to developing parallel implementation structures.
          Risk assessment. Seven risks were identified at appraisal relating to three main areas:
           stakeholder, implementing agency, and project-related risk. The overall project risk was rated
           substantial. The PAD (annex 4) included detailed risk mitigation measures.
          M&E arrangements. Data collection was decentralized, collected at the community and sub-
           national levels, and aggregated at the national level every quarter. The Results Framework
           included adequate indicators to capture the project outcomes and track activities. However, there
           were shortcomings related to the lack of definition for some indicators, for example, the number of
           suspicions of outbreaks or adoption of alternative livelihood. Overall, M&E arrangements were
           adequate.

  Summary of QAE Assessment. The project was strategically relevant, with a sound design tailored to
  each participating country. The design also ensured cooperation with IGAD to strengthen its coordination
  role through the Regional Disaster Resilience and Sustainability Platform (ICR, paragraph 91).
  Environmental arrangements and fiduciary aspects were adequate at appraisal. Risk assessment
  identified potential risks and included relevant mitigation measures. Implementation arrangements were
  adequate and built on existing country systems. Finally, M&E arrangements were adequate but had
  minor shortcomings. Overall, QAE is rated Satisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision



                                                                                                   Page 16 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Regional Pastoral Livelihoods Resilience (P129408)



       The project faced a challenging security situation in Ethiopia nd Uganda during implementation.
        Also, in Uganda prolonged drought conditions hampered the project activities in some areas. The
        project also had to deal with COVID-19 and the associated restrictions and disruptions.
       In total the Bank conducted 15 supervision missions, which according to the ICR were carried out
        twice per year. Bank missions reflected an adequate skill mix and mobilized international expertise
        when required (ICR, paragraph 93). In the last two years of implementation, supervision missions
        were conducted virtually to accommodate COVID-19 restrictions. The ICR noted that "the quality of
        supervision and support to the client was constrained by the pandemic (paragraph 93)." The project
        experienced a relatively high turnover in task team leaders (the project had seven TTLs spread
        across the three countries) which according to the ICR (paragraph 93) "hindered long-term
        relationships and in occasions caused loss of institutional memory."
       The PCU benefitted from additional training provided by the Bank during Interim technical missions,
        which also helped address implementation constraints (ICR, paragraph 93).
       The Bank team was responsive and proactive in project restructuring to make the necessary
        changes on time and avoid further delays in implementation (ICR, paragraph 94). The Bank team
        also established good collaboration with the Governments’ and IGA ’s teams

 Summary of Quality of Supervision Assessment. The Bank addressed implementation concerns and
 guided the project across three countries under challenging implementation conditions. Despite the high
 turnover of TTLs, Bank supervision successfully guided the project across three countries towards
 achieving its PDO. Overall, Bank Supervision is rated Satisfactory.

 Based on the assigned ratings, overall Bank Performance is rated Satisfactory.




  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
      The PAD did not include a Theory of Change (ToC) as the Bank did not require it at the time of
        appraisal. Nonetheless, the ICR included a ToC that reflected the relationship between the project
        activities, outputs, and outcomes in a plausible causal chain.
       The PDO was to be measured through five PDO outcome indicators: (a) Percentage death rate of
        livestock kept by agro-pastoral and pastoral households targeted by the project (cattle, goats); (b)
        Number of livestock traded in selected project markets; (c) Real value of livestock traded in selected
        project markets (local currency); (d) Time lapse between early warning information and response
        reduced; and (e) Number of direct project beneficiaries, of which female (percentage). These


                                                                                                  Page 17 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Regional Pastoral Livelihoods Resilience (P129408)



        indicators were indirectly connected to the PDO in terms of measuring the three dimensions of
        livelihood resilience as defined in the PAD (paragraph 21). The PDO indicators reflected reasonable
        targets. However, the indicators could have been disaggregated to reflect the two groups of
        beneficiaries (pastoral and agro-pastoral). Also, the RF lacked any indicators to measure the
        effectiveness of the government's response to an eligible crisis or emergency.
       The Results Framework (RF) included 16 intermediate results indicators to measure and track the
        different activities supported by the project. The RF indicators were connected to the project
        activities, measurable, and reflected reasonable targets. However, the ICR (paragraph 77) pointed
        out that two indicators (the number of suspicions of outbreaks and the adoption of alternative
        livelihood) were not clearly defined. Also, the RF could have benefitted from including indicators to
        track the number of vaccinations administered (disaggregated by the animal) under the project.
       Overall, the M&E design was adequate. However, the M&E design relied on the government
        systems in the three countries as the sole source of information. The inclusion of other evaluative
        tools (qualitative evaluations, case studies, and thematic evaluations, among others) could have
        facilitated triangulation of data, provided more depth to understanding issues including the needs of
        women/ethnic minorities, further developed lessons learned, and ensured potential scale-up (ICR,
        paragraph 78).



b. M&E Implementation
       Data collection relied on a decentralized arrangement where data was collected at the community
           and sub-national levels and aggregated at the national level every quarter. According to the ICR
           (paragraph 80), "verification mechanisms were in place, and information was updated regularly."
           The ICR (paragraph 79) noted that "IGAD worked closely with project countries to harmonize
           methodologies to measure indicators."
          M&E staff in the three countries benefited from project-provided training. The PCU staff conducted
           regular auditing of data to ensure quality (ICR, paragraph 81).
          At the country level, in Kenya the project team involved stakeholders in participatory monitoring
           and evaluation of project outputs, used GIS and mapping to guide public investments and
           monitoring results. It used Pastoral Field Schools to teach communities to monitor the results of
           investments at the household level.
          Restructuring and revision of the RF. The PDO was not revised throughout the project, but the
           outcome target for direct project beneficiaries (PDO-5) was revised and clarified for harmonization
           across the three countries. In addition, the outcome target for the percentage of death of livestock
           in Ethiopia was revised following the detailed baseline study carried out in the country. Also, 12
           intermediate results indicators were revised during the project's life. Most revisions were
           downward for logical reasons detailed in the ICR (Table 1). All the RF revisions had no implication
           on the Theory of Change (ICR, paragraph 30)
          While the project planned to develop a management information system or build upon
           existing systems, it did not create a coherent data ecosystem (ICR, paragraph 78). Also,
           Ethiopia's security concerns contributed to poor project activity monitoring (ICR, paragraph 69).



c. M&E Utilization


                                                                                                    Page 18 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Regional Pastoral Livelihoods Resilience (P129408)



        The M&E data from all three countries were used to identify areas of lagging activities and inform
           decision-making at national and regional levels. This also informed the revisions to target
           indicators of key investments such as water infrastructure in Uganda and Ethiopia and capacity-
           building support in Kenya (ICR, paragraph 80).
          M&E data was used to prepare annual outcome evaluations, thematic studies, annual work plans
           and budgets, quarterly reports, conduct technical infrastructure audits, and develop case studies
           (ICR, paragraph 82).
          In Kenya, M&E data were used as inputs into the Kenya Food Security Strategy that the
           Government later developed. Also, communication and knowledge management strategies were
           prepared by Uganda and Ethiopia to disseminate key project information more broadly.
          M&E data from the three countries helped in the development and preparation of case studies,
           policy briefs, as well as regional strategies that were prepared by IGAD (Rangeland
           Management, SPS, and Animal Health) under the project.
          Resource mapping generated through M&E data was also made available on a web map for
           future reference and use by other external actors. M&E information helped the participating
           countries to make timely and well-informed decisions, including, but not limited to, drought
           response (ICR, paragraph 82).

  Summary of M&E Quality Assessment. M&E design was adequate but had minor shortcomings
  related to the lack of a clear definition of some indicators and the absence of indicators to measure the
  effectiveness of the government's response to crises or emergencies. While the implementation was
  acceptable in Kenya and Uganda, it was challenging in Ethiopia. Utilization was adequate as the project
  data-informed project management, decision-making, and informed IGAD-sponsored studies. Overall,
  M&E is rated Substantial with moderate shortcomings.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was assigned an environmental Category B since environmental impacts were expected to be
   significant, primarily site-specific, and could easily be avoided and managed. Four environmental safeguard
   policies were triggered: Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01), Natural Habitats (OP 4.04), Pest
   Management (OP 4.09), and Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50). The project was expected
   to positively impact the environment by enhancing the capacities of relevant stakeholders to sustainably
   manage natural resources, especially rangelands and water sustainably, and by rehabilitating or developing
   water and pasture-related infrastructure and ecosystems. The project also triggered three social safeguards
   policies: Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12), Physical Cultural Resources (OP 4.11), and Indigenous
   People (OP 4.10). Relevant documents (Environmental and Social Management Frameworks and
   Resettlement Policy Frameworks for the three countries, Social Assessments in Uganda and Ethiopia,
   Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework and the Vulnerable Groups Management Framework, Vulnerable
   and Marginalized Groups Framework in Uganda and Kenya, respectively) were publicly disclosed in the



                                                                                                   Page 19 of 22
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Regional Pastoral Livelihoods Resilience (P129408)



  three countries. The ICR did not include an explicit statement on compliance with safeguard policies in any
  of the three countries.

  Compliance with Environmental Safeguards. The ICR (paragraph 85) reported that the Ethiopian
  Federal Ministry of Finance and Economic Development requested the Bank notify the Governments of
  Djibouti, Somalia, and Kenya of any potential abstraction from the Awash, Genalle, Wabeshebellie, Omo,
  and Dawa Rivers. Due to ongoing conflict, establishing community platforms for conflict resolution in
  Ethiopia's Somali and Afar regions was challenging. In Kenya and Uganda, environmental activities were
  carried out as planned. Overall, the project had positive environmental impacts by improving natural
  resources management and reducing pollution levels from animals, including at markets (ICR, paragraph
  86). While no major environmental issues arose in the case of Ethiopia and Kenya, Uganda did experience
  a serious security incident in the Karamoja Region that resulted in a fatality of a visitor at one of the project
  sites. Although the incident was not directly project-related, "weaknesses in following protocol and security
  gaps were identified" (ICR, paragraph 87), and "a safeguards Incident corrective action plan was instituted
  in which security coordination approaches were strengthened, especially information sharing, early warning
  mechanisms and response under the district security committee."

  Compliance with Social Safeguards. A grievance redress mechanism (GRM) was in place in Ethiopia and
  Kenya. According to the ICR (paragraph 88), "no major social safeguards issues arose during project
  implementation."




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management (FM). The project submitted Interim Financial Reports (IFRs) and audit reports on
  time; there were no outstanding reports (ICR, paragraph 90). Across all three countries, FM had adequate
  staffing, and annual work plans and budgets were prepared and submitted in a timely manner. However, in
  Kenya, the project lost a quarter of the financial year every year due to delays by the National Treasury in
  uploading the development budget into the system, which created implementation challenges (ICR,
  paragraph 90).

  Procurement. Procurement staff in Kenya and Uganda were mostly competent. However, the lack of
  procurement capacity was "a major bottleneck" in Ethiopia (ICR, paragraph 69), a situation that was
  exacerbated by conflict and insecurity in some regions. Contract management improved throughout the life
  of the project. According to the ICR (paragraph 91), "the project did not have any mis-procurement."




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  None.



d. Other

                                                                                                     Page 20 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Regional Pastoral Livelihoods Resilience (P129408)



   None.



11. Ratings
                                                                                    Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                      IEG
                                                                                    Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                          Satisfactory             Satisfactory

Bank Performance                 Satisfactory             Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                   Substantial              Substantial

Quality of ICR                   ---                      Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR included six lessons. The following three are emphasized with some adaptation of
language:

1. Having a regional partner in place to provide key oversight, support, and
coordinate implementation guidance may enhance the project’s potential to address regional
pastoralism challenges successfully. The project experience showed that IGAD ’s involvement in
the project resulted in strong coordination in implementing activities and cohesive results. The
regional approach of the project helped address conflict management, harmonized disease control
actions, and identification of investments in jointly used cross-border water and market
infrastructure.

2. Joint planning and monitoring platforms between participating project countries
may facilitate the exchange of information, lessons, and knowledge/skills in regional
projects. This facilitated institutional learning across the three countries and facilitated the sharing
of successful approaches to key interventions, such as traditional methods of rangeland
management, which IGAD documented in policy briefs that were produced. Furthermore, joint
facilitation was found to be the most effective way of controlling cross-border disease outbreaks.

3. Diversifying into activities less prone to risk can provide a buffer for pastoral communities
to better withstand and recover more quickly from shocks, including conflict. The project
could have provided more for additional interventions that could bring about significant returns to
investments made in livelihood activities, especially stronger business facilitation and access to
markets. While livelihood activities undertaken were viable, more could have been done in terms of
assessments of those activities that could potentially yield better returns than livestock and move
more communities out of livestock herding given the growing risks, compounded crises and
uncertainty faced by pastoralists.




                                                                                                      Page 21 of 22
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Regional Pastoral Livelihoods Resilience (P129408)




13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR was candid and comprehensive. While the ICR provided evidence of the results achieved, the
ICR clarified that the M&E design relied on the existing government systems in the three countries and could
have benefitted from the diversification of data sources (data triangulation) to explore some issues in depth and
better address the needs of women. The ICR attempted to provide explicit linkage between evidence and
findings to the extent possible and used the available evidence base to serve the arguments under the different
sections. The ICR reflected useful lessons based on the project experience. that could apply to other operations
of similar nature.

The ICR was mostly consistent with guidelines. Reporting on safeguards did not include an explicit statement
on compliance with the Bank's safeguard policies. Also, Annex 1 did not include a list of outputs that resulted
from the project activities. Overall, the ICR Quality is rated Substantial with minor shortcomings.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                   Page 22 of 22
