     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GY Payments System Project (P159512)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0023317

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P159512                                    GY Payments System Project

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Guyana                                     Finance, Competitiveness and Innovation


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-59660                                  31-Mar-2021                                           2,375,710.32

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 31-Mar-2017                                31-May-2022

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            6,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                             2,031,294.34                                               0.00

 Actual                                         2,375,710.32                                               0.00




 Prepared by               Reviewed by                    ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Antonio M. Ollero         Ebru Karamete                  Christopher David Nelson       IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The project development objective of the Guyana Payments System Project was to improve the national
   payments system by enhancing the safety and efficiency of payments.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
   No

                                                                                                  Page 1 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GY Payments System Project (P159512)




c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project had three components:

        1. Developing Payments System Infrastructure (US$4.30 million estimated at appraisal, US$1.754
          million disbursed at closing) supported the acquisition of hardware and software by the Government
          to provide interbank clearing and settlement services for electronic payments. Specifically, the
          component would support: (a) the acquisition of hardware and software for the real time gross
          settlement system (RTGS) – the instantaneous and continuous process of settling interbank
          payments on an individual order basis across the books of a central bank; (b) the acquisition
          of hardware and software for the central securities depository (CSD) – a specialized financial
          institution that holds securities, such as shares and bonds, provides for the safekeeping of these
          assets, and allows for the settlement of securities transactions; (c) the upgrade of the automated
          clearinghouse (ACH) – the electronic funds-transfer system that facilitates payments between
          banks; (d) the upgrade of the core systems of the Bank of Guyana, the Ministry of Finance, the
          Guyana Revenue Authority, and the National Insurance Fund (also called the National Insurance
          Scheme) as users of the new payments system; (e) the acquisition and installation of
          interconnectivity hardware and virtual private network to connect the Bank of Guyana, the Ministry of
          Finance, the Guyana Revenue Authority, the National Insurance Fund, and all commercial banks
          operating in Guyana; and (f) the conduct of an information security audit of the payments
          system infrastructure. The following activities, originally part of this component at approval, were
          cancelled during the second restructuring: (a)

        2. Capacity Building of the Bank of Guyana (US$1.38 million estimated at appraisal, US$0.559
          million disbursed at closing) focused on strengthening the technical capacity of the Bank of Guyana
          to operate the modernized payments system infrastructure. A specialized firm would assist the
          central bank with the procurement process for the RTGS and the CSD and the associated
          information technology (IT) infrastructure. The advisor would also oversee the knowledge
          transfer and capacity building services to be extended by the RTGS and CSD systems supplier to
          the central bank. Cancelled Activities: The training activities for the staff of the Bank of Guyana
          on information technology security, database administration, and systems management, which were
          originally part of this component at appraisal (Part 2.d of the Project Description in the Financing
          Agreement), were cancelled at the second restructuring because of mobility restrictions during the
          COVID-19 pandemic. According to the Bank team, the cancellation of these activities did not
          compromise the achievement of the project results because: (a) hardware suppliers and software
          providers extended training to the Bank of Guyana staff; (b) a technical assistance firm hired by the
          Bank of Guyana provided advisory services on these topics; (c) the Bank of Guyana organized the
          virtual training sessions which were also delivered to staff of the participating government agencies
          and commercial banks.

        3. Project Implementation Unit (US$0.32 million estimated at appraisal, US$0.062 million disbursed
          at closing) supported the implementation of the project by the Bank of Guyana, including by the
          Project Implementation Unit, which was responsible for planning, coordinating, implementing,
          managing, and monitoring all project activities.


                                                                                                  Page 2 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GY Payments System Project (P159512)




e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project Cost, Financing, and Borrower Contribution. The project was estimated to cost SDR 4.5 million
   (US$6 million equivalent) at appraisal. The project was financed by a credit of SDR 4.5 million from the IDA
   to the Co-operative Republic of Guyana. Total disbursements at closing were US$2.376 million (SDR 1.76
   million equivalent), after US$3.5 million (SDR 2.47 million equivalent) was cancelled at the second
   restructuring. The cancelled amount represented exchange rate gains (the exchange rate, which was
   SDR1.00 = US$1.34 at appraisal, was SDR1.00 = US$1.42 at the second restructuring) , savings from
   procurement activities (actual costs were lower than originally budgeted), and savings from activities that
   were not implemented due to restrictions during the COVID-19 pandemic (see Section 2.D - Component 2).

   Dates. The project was approved on March 31, 2017, became effective on September 8, 2017, and closed
   on May 31, 2022, fifteen months after the original closing date of March 31, 2021.

   Restructuring. The project was restructure thrice.

         The first restructuring on February 23, 2021, with US$1.94 million disbursed (82 percent of the final
          disbursement amount), extended the project closing date by six month from March 31, 2021 to
          September 30, 2021, to allow for technical assistance by the World Bank to the Bank of
          Guyana to test the functionality of the new system, once deployed, and to monitor the
          implementation of capacity-building activities to strengthen the Payments System Unit at the central
          bank.
         The second restructuring on September 29, 2021, with US$1.94 million disbursed (82 percent of the
          final disbursement amount), extended the closing date by three months from September 30, 2021 to
          December 31, 2021 to allow the Ministry of Finance, the Guyana Revenue Authority, and the
          National Insurance Fund to upgrade their core systems to link with the new payments system
          infrastructure at the Bank of Guyana. The amount of US$3.5 million – representing exchange rate
          gains, savings from procurement activities, and savings from activities that were not implemented –
           was cancelled (see Section 2.E - Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution). The restructuring
          also adjusted two results indicators (see Section 9.B).
         The third restructuring on December 16, 2021, with US$2.14 million disbursed (90 percent of the
          final disbursement amount), extended the closing date by five months from December 31, 2021, to
          May 31, 2022, to allow the Ministry of Finance to complete the delivery and installation of critical
          hardware and software updates. The extension would also allow the project to: make progress
          with the Principles for Financial Market Infrastructures (the international standards for payment
          systems, central securities depositories, securities settlement systems, central counterparties, and
          trade repositories issued by the Committee on Payments and Settlement Systems of the Bank for
          International Settlements and the Technical Committee of the International Organization of
          Securities Commissions); continue receiving technical assistance; and, implement support from the
          World Bank.




3. Relevance of Objectives



                                                                                                   Page 3 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GY Payments System Project (P159512)



Rationale
The project development objectives were highly relevant to the country needs and strategies.

Development Constraints. Guyana lacked a modern national payments system – the system used to
conduct and settle financial transactions through the transfer of monetary value – that was crucial to finance
and to economic activity: (a) the legal and regulatory framework governing payments was deficient; (b) the
financial infrastructure was underdeveloped, lacking the basic mechanisms to automatically clear and settle
retail interbank payments, to efficiently process large value payments, and to electronically settle and
record securities transactions; and (c) the institutional capacity of market participants to operate a modern
payments system was weak. Overall, the cost of conducting payments was higher than necessary, the time
to settle transactions longer than normal, and the risks to finance and economic activity higher than
acceptable.

      According to the IMF Financial Sector Stability Assessment of 2016, based on the work of the joint
       IMF and World Bank Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP) of 2016-18, Guyana needed to
       develop an effective national payments system with "a robust legal and regulatory framework, and
       safe and efficient payment infrastructures ... for facilitating account transactions and thus access to
       finance." The assessment further explained – "These relate to both interbank payment mechanism
       and retail services. Innovative retail payment services, including bill payment and e-money services,
       should be further promoted. Execution should be broad-based for interbank currency trades, money
       market transactions, collateral placements in government securities, and government securities
       trading. Market infrastructures should develop immediately to electronically record transactions,
       manage risks, provide market transparency, or enable the Bank of Guyana to monitor developments
       on a timely basis."
      According to the World Bank Guyana Country Systematic Diagnostic of 2020 - A Pivotal Moment for
       Guyana, the national payments system "lagged far behind the needs of the economy", with the
       prevalence of cash transactions slowing productivity growth and reducing financial
       transparency. Paper instruments dominated the payment system, accounting for 99 percent of the
       243 million retail payment transactions made annually. The manual processing of paper instruments
       cost the economy US$74 million annually, or 2.5 percent of GDP. Shifting at least half of
       retail payments to electronic payments would save consumers around US$6 million annually, and
       the Government, about US$2 million.

Government Priorities. Guyana articulated a National Payments System Strategy in 2018, which aimed to
"build a robust, safe and sound, efficient and inclusive National Payments System that meets the current
and future needs of the economy, supports financial activity and financial sector development, advances
the use of electronic payments, contributes to financial risk mitigation, achieves compatibility with
international systems, and adheres to the relevant international standards, guidelines and codes.” To
create the enabling legal and regulatory framework for the strategy, Parliament passed the National
Payments System Act 2018 (Act No. 13 of 2018), which provided for the establishment, regulation, and
oversight of a national payments system. This project would help Guyana develop, install, and operate the
new system.

Bank Group Strategy. The project objective was aligned with the country strategy articulated in the
Country Engagement Note for the Cooperative Republic of Guyana for the Period FY16-
18 (CEN). According to the CEN, the Bank engagement would focus on three objectives: (a) enhancing
resilience of selected infrastructure and building disaster risk management capacities, (b) setting up

                                                                                                    Page 4 of 15
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                       Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      GY Payments System Project (P159512)



               the foundations for high quality education, and (c) laying the ground for private sector development. On
               private sector development, the CEN noted that both the legal framework and the financial infrastructure for
               the payments system were underdeveloped and deficient, posing constraints to private economic
               activity. To promote private sector development as well as access to finance, Bank would "continue to
               focus on strengthening the financial sector infrastructure, including the payment system." The Bank listed
               analytic and advisory services on payments system reform among activities planned over 2016-2018.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Improve Guyana's national payments system by enhancing the safety and efficiency of payments.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change. The procurement and installation of a real time gross settlement system, central
                             securities depository, and upgraded automatic clearinghouse would provide Guyana with the basic financial
                             infrastructure for a modern national payments system that would be capable of instantaneously and
                             continuously settling interbank payments across the books of the central bank, electronically settling and
                             recording securities transactions, and facilitating electronic funds transfers and payments between
                             banks. The modern payments system would become operational with the installation of interconnectivity
                             hardware and a virtual private network connecting the Bank of Guyana, the Ministry of Finance, the Guyana
                             Revenue Authority, the National Insurance Fund, and all commercial banks, coupled with upgrades to the
                             software of the central bank and the agencies and the provision of technical assistance and training to a new
                             Payments System Unit in the central bank. Should it meet the international standards set by the Bank for
                             International Settlements and the International Organization of Securities Commissions, the new financial
                             market infrastructure should provide Guyana residents a safer and more efficient electronic-based national
                             payments system.

                             The theory of change was cogent and adhered to the principles advanced by the Bank for International
                             Settlements, the financial institution that serves as a bank for central banks, and the International
                             Organization of Securities Commissions, the association of organizations that regulates the world's securities
                             and futures markets, for the establishment, operation, and management of national payments systems (BIS,
                             2006, Guidance for National Payment System Development and BIS and IOSCO, 2012, Principles of
                             Financial Market Infrastructures). The achievement of the development objectives assumed a credible level
                             of institutional capacity on the part of Bank of Guyana, the Ministry of Finance, the Guyana Revenue
                             Authority, the National Insurance Fund, and commercial banks, to modernize current practices and operate
                             the new system, a topic which was vetted by the Bank at appraisal and would be enhanced by advisory
                             services and training provided during implementation. The degree of achievement of the development
                             objectives would be evidence by seven output indicators focused on the operationalization of the constituent

                                                                                                                              Page 5 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   GY Payments System Project (P159512)



parts and government use of the system, and two outcome indicators, reflecting commercial bank use of the
system and adherence to international standards. The choice of the indicators was consistent with Bank
guidance on measures and methods (World Bank, 2008, Measuring Payment System Development). The
results indicators were specific, measurable, achievable, relevant, and time-bound.

Outputs. The project achieved six of seven output targets defined for the objective to improve the national
payments system.

      The RTGS became operational on March 31, 2021, achieving the target that it be operational by
         closing. All commercial banks in the country, the Bank of Guyana, the Ministry of Finance, and the
         Guyana Revenue Authority were connected to the RTGS by closing. Commercial banks processed
         US$1.77 billion of large value transactions through the RTGS from March 2021 to May 2022, and
         Bank of Guyana, US$1.3 billion (including transactions made on behalf of the Ministry of Finance. and
         Guyana Revenue Authority).
        The CSD became operational on March 31, 2021, achieving the target that it be operational by
         closing. A total 44 Treasury bills, with a nominal value of US$993 million (GY$199 billion), were
         issued using the CSD from March 2021 to May 2022, and 27 Treasury bills, with a nominal value of
         US$493 million (GY$99 billion), were redeemed. In addition to processing the auction and recording
         as well as transferring the ownership of government securities in electronic form, the CSD could
         hence be used for the repo and other Open Market Operations of the Bank of Guyana, the securities
         that are used as collateral for liquidity support in the RTGS, and for changes in the ownership of
         corporate securities.
        The Ministry of Finance was connected to the RTGS, the CSD, and the ACH, meeting the
         target. In addition to issuing and redeeming Treasury bills using the CSD (see above), the Ministry
         of Finance processed 589,733 low value transactions (payments less than US$25,000) from July 2021
         to May 31, 2022, through the Electronic Funds Transfer of the ACH. Meanwhile, the Ministry of
         Finance is expected to process large value payments directly though the RTGS in 2023, after
         previously channeling large value payments through the Bank of Guyana (see above).
        The Guyana Revenue Authority was connected to the RTGS and the ACH, meeting the target. The
         Guyana Revenue Authority processed 18,019 low value transactions through the Electronic Funds
         Transfer of the ACH from July 2021 to May 31, 2022. Like the Ministry of Finance, the Guyana Revue
         Authority is expected to process large value payments directly though the RTGS in 2023, after
         previously channeling large value payments through the Bank of Guyana (see above).
        The National Insurance Fund was connected to the ACH, meeting the target. The National Insurance
         Fund was supposed to be connected also to the RTGS, but this plan was scrapped because the
         National Insurance Fund processed only small value payments and not large-value payments (which
         would require the RTGS). The National Insurance Fund, however, had not started processing
         payments through the ACH by closing.
        The percentage of Government payments channeled through the RTGS or the ACH was 20.57
         percent by closing, failing to meet the original target (set in May 2017) of 100 percent (the 100 percent
         target was retained during the second restructuring in September 2021 and remained unchanged
         through closing). Between July 2021 and May 31, 2022, the Ministry of Finance processed 54 percent
         of its 1,091,439 low-value payments through the ACH and the Guyana Revenue Authority, 2 percent
         of its 900,950 low-value transactions.
        The Payments System Unit (part of the Banking Division under the Operations Department) was
         established and functioning at the Bank of Guyana, with trained staff, meeting the target that an
         organizational unit focused on the payments system and with trained personnel be created and

                                                                                                    Page 6 of 15
                     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                     GY Payments System Project (P159512)



                           functioning at the central bank. This unit, with responsibility over the RTGS, CSD, and ACH, received
                           training and technical assistance during project implementation.

                  Outcomes. The project achieved the two outcome targets defined for the objective to improve the national
                  payments system.

                          Large-value payments processed through the RTGS reached 14.98 percent of GDP by closing,
                           exceeding the revised target of 7 percent (revised in September 2021) as well as the original target of
                           12 percent (set in March 2017). The number of large-value payments (payments greater than
                           US$250,000) processed by commercial banks through the RTGS was 2,857 from April 2021 (the
                           month after the RTGS became operational) to May 31, 2022 (the closing date), with an aggregate
                           value of US$1.11 billion (GY$ 232 billion), amounting to 14.98 percent of GDP. Additional data after
                           closing indicate that the number of large-value payments processes by commercial banks through the
                           RTGS reached 4,974 by September 2022, with a value of US$2.48 billion (GY$ 519
                           billion). Meanwhile, the Guyana Revenue Authority was expected to start processing payments
                           through the RTGS by the end of 2022, and the Ministry of Finance, by the second quarter of 2023.
                          The new National Payments System "broadly observes" all applicable standards under the Principles
                           for Financial Market Infrastructures, meeting the target that the system either "observes" or "broadly
                           observes" the standards set by the Bank for International Settlements and the International
                           Organization of Securities Commissions. The system is supported by a strong legal and policy
                           framework and has been modernized with new hardware and software, allowing for greater
                           operational efficiency, reduced costs, and better management of credit, liquidity, and operational risks
                           across the payments system. The assessment was made by the Bank of Guyana, using templates
                           provided by the Bank for International Settlements. The findings and conclusions of the Bank of
                           Guyana, and the attendant documentation, were verified by the Bank (specifically, the World Bank
                           Payments System Development Group, the unit which helps member countries adopt international
                           best practice and standards for payments systems and financial market infrastructure and which
                           publishes the biennial Payment Systems Worldwide - Outcomes of the Global Payments System
                           Survey).

                  The achievement of the objective is rated high. The real time gross settlement system, central securities
                  depository, and upgraded automatic clearinghouse were all operational more than a year before closing. The
                  Ministry of Finance was connected to the RTGS, CSD, and ACH, the Guyana Revenue Authority, to the
                  RTGS and ACH, and the National Insurance Fund, to the ACH. Total large value payments processed by
                  commercial banks through the RTGS were double the target, although the percentage of government
                  payments processed through the RTGS or ACH was lower than expected. The Payments System Unit at the
                  Bank of Guyana, responsible for payments system regulation, supervision, and oversight, was established
                  and functioning. The new system was determined to broadly observe international standards for financial
                  market infrastructures, according to the Bank of Guyana and the World Bank.



                  Rating
                  High


OVERALL EFF TBL




                                                                                                                      Page 7 of 15
              Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
              GY Payments System Project (P159512)



 OBJ_TBL




           OVERALL EFFICACY
           Rationale
           The project achieved the objective to improve the national payments system by enhancing the safety and
           efficiency of payments. Guyana had an operational real time gross settlement system, central securities
           depository, and upgraded automatic clearinghouse. The Ministry of Finance were connected to the RTGS,
           CSD, and ACH, the Guyana Revenue Authority, to the RTGS and ACH, and the National Insurance Fund, to
           the ACH. Total large value payments processed by commercial banks through the RTGS were double the
           target, although the percentage of Government payments processed through the RTGS or ACH was lower
           than expected. The Payments System Unit at the Bank of Guyana was established and functioning. The new
           system broadly observed international standards for financial market infrastructures. The efficacy is rated
           high.



           Overall Efficacy Rating
           High



 5. Efficiency
Economic Efficiency. The ICR did not compute a formal cost-benefit analysis of the project, but argued that
the project earned economic benefits far greater than the project cost of US$2.38 million: (a) the continuous,
real-time, large-value payments processed through the RTGS sped up the velocity of money in the economy –
 involving payments worth 15 percent of GDP; (b) the use of the CSD opened the opportunity to use government
securities (about US$1.5 billion in Treasury bills) for the repo and other Open Market Operations of the Bank of
Guyana – a well-functioning repo market would also support liquidity in other markets, contributing to the
efficient allocation of capital in the real economy; (c) the Ministry of Finance and Guyana Revenue
Authority reduced their costs by about US$424,000 by processing 1.8 million low-value payments through the
Electronic Fund Transfer of the ACH from July 2021 to May 2022 (the processing fee was US$0.24 per
transaction for an electronic payment versus US$1.00 for a check payment). Post-closing, additional cost
reductions of US$148,000 was estimated for actual transactions from June to September 2022, and US$3.6
million was projected for future transactions from 2023 to 2025. Based on the foregoing, the economic
efficiency of the project is rated high.

Operational Efficiency – Project Cost. The project completed all the project activities at 40 percent of the
original project cost estimated at appraisal (i.e., a cost underrun): (a) Payments System Infrastructure –
 US$1.754 million versus original cost of US$4.3 million; (b) Capacity Building – US$0.559 million versus original
cost of US$1.38 million; and (c) Project Implementation – US$0.062 million versus original cost of US$0.32
million. The amount of US$3.5 million was cancelled, representing exchange rate gains, savings from
procurement activities with actual costs lower than originally budgeted, and cancellation of some capacity-
building activities that could not implemented as originally designed because of restrictions during the COVID-19
pandemic. In addition, the Bank of Guyana absorbed the costs of project management under the third project
component.

The large differential between estimated and actual project cost raises questions about the precision of the
appraisal estimates. This ICR Review calculates the cost differential – representing the US$3.5 million amount

                                                                                                          Page 8 of 15
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       GY Payments System Project (P159512)



cancelled – as consisting roughly of: (a) exchange rate changes – the appreciation of the SDR from
SDR1.00=US$1.34 at appraisal to SDR1.00=US$1.42 at the second restructuring resulted in lower US$ costs of
US$0.36 million; (b) cancellation of some capacity building activities – costs for the second project
component were US$0.82 million lower than planned; (c) absorption by the Bank of Guyana of some project
implementation costs – costs for the third project component were US$0.26 million lower than planned; and (d)
the residual – US$2.06 million – would represent lower procurement costs for the first project component. The
ICR (page 22) contends that the cost of the RTGS and CSD estimated at appraisal was "based on industry
benchmarks and historic prices of similar projects." If international prices for technology products and services
were roughly unchanged between appraisal and implementation, the cost difference could only be explained on
the "quantity side." This would appear to be the case – for example, for the modification and upgrade of the
software for the National Insurance Fund, "the scope of the activity needed to connect the entity with the
Electronic Funds Transfer [of the ACD] was relatively less complex; therefore, the actual cost was about US$0.6
million lower," according to the ICR (page 22). This ICR Review concludes that more a detailed specification of
the technology requirements at appraisal would have produced more conservative estimates of the project
cost. On this basis, this aspect of the operational efficiency of the project is rated moderate.

Operational Efficiency – Project Completion Time. The project was extended for 15 months from March 31,
2021, to May 31, 2022, but there were extenuating factors, according to the ICR: (a) the political environment
was unstable in 2019 and 2020 when a new government was installed; and (b) the COVID-19 pandemic
resulted in economic uncertainty, activity lockdowns, and mobility restrictions. On this basis, this aspect of
the operational efficiency of the project is rated substantial.

Overall, the efficiency of the project is rated substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                 Rate Available?               Point value (%)       *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     0
 Appraisal                                                     0
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     0
 ICR Estimate                                                  0
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The relevance of objectives is rated high. The project development objectives were highly relevant to the
country needs and strategies (see Section 3).



                                                                                                     Page 9 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      GY Payments System Project (P159512)



The efficacy is rated high. The project achieved the objective to improve the national payments system by
enhancing the safety and efficiency of payments. All parts of the system were operational, and all four key
Government agencies were connected to the system. Government use of the system was still lower than
planned at closing, when measured as a percentage of all Government payments, but commercial bank use of
the system for large value payments was double the target. The unit at the central bank responsible for system
regulation and supervision was functional and the system broadly observed international standards for national
payments systems and financial market infrastructures (see Section 4).

The efficiency is rated substantial. The project earned economic benefits far greater than the project cost. The
project completed all the project activities at 40 percent of the original project cost estimated at appraisal. The
project was extended for 15 months, but there were extenuating factors (see Section 5).

The outcome is rated highly satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Highly Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Operational Risk. The risk to the sustainability of the development outcome achieved by this project is
considered low. With the national payments infrastructure (hardware and software) in place and the systems
operational, and with the participants having gained experience with the system, it is unlikely that the
transition to the modern payments system will be derailed. From June 2022 to September 2022 (the project
closed in May 2022), use of the new system has grown further: (a) the commercial banks processed 1,372
large-value payments through the RTGS worth US$714 million; (b) the Ministry of Finance and the Guyana
Revenue Authority processed 195,718 low-value payments though the Electronic Fund Transfer of the ACH;
and (c) the National Insurance Fund processed 7,500 pension payments though the Electronic Fund
Transfer of the ACH, covering 10 percent of all retirees.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  Analytic Underpinnings. The design of the project was informed by the Financial Sector Assessment
  Program (FSAP) jointly conducted by the International Monetary Fund and the Bank in 2016-2017. On
  the national payments system, the FSAP recommended that the authorities: adopt a robust law to govern
  the national payments system, enable the safe and efficient use of electronic payments, strengthen the
  associated regulatory framework, and grant the Bank of Guyana enforcement powers. The design of the
  project also benefitted from the Practical Guide for Measuring Retail Payment Costs - Results from the
  Guyana Surveys prepared in 2015 which estimated the potential efficiency gains from the transition from
  a primarily paper-based payment economy to an electronic payment economy. The design of the M&E
  was informed by Measuring Payment System Development prepared by the Bank in 2008.


                                                                                                     Page 10 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GY Payments System Project (P159512)



  Lessons from Past Operations. The project incorporated lessons learned from the Bank's work
  supporting national payments system development and reforms globally. The Bank, which had
  conducted five Global Payments System Surveys covering 142 countries since 2007, had provided both
  project financing and technical assistance to help client countries develop their national payments
  systems, following international standards set by the Bank of International Settlements and the
  International Organization of Securities Commissions. The Bank adequately covered the technical,
  operational, safeguards, and fiduciary aspects of the project at appraisal, according to the
  ICR. Stakeholders from the government (Bank of Guyana, the Ministry of Finance, the Guyana Revenue
  Authority, and the National Insurance Fund) and private sector (commercial banks) participated in project
  design.

  Operational Risks. The Bank assessed the operational risks of the project as moderate
  overall. Political and governance risk, arising chiefly from changes in political leadership, was
  considered moderate. Macro-financial risk could arise from U.S. and other global banks reconsidering
  their correspondent banking relationship with local banks - a rupture would reduce the appetite of the
  local banks to connect to the RTGS and the CSD. However, the ongoing effort by the authorities and the
  Bank to complete an anti-money laundering and countering the financing of terrorism (AML/CFT)
  assessment and strategy would mitigate this risk. Institutional capacity risk involving the ability of the
  Bank of Guyana to operate the new payments system would be addressed by the extension of technical
  advisory services to the central bank, the training of specialists, and the establishment of a credible
  internal control system.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Highly Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The Bank fielded five project supervision missions before the outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic and
 conducted periodic virtual review meetings since. The Bank produced nine Implementation Status and
 Results Reports (ISRs) over the five-year duration of the project, or about two a year, the average for
 investment project financing operations.

 According to the ICR, (a) the Bank interacted extensively with the officers and staff of the Bank of Guyana,
 the Ministry of Finance, the Guyana Revenue Authority, and the National Insurance Fund and those of the
 commercial banks; (b) technical, operational, procurement, financial management, and disbursement
 specialists provided close support to the Project Implementation Unit and were available on a regular and
 on-call basis; (c) the low staff turnover rate ensured the consistency of the support services extended by
 the Bank to the project.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Highly Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating

                                                                                                  Page 11 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GY Payments System Project (P159512)



  Highly Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The Project Appraisal Document defined seven output and two outcome indicators to measure the
 achievement of the project objective. The choice of the results indicators was consistent with Bank
 guidance on measures and methods (World Bank, 2008, Measuring Payment System Development). The
 results indicators were specific, measurable, achievable, relevant, and time-bound.

 The Financing Agreement required the Government to prepare and submit to the Bank biannual Project
 Reports detailing the progress of the project. A Project Implementation Unit would be responsible for M&E
 activities.



b. M&E Implementation
  At the second restructuring, some refinements were introduced in the results framework: (a) the outcome
  indicator "Percentage of large-value payments processed through the RTGS (turnover of GDP)" was
  adjusted to better reflect the results of using the new payments system for nine months instead of 12
  months (considering that the closing date at that time was December 31, 2021) and to make the
  target consistent with international data based on the World Bank Global Payment Systems Survey (the
  Sixth Survey would cover data through end-2021), and (b) the output indicator "National Insurance Fund
  is connected to the RTGS and ACH platform" was adjusted to clarify that the National Insurance Fund
  would be connected only to the ACH since the institution managed low-value and not large-value
  payments.

  The Bank of Guyana and the World Bank systematically reported on the progress toward the
  achievement of the project outputs and outcomes. The Bank of Guyana prepared semiannual project
  reports that were shared with the World Bank. The reports included a summary of the project activities
  executed during the reporting period, the status of each project component, and updates on the
  milestones listed in the M&E plan. Both the Bank of Guyana and the World Bank adapted their M&E
  activities to the restrictions arising from the COVID-19 pandemic.



c. M&E Utilization
  The M&E data was reported in the ISRs, was used to guide operational management, and informed
  decisions made to restructure the project.



  M&E Quality Rating
  High

10. Other Issues

                                                                                                Page 12 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GY Payments System Project (P159512)




a. Safeguards
   Environmental Safeguards. The project was classified as a Category C (no environmental review
   required) at appraisal and did not trigger any safeguards policy. The category remained the same at
   closing.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Procurement. Procurement was conducted in accordance with Bank procurement regulations and
   following the terms of the Financing Agreement, according to the ICR (pages 21-22). The project
   experienced delays in obtaining authorizations from the National Procurement and Tender Administration
   Board. However, the Bank procurement team worked closely with the Bank of Guyana, providing the
   Project Implementation Unit extensive support in the procurement process. Although procurement was
   initially rated as moderately satisfactory at the beginning of the project (which reflected the Bank of
   Guyana's unfamiliarity with Bank procedures), the rating was upgraded to, and maintained at, satisfactory
   throughout project implementation, including in the last ISR of January 2022.

   Financial Management. Budgeting, accounting, internal control, funds flow, financial reporting, and
   auditing adhered to the standards set by the Bank as general conditions for credits and followed the terms
   of the Financing Agreement, according to the ICR (page 21). Interim financial reports were submitted on
   time and were of satisfactory quality. Annual audits received unqualified audit opinions. Financial
   management was rated as satisfactory throughout project implementation, including in the last ISR of
   January 2022.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                               Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                   IEG
                                                                               Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                        Highly Satisfactory   Highly Satisfactory

Bank Performance               Highly Satisfactory   Highly Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                 High                  High

Quality of ICR                 ---                   High



                                                                                                 Page 13 of 15
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       GY Payments System Project (P159512)



12. Lessons

Two lessons are drawn from the ICR, with adaptation.

A comprehensive set of interventions, starting with a national strategy that addresses the
needs of the government and the private sector for clearing, settlement, and recording of
monetary and financial transactions, helps to ensure the successful development and
implementation of a modern national payments system. The Government adopted a National
Payments System Strategy in 2018 to guide its efforts to build a robust, safe, and efficient national
payments system. Parliament enacted the National Payments System Act 2018 to provide the
enabling legal and regulatory framework for the creation, operation, and oversight of the new
system. The project funded both the acquisition and installation of hardware and the procurement
and upgrading of software for the new infrastructure and extended technical assistance and training
to the central bank to lead the development and operation of the new system. The project catered
to both the government and the private sector requirements for the system, serving not
only interbank payments and retail services but also agency payment transactions and government
securities trading. Finally, the project required observance of the international standards for financial
market infrastructures as a results target.

The participation of all key government agencies in a project promoting electronic payments
strengthens the viability of a nationwide electronic payment innovation. In this project, the
Ministry of Finance, the Guyana Revenue Authority, and the National Insurance Fund were
chosen as key participants and users of the modern payments system with targets set for the
percentage of Government payments processed through the real time gross settlement system and
the automated clearinghouse. The three key agencies were directly connected to the new payments
infrastructure, including to the system's virtual private network, and their software were upgraded to
enable them to channel payments through the new infrastructure. An Inter-Participant Working
Group established by the Bank of Guyana served to coordinate the participation of these key
agencies in the design and implementation of the project. In a complex system undertaking of this
nature, harnessing the participation of all stakeholders created a collaborative environment that
proved critical to the success of the project.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is consistent with OPCS guidelines on ICRs for investment project financing operations.

The document is concise.

The efficacy assessment is outcome-oriented and based on the degree of achievement of the results targets.



                                                                                                     Page 14 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GY Payments System Project (P159512)



The ICR presents ample evidence to support its assessment of the Bank’s performance at design and
implementation and M&E design and implementation.

The assessment of the efficacy of the program is candid.

The ICR draws lessons that would be valuable to modernizing national payments systems elsewhere.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      High




                                                                                              Page 15 of 15
