     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Climate Change and Green Growth DPF (P171006)



                                                                               Report Number: ICRR0023320

1. Operation Information



 Operation ID                             Operation Name
 P171006                                  Climate Change and Green Growth DPF

 Country                                  Practice Area (Lead)
 Vietnam                                  Environment, Natural Resources & the Blue Economy



 Non-Programmatic DPF

 L/C/TF Number(s)                         Closing Date (Original)                  Total Financing (USD)
 IDA-66170                                30-Nov-2021                                          86,008,980.00

 Bank Approval Date                       Closing Date (Actual)
 05-Jun-2020                              30-Nov-2021

                                          IBRD/IDA (USD)                              Co-financing (USD)

 Original Commitment                          84,400,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                           84,400,000.00                                              0.00

 Actual                                       86,008,980.00                                              0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                 ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Avjeet Singh               Stephen Hutton              Christopher David Nelson       IEGSD




2. Program Objectives and Pillars/Policy Areas
DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives

The Program Development Objective (PDO) of this Development Policy Financing (DPF) operation, as stated
in the Program Document (PD, page 6), is “to promote: (a) climate resilient management of landscapes; and
(b) adoption of cleaner transport and energy systems.”



                                                                                                Page 1 of 24
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Climate Change and Green Growth DPF (P171006)



For this evaluation, the individual objectives are identified as follows:

PDO 1. To promote climate resilient management of landscapes

PDO 2. To promote adoption of cleaner transport and energy systems


b. Pillars/Policy Areas
The PDOs were to be achieved under two pillars (PD, para 36):

Pillar 1: Climate resilient management of landscapes

Pillar 2: Adoption of cleaner transport and energy systems


c. Comments on Program Cost, Financing and Dates

Program Financing. This single-tranche operation was financed by an IDA credit of US$84.2 million. The
tranche was fully disbursed on completion and verification of prior actions.

Program Cost. At appraisal, the project was estimated to cost US$84.4 million. At project closing, the amount
disbursed was US$86.08 million. The Bank team clarified that the discrepancy between the amount approved
and disbursed was due to the exchange rate fluctuation between XDR and USD.

Dates. The operation was approved on June 5, 2020, became effective on June 4, 2021, and closed as
scheduled on November 30, 2021.




3. Relevance of Design

a. Relevance of Objectives

 Country Context: Vietnam was one of the world’s most vulnerable countries to climate change impacts. The
 intense exploitation of natural resources linked to its rapid economic growth exacerbated its vulnerability. In
 the late 2000s, when growth was peaking, natural resource depletion was in the order of 7 percent of GNI. The
 rapid development and uneven distribution put pressure on water resources leading to competing demands
 and pollution. Climate change may lead to increased frequency of droughts and storm events. Overstretched
 water resources will make the country more vulnerable to drought, and unsustainably logged landscapes will
 increase the risk of flooding from storm events. More resilient landscape management could mitigate these
 effects. Where agricultural production is stressed by erratic rainfall, drought, and salinity, the adoption of
 climate-smart agricultural technologies is also needed as part of an integrated approach to landscape
 resilience. From 2000 to 2015, carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions nearly quadrupled, and Vietnam was the 13th
 most carbon-intensive economy in the world and the 4th amongst low and middle-income countries in East
 Asia. The adoption of cleaner transport and energy systems was needed to address the rising greenhouse gas


                                                                                                      Page 2 of 24
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Climate Change and Green Growth DPF (P171006)



(GHG) emissions, air pollution caused by the transport sector, and the growing reliance on coal-based power
generation.

Government Strategy: The DPF’s objectives were well aligned with the Government of Vietnam’s 2016-2020
Socio-Economic Development Strategy (SEDS), which underscored the need for climate resilience,
environmental protection, and improved management of natural assets (ICR, para 6). The operation supported
the government’s Support Program to Respond to Climate Change (SP-RCC) 2016-2020, which facilitated
policy reforms for the effective implementation of climate change and green growth actions prioritized under
the National Climate Change Strategy (NCCS) approved in 2011 and Vietnam Green Growth Strategy (VGGS)
approved in 2012. This included supporting policies that aimed to increase the protection of water sources,
additional reductions in air pollutants from vehicles, and further scale-up of renewable generation capacity
(ICR para 7). The policy reform areas were chosen based on the highest potential for transformative
interventions, aligning with shared priorities identified collaboratively by the Government, the Bank, and other
Development Partners involved in the SP-RCC program. The objectives were also aligned with the
commitments made under the Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC, initially developed in 2015) which
included reducing GHG emissions, and a variety of adaptation targets such as integrating climate planning in
the Socio-Economic Development Plan (SEDP), increasing forest coverage, and provision of water services.
(Program Document, para 31).

Bank Strategy: The DPF’s objectives were well aligned with the Country Partnership Framework (CPF) 2018-
2022. The two pillars of the PDO on promoting (i) climate resilient management of landscapes and (ii) cleaner
transport and energy systems were aligned with Focus Area 3 (Ensure Environmental Sustainability and
Resilience). The DPF end-of-program indicators also contributed towards the indicators for achieving CPF
objectives. It also contributed to the ‘Strategic Shift Five’ under the 2019 Performance and Learning Review of
the CPF, which stated that the World Bank’s engagement would support the NDC implementation.

Previous Bank experience: This DPF was built on an earlier 2016 operation that was designed to be the first
in a 3-operation series. The originally conceived DPF series focused on mainstreaming climate within general
planning and budgeting processes and tackling specific climate issues in critical sectors. The original series
was expected to run from 2016 to 2019, but following approval of the first operation in June 2016, processing
of the second operation was delayed beyond 24 months and eventually dropped due to the public debt ceiling
and constraints on government borrowing. The preparation of this DPF drew upon the policy discussions
conducted during the previous DPF series. It sought to expand upon the achievements made in the earlier
phase while creating a pathway towards a new phase of climate action in Vietnam beyond 2020, centered on
implementing NDC commitments. This operation extended the policy ambition and results beyond those
envisaged for the original series in critical areas, including increased protection of water sources, additional
reductions in air pollutants from vehicles, and further scale-up of renewable generation capacity.

The Program Development Objective was appropriate in its ambition and relevant to the country and Bank
strategy. It was a natural continuation of achievements under the previous DPF.


b. Relevance of Prior Actions

Rationale

Pillar 1: Climate resilient management of landscapes


                                                                                                   Page 3 of 24
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Climate Change and Green Growth DPF (P171006)



The reforms under this pillar included support under three policy tracks: (i) Climate Smart Landscape Planning;
(ii) Climate Budgeting; and (iii) Improving Water Resources Protection and Use Efficiency.

Climate Smart Landscape Planning

Prior Action 1: The Recipient, through its Government, has adopted criteria for the classification of
coastal protection forests, as evidenced by Decree No. 156/2018/ND-CP dated November 16, 2018, and
through MARD, has adopted Circular No. 28/2018/TT-BNNPTNT dated November 16, 2018, on the
development of sustainable forest development plans.

The first prior action for this reform area focused on adopting ‘criteria for classifying coastal protection forests
and respective management measures’. Additionally, it aimed to establish requirements for sustainable forest
management plans, recognizing the crucial role these forests play in enhancing the climate resilience of
Vietnam's vulnerable coastal landscape. The forest sector is of vital importance to Vietnam's economy and
climate change strategies; however, it faced challenges such as competing land uses and overexploitation.
Two-thirds of Vietnam's natural forests were deemed to be in poor condition or undergoing regeneration. The
decline was linked to the emphasis on the production forests and limited resources allocated to the
management of natural forests. Coastal forests, especially protection forests, were crucial for protecting
vulnerable populations and economic assets in the lowlands.

Considering the pressing issues of forest overexploitation and inadequate forest management capacity,
prioritizing the protection and management plans for forests was both critical and timely. However, the prior
action itself mandated only the adoption of criteria and the development of requirements, which by themselves
may have little impact. A more substantive prior action might have required the actual classification and
reporting on coastal protection forests according to agreed criteria. While PA#1 was relevant in terms of
increasing recognition and developing management plans in line with national certification systems, it was too
early in the results chain to have a significant impact on achieving the objective of improved climate landscape
management. Consequently, the relevance of the prior action is rated as Moderately Satisfactory.

Prior Action 2: The Recipient has: (i) through its Government, adopted Decree No. 37/2019/ND-CP dated
May 7, 2019, guiding the implementation of the Planning Law, including the process, content, and
climate considerations for the preparation of regional master plans, and (ii) through its Prime Minister,
issued Decision No. 1226/QD-TTg dated September 24, 2018, establishing the National Planning Council
tasked with the responsibility of developing regional master plans for the Mekong Delta and other
regions.

The second prior action focused on strengthening the resilient planning of the Mekong Delta. The Mekong Delta
is home to 20 million people and accounts for half of Vietnam’s rice production, 70% of aquaculture production,
and one-third of GDP. The Delta had a high inundation risk, and it was expected that by 2050, eight of the 13
Delta provinces could experience at least a 50% increase in the flood areas. To address climatic impacts, it was
essential to have greater coordination across sectors and provinces to minimize negative externalities and
inefficiencies created by siloed planning. Vietnam's 2017 Planning Law transformed the planning process into a
more coherent and integrated one, with the Integrated Regional Master Plan for the Mekong Delta set to
replace more than 30 sector master plans that have led to inefficient investments and unsustainable
development.

The development of the Mekong Delta needed a shift towards a more integrated, area-based, and climate-
smart approach. PA 2 included adopting guidance for implementing the Planning Law, including process,


                                                                                                       Page 4 of 24
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Climate Change and Green Growth DPF (P171006)



content, and climate considerations for the preparation of regional master plans and establishment of a National
Planning Council tasked with developing regional master plans. The Program document notes (para 41) that
within the Vietnam governance context, official plans typically represent robust policy vehicles as there is a high
degree of commitment to their implementation. However, the prior action was somewhat weak, as it mandated
only the issuance of guidance and the creation of a planning body, not the actual issuance of plans that
included climate considerations.

PA 2 was relevant in supporting this shift and the development of the first single, integrated, multi-sectoral, and
spatial master plan at the regional level - the Mekong Delta regional master plan (with a strong focus on climate
resilience and sustainability). However, for this PA to generate a tangible outcome, it was expected that the
2021-2025 Medium-Term Investment Plan would include coordinated investments identified in the Regional
Master Plan. However, the Regional Master Plan was approved after the MTIP. PA 2 was in congruence with
the PDO and addressed the key issues of fragmented and sectoral-based planning, which had led to
inefficient investments. However, the contribution of this PA to the achievement of outcome was difficult to
substantiate as the result chain associated with this PA was weak. The relevance of this prior action is rated as
Moderately Satisfactory.

Climate Budgeting

Prior Action 3: The Recipient, through MPI, has adopted Decision No. 1085/QD-BKHDT dated July 16,
2018, governing the identification, classification, and reporting of public investment allocations related
to climate change and green growth.

The third prior action focused on adopting guidance for identifying, classifying, and reporting public investment
allocations related to climate change and green growth. Vietnam has committed through the Socio-Economic
Development Plan to increasing financing for investments that enhance climate resilience and green and low-
carbon growth. Climate change and green growth budget tagging are needed to monitor and evaluate action
under this commitment and understand and manage the composition of expenditures on these topics.

The prior action aimed to implement a consistent methodology for tracking climate budget public expenditures.
The prior action was important to assess and manage the overall level of public climate investment and the
alignment of that investment with established national climate objectives. However, the causal chain to increase
investment in response to national climate priorities as a result of the prior action was weak. A stronger prior
action might have required an increasing allocation of public investment for climate change, rather than solely
classifying and reporting on investments that are responsive to climate concerns. The relevance of the prior
action is rated as Moderately Satisfactory.

Improving Water Resources Protection and Use Efficiency

Prior Action 4: The Recipient, through its Government, has: (i) adopted regulations on groundwater
protection to prevent saline intrusion and land subsidence, as evidenced by Decree No. 167/2018/ND-
CP dated December 26, 2018; and (ii) improved sand mining management and river works planning to
protect water sources, as evidenced by Decree No. 23/2020/ND-CP dated February 24, 2020.

The fourth prior action aimed to protect water sources through regulations on groundwater protection to prevent
saline intrusion and land subsidence and regulations to improve sand mining management and river works
planning. The unregulated groundwater abstraction depletes aquifers, and uncontrolled sand mining leads to
erosion and flood risk. Climate change exacerbates water scarcity and salinization, affecting the country's water


                                                                                                    Page 5 of 24
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Climate Change and Green Growth DPF (P171006)



resources. The government has committed to protecting surface and groundwater resources through policies
regulating water management, abstraction charges, and violation penalties.

The prior action aimed to regulate groundwater exploitation and establish four different groundwater protection
zones, with restrictions on abstraction in zones where groundwater is already depleted, polluted, or threatened
by salinization. While the Ministry of Natural Resources and Planning (MONRE) continued to be responsible for
overall framework planning and oversight, the responsibility for groundwater and sand management was
assigned to the provincial authorities, thereby increasing accountability, and enhancing enforcement on the
ground. Establishing the institutional and governance framework for water resources protection was considered
instrumental to ensuring water resources' sustainability and security, especially in the face of increasing climate
change impacts. The relevance of the prior action is rated as Satisfactory.

Prior Action 5: The Recipient, through its Government, has adopted: (i) Decree No. 77/2018/ND-CP
dated May 16, 2018, providing financial incentives for on-farm irrigation, and advanced and efficient
irrigation system; and (ii) guidelines for water service fees for irrigation, as evidenced by Decree No.
96/2018/ND-CP dated June 30, 2018

The fifth prior action focused on improving irrigation efficiency by providing incentives for the development of
small-scale, multi-purpose water storage and on-farm water delivery systems. Agriculture is the primary water
user, and increasing irrigation efficiency is crucial for addressing climate-induced water shortages. The
dominant use of water-intensive, low-value crops for irrigation has put pressure on water resources, especially
in the context of climate change. The incentives include subsidies ranging from 50-100% for design and
machinery costs in investments that improve irrigation efficiency.

In addition, the PA focused on guidelines for water service feed for irrigation. In 2008, the government had
abolished irrigation fees, which led to an insufficient budget for maintaining public irrigation systems and
disincentivized efficient water use. The new guidelines are for pricing irrigation services based on either area
served or volume of water used (depending on farm size and crop type) and a timeline for rolling out their
application. The establishment of volume-based fees was a critical incentive to increase irrigation efficiency and
water productivity.

The prior action aimed to reduce the pressure on water sources by providing incentives to enhance water use
efficiency and improve water productivity, directly contributing to climate resilient management of landscapes.
The relevance of the prior action is rated as Satisfactory.

Pillar 2: Adoption of cleaner transport and energy systems

The reforms under this pillar include support under two policy tracks: (i) Cleaner Transport; and (ii) Towards a
Low-Carbon Energy Transition.

Cleaner Transport

Prior Action 6: The Recipient, through its Prime Minister, has adopted new emissions standards for in-
use and imported used road motor vehicles, as evidenced by Decision No. 16/2019/QD-TTg dated March
28, 2019.

The sixth prior action regarding new emissions standards for in-use and imported used road motor vehicles
aimed to encourage the adoption of progressively cleaner fuels in the transport sector, thus leading to a
reduction in polluting vehicles and reduced local air pollution. The transport sector in Vietnam has been growing

                                                                                                    Page 6 of 24
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Climate Change and Green Growth DPF (P171006)



rapidly, with road transport accounting for two-thirds of total passenger kilometers and a quarter of freight ton-
kilometers. This heavy reliance on road transport has led to a continuous upsurge in emissions, making
transport the primary source of air pollution in Vietnam's congested urban areas. While the government has
adopted EURO-4 vehicle emission standards for new vehicles, there has been no effective measure to tackle
emissions from in-use vehicles and used import vehicles, which account for a significant share of the sector's
emissions.

The prior action expanded on the achievements of the original DPF series, which supported the adoption of
regulations on new vehicles, by extending emissions regulations to in-use and imported used road vehicles.
The prior action was expected to significantly reduce air pollution and GHG emissions and lead to a cleaner
transport sector in Vietnam. The relevance of the prior action is rated as Satisfactory.

Towards a Low-Carbon Energy Transition

Prior Action 7: The Recipient, through its Prime Minister, has adopted a national energy efficiency
program for the period 2019-2030, as evidenced by Decision No. 280/2019/QD-TTg dated March 13,
2019.

The energy sector in Vietnam is responsible for the largest share of GHG emissions (44% in 2014), making it
critical to promote energy efficiency (EE) and renewable energy (RE) policies to transition towards a low-carbon
economy. At appraisal, the Program Document noted (para 72) that the government is planning to move from
the current voluntary to a more mandatory EE regime, adopting a carrot-and-stick approach, particularly in the
industrial and residential sectors that are responsible for the majority of electricity consumption in Vietnam. The
seventh prior action aimed at adopting a national energy efficiency program for 2019-2030. The program
supports policy development, technical and financial assistance for promoting investment, strengthening of
monitoring and compliance regime, communications and awareness raising, and research and development. It
also included a plan to set up a financial mechanism for energy efficiency, provision of capacity building for
provincial stakeholders for monitoring energy consumption, and the establishment of an energy data
management center.

The program included a high level energy savings target of 8 to 10 percent from 2019 to 2030 against a
business-as-usual energy demand forecast, as well as specific targets for key sectors such as cement, steel,
plastic, chemical, textile, beverage, and paper industries, and goals related to the adoption of energy
management systems, energy efficiency measures in industrial parks and clusters, and the certification of green
buildings. To achieve these targets, the provincial plans incorporate various solutions and actions, including the
review and development of energy efficiency policies and regulations, providing technical and financial support
for investment in energy efficiency projects, establishing energy databases, capacity building initiatives,
monitoring and evaluation of energy efficiency regulations, communication and awareness campaigns,
international cooperation, and research and development of energy efficiency technology. The plans also
assign clear responsibilities to local departments and designated energy users, ensuring effective
implementation and coordination. Moreover, the plans generally include financial resources and budget
requirements for their successful execution.

The prior action was expected to lead to increased uptake of energy efficiency measures and was an important
step for moving towards a low-carbon energy transition. The relevance of the prior action is rated as
Satisfactory.




                                                                                                     Page 7 of 24
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Climate Change and Green Growth DPF (P171006)



Prior Action #8: The Recipient has: (i) through its Prime Minister, revised the feed-in tariff to promote
investment in wind power development in Vietnam, as evidenced by Decision No. 39/2018/QD-TTg dated
September 10, 2018; and (ii) through its MOIT, adopted a standard power purchase agreement for wind
power, as evidenced by Circular No. 02/2019/TT-BCT dated February 28, 2019.

The eighth prior action focused on increasing the feed-in tariff and adopting a standard power purchase
agreement for wind power development. The Government of Vietnam has set ambitious targets to promote low-
carbon development by reducing the carbon intensity of its power sector with the adoption of the Renewable
Energy Development Strategy and the Revised Power Development Master Plan VII. To achieve the
government’s targets, several challenges need to be addressed, including the lack of concessional financing
sources, infrastructure connections, an enabling policy framework, and associated risks related to investments.
The prior action was expected to incentivize investment in both onshore and offshore wind and address
financing challenges wind developers face (for example, reduced risks related to force majeure and technical
curtailment).

The prior action helped to address the need for an enabling policy and regulatory framework to attract
commercial financing in wind power. The prior action was expected to lead to a significant investment in wind
power generation and expanded use of wind power in Vietnam, contributing towards Vietnam’s low-carbon
energy transition. The ICR team also clarified that the feed-in-tariff was an interim mechanism for developing
wind power in Vietnam. To further scale-up renewable energy (RE) investments in Vietnam, the government
intended to accelerate the deployment of an auction-based procurement framework for sourcing additional RE
generation capacity, which would replace the current FIT mechanism, strengthen market- based competition
and allow for efficient price recovery. The relevance of the prior action is rated as Satisfactory.

Table 1: Rating of Relevance of Prior Actions

                                                                                             Rating of
Pillar        Prior Action                                                                   Relevance of
                                                                                             PA
            1. Adoption of criteria for the classification of coastal protection forests
                                                                                             Moderately
            and the development of requirements for sustainable forest management
                                                                                             Satisfactory
            plans.
            2. Adoption of guidance for implementing the Planning Law, including
            process, content, and climate considerations for preparation of regional         Moderately
Pillar 1:   master plans and establishment of a National Planning Council tasked             Satisfactory
Climate     with the responsibility of developing regional master plans
resilient   3. Adoption of guidance for the identification, classification, and reporting
                                                                                             Moderately
management of public investment allocations related to climate change and green
                                                                                             Satisfactory
of          growth
landscapes 4. Adoption of regulations on groundwater protection to prevent saline
            intrusion and land subsidence and regulations to improve sand mining             Satisfactory
            management and river works planning to protect water sources
            5. Adoption of financial incentives for on-farm irrigation and advanced and
            efficient irrigation systems, as well as guidelines for water service fees for   Satisfactory
            irrigation
Pillar 2:   6. Adoption of emissions standards for in-use and imported used road
                                                                                             Satisfactory
Adoption of motor vehicles


                                                                                                     Page 8 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Climate Change and Green Growth DPF (P171006)



 cleaner      7. Adoption of a national energy efficiency program for the period 2019-
                                                                                        Satisfactory
 transport    2030
 and energy 8. Revision of the feed-in tariff and adoption of a standard power purchase
 systems                                                                                Satisfactory
              agreement for wind power development
 Overall Rating of Relevance of Objectives                                              Satisfactory

 The prior actions were appropriate along the results chain for realizing the intended objectives. Five of the eight
 prior actions were satisfactory, and three were moderately satisfactory. Assuming equal value to each prior
 action, the relevance of the design is rated as Satisfactory.



Rating

Satisfactory


4. Relevance of Results Indicators

Rationale

PDO 1: To promote climate resilient management of landscapes

To assess the achievement of this objective, there were five Results Indicators (RIs), with each PA having
one RI. Below is the discussion and rating of each result indicator used to assess the extent to which
the PAs were achieved.

RI1: Number of hectares of production and natural forests with approved sustainable forest
management plans

The indicator was relevant to assess the government's commitment and the PA's impact on strengthening
forest management. While, in principle, the indicator was appropriate, the definition and targets should
have aligned with the official categories of forests. The targets include one for production forests (250,000
ha) and one for natural forests (100,000 ha). However, according to Decree 156 and Circular 28, forests
were categorized into three types: specialized, protection, and production. Natural and plantation forests
could fall into each of the above categories. Therefore, the indicator and targets should have been defined
for the three categories of the forest instead of production and natural. There was no indicator to measure
the progress on classification and reporting on coastal protection forests regulation under PA#1. The
relevance of the indicator is rated as Moderately Satisfactory.

RI2: Medium-Term Investment Plan includes coordinated investments as defined in the Integrated
Regional Master Plan for the Mekong Delta to address multiprovincial issues compounded by
climate change

The indicator aimed to demonstrate the government’s commitment to addressing issues of fragmented
and sectoral-based climate planning by integrating coordinated investments identified in the Regional
Master Plan into the 2021-2025 Medium-Term Investment Plan. The Mekong Delta Plan was the first
master plan at the regional level that would be informed by robust vulnerability models to identify climate-

                                                                                                      Page 9 of 24
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Climate Change and Green Growth DPF (P171006)



smart pathways and investments under different climate and development scenarios. This Master Plan
was deemed to be critical to enable effective action on climate change and green growth (Program
Document, para 51), and the incorporation of key investments in the MTIP was to demonstrate
commitment to its implementation. The Program Document had also identified the risk to be substantial
‘because the approval of the regional plan was expected to involve complex political economy
challenges’. The relevance of the indicator is rated as Satisfactory.

RI3: Number of sub-sectors with increased climate-responsive investment under the Ministry of
Agriculture and Rural Development’s (MARD) annual budget

The indicator under this PA aimed to measure the sub-sectors with increase in investment in response to
national climate priorities. The indicator focused on measuring the increase in climate-responsive public
investment (as assessed in accordance with the new regulations on identifying and reporting on climate
public expenditure under PA#3) under the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development (MARD). The
ICR team clarified the focus was on MARD to start with since it accounted for a large share of the state
budget’s climate-related investment. A Climate Public Expenditure Review conducted prior to DPF
preparation found that MARD accounted for 79 percent of climate expenditures from the five key climate-
relevant line ministries (MARD, Ministry of Transport, Ministry of Construction, Ministry of Industry and
Trade, and Ministry of Natural Resources and Environment). The four sub-sectors where an increase was
expected were irrigation, forestry, agriculture, and fisheries, based on an assessment of the sub-sectors
that constituted most of the climate public financing under MARD.

While the indicator had good intentions by aiming to measure the increase in climate-responsive
investment, it fell short in its ambition. Instead of measuring the relative or percentage increase, it only
counted the number of sub-sectors with an increase. Consequently, any sub-sector, regardless of the
magnitude of the increase, would have been included. A more appropriate approach would have been to
target a percentage increase in climate-responsive spending across key sub-sectors, rather than solely
focusing on the number of sub-sectors with an increase. The relevance of the indicator is rated as
Moderately Satisfactory.

RI4: Number of provinces establishing groundwater exploitation zones

The indicator aimed to measure the number of provinces establishing groundwater exploitation zones
where restrictions on abstraction would be applied following PA 4. The indicator was relevant for
assessing the commitment of the Government to strengthen the governance framework for managing
water resources, specifically groundwater resources, at the sub-national level. The indicator was
measurable and a direct outcome of the reform. The ambition was appropriate given the program
timeframe. However, there was no indicator to reflect the application of sand mining regulation under
PA#4. The relevance of the indicator is assessed as Satisfactory.

RI5: Area of farmland with improved water-saving practices applied

The indicator aimed to measure the area of farmland with improved water-saving practices applied. In
principle, this indicator was appropriate for assessing the impact of the policy on incentivizing farmers to
adopt water-saving techniques. However, the team clarified that this indicator was measured as the area
of farmland in the provinces (district and commune levels) where the incentive mechanism was adopted
and officially reported to MARD, it did not measure whether water-saving practices were applied on farms.
The assessment of the implementation of this policy showed different levels of adoption across the


                                                                                                    Page 10 of 24
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Climate Change and Green Growth DPF (P171006)



provinces, with only 21 out of 63 provinces issuing relevant policies and strategies at the provincial level
to implement Decree 77. The indicator for this PA could have been further enhanced by measuring the
actual area under improved water-saving practices (rather than just where the incentive mechanism has
been adopted) as well as including an indicator that reflected the adoption of the policy across provinces
by putting specific regulations and measures in place. Also, there was no indicator to reflect the
application of the water service fees for irrigation. The relevance of the indicator is assessed as
Moderately Satisfactory.

PDO 2. To promote adoption of cleaner transport and energy systems

To assess the achievement of this objective, there were three Results Indicators (RIs), with each PA
having one RI. Below is the discussion and rating of each result indicator used to assess the extent to
which the PAs were achieved.

RI6: Percentage emissions reductions of carbon monoxide (CO), hydrocarbons (HC), and
Hartridge Smoke Unit (HSU) from imported used vehicles and in-use vehicles that do not comply
with new emissions standards (as compared to the BAU)

The indicator aimed to measure the percentage emission reduction of carbon monoxide (CO) and
hydrocarbons (HC) as well as exhaust Hartridge Smoke Units (HSU) as a direct result of the adoption of
the new emissions standards for in-use and imported used road motor vehicles. The indicator was
relevant for assessing pollution abatement associated with the policy. However, the indicator could have
been simplified by excluding the qualifier of in-use vehicles “that do not comply with new emissions
standards” as the policy applied to both compliant and non-compliant vehicles. The relevance of the
indicator is rated as Satisfactory.

RI7: Percentage of national energy savings (through 2030) committed to in newly adopted
provincial energy efficiency programs

The indicator measured the total energy savings commitments made in provincial energy efficiency
programs/plans to be adopted due to the national program. Given the short period between the adoption
of the program and the measurement of the indicator, measuring the actual energy savings associated
with adopting the national energy efficiency program would take time. Thus, the tracking of the
achievement of provincial implementation, i.e., the adoption of provincial programs/plans and energy
savings targets, the indicator was realistic. The target of 8 percent was appropriate as it aligned with the
national-level program target. The relevance of the indicator is rated as Satisfactory.

RI8: Generating capacity of grid-connected wind power in Vietnam

PA 8 aimed to encourage increased private investment in wind power. The indicator aimed to measure
the downstream outcome of expanding wind power capacity in Vietnam, which the prior action contributed
to. The electricity utility (EVN) regularly monitored and reported on the indicator. The ICR team argued
that PA 8, which focused on revising the feed-in tariff and adopting a standard power purchase agreement
for wind power development played an important role in advancing the progress of all wind power projects
in the pipeline and ensuring their successful completion and commission. While the pipeline of projects
was already identified in the revised power Master Plan VII and so many of the wind projects were already
in development prior to the feed-in tariff revisions, without a revised pricing mechanism, there could be
delays or postponement of the pipeline. In particular, developers could be unable to reach the financial


                                                                                                    Page 11 of 24
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Climate Change and Green Growth DPF (P171006)



closure for offshore wind projects. It’s important to note that all wind power projects were financed by the
private sector.

The indicator was outcome-oriented and a critical measure of Vietnam’s progress towards a low-carbon
energy transition. The relevance of the indicator is assessed as Satisfactory.

Rating

The results framework was mostly appropriate with clear, feasible, and measurable indicators, although
there were a few exceptions. Given that this was a standalone DPF, some indicators focused on
intermediate results, which were more feasible and realistic. The Bank considered the client’s capacity to
deliver the targets. It ensured they were ambitious enough to be achieved within the operation’s short
duration and aligned with the relevant ministries’ mandates.

However, some indicators had moderate shortcomings in the definition and target setting. For instance,
the improved forest landscape management policy track’s targets could have aligned better with the three
official categories of forests. The climate budgeting policy track aimed to measure the number of sub-
sectors with increased public investment allocations for climate change under MARD rather than the
relative increase in investment. The indicator on the area of farmland with improved water-saving
practices applied could have been more outcome-oriented by measuring the actual area under improved
water-saving practices rather than just where the incentive mechanism has been adopted. There were no
results indicators to measure the policy impact of regulations pertaining to coastal protection, sand mining,
and irrigation service fees. Overall, the relevance of results indicators is rated as Moderately Satisfactory.



                                                                             Actual
                                                                             Change in
                                                                Actual                    RI
                   Associated RI                                             RI relative
Description                             Baseline Targets        Value as of               Achievement
                   PA         Relevance                                      to
                                                                Target date               Rating
                                                                             Targeted
                                                                             Change
PDO 1: To promote climate resilient management of landscapes
                                                                1 million ha
RI1: Number of
                                                                (production Target
hectares of                             151,000 ha 250,000 ha
                                                                forest); 2.1 exceeded
production and                          (production (production
                                                                million ha for
natural forests                         forest);    forest);
                                                                (specialized production
with approved                           86,000 ha 100,000 ha
                   PA1        MS                                forest); 4.6 forest; Data Substantial
sustainable forest                      (natural    (natural
                                                                million ha not
management                              forests)    forests)
                                                                (protection available
plans
                                                                forest)      for natural
                                        (2018)      (2021)
                                                                             forests.
                                                                (2021)
RI2: Medium-       PA2        S         No          Yes         No           Target was Modest
Term Investment                                                              not
Plan includes                           (2018)      (2021)      (2021)       achieved
coordinated                                                                  since the

                                                                                                    Page 12 of 24
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Climate Change and Green Growth DPF (P171006)



investments as                                                            RMP for
defined in the                                                            the Mekong
Integrated                                                                Delta was
Regional Master                                                           not
Plan for the                                                              formulated
Mekong Delta to                                                           in time to
address                                                                   inform the
multiprovincial                                                           MTIP.
issues
compounded by
climate change
RI3: Number of
sub-sectors with
increased climate-                      0           4         2
                                                                          50%
responsive         PA3       MS                                                        Modest
                                                                          achieved
investment under                        (2018)      (2021)    (2021)
the MARD’s
annual budget
RI4: Number of
provinces                               0           20        24
                                                                          Target
establishing       PA4       S                                                     Substantial
                                                                          Exceeded
groundwater                             (2018)      (2021)    (2021)
exploitation zones
RI5: Area of
farmland with
improved water-                         320,000     500,000   528,624
                                                                          Target
saving practices PA5         MS                                                    Substantial
                                                                          Exceeded
applied                                 (2018)      (2021)    (2021)


PDO2: To promote adoption of cleaner transport and energy systems
RI6: Percentage PA6       S           0         3 percent 10 percent Target   Substantial
emissions                                       (CO); 7    (CO); 15  Exceeded
reductions of                         (2018)    percent    percent
carbon monoxide                                 (HC); 9    (HC); 9
(CO),                                           percent    percent
hydrocarbons                                    (HSU)      (HSU)
(HC), and
Hartridge Smoke                                 (2021)     (2021)
Unit (HSU) from
imported used
vehicles and in-
use vehicles that
do not comply
with new
emissions
standards (as


                                                                                           Page 13 of 24
                   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                   Climate Change and Green Growth DPF (P171006)



               compared to the
               BAU)
               RI7: Percentage
               of national energy
               savings (through
                                                         0           8           8
               2030) committed                                                                Target
                                  PA7         S                                                           Substantial
               to in newly                                                                    achieved
                                                         (2018)      (2021)      (2021)
               adopted provincial
               energy efficiency
               programs
               RI8: Generating
                                                         300         800         4000
               capacity of grid-                                                              Target
                                  PA8         S                                                        Substantial
               connected wind                                                                 Exceeded
                                                         (2018)      (2021)      (2021)
               power in Vietnam

   Rating

   Moderately Satisfactory

   5. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
EFFICACY_TBL




                OBJECTIVE 1
                Objective
                To promote climate resilient management of landscapes

                Rationale
                Theory of Change: Reforms supported the government’s efforts to adapt to climate change by increasing the
                resilient management of landscapes and natural resources, including water resources, and managing public
                investment more effectively. Further enhancement of legal and institutional measures for forest management,
                and spatial planning of the Mekong Delta would likely contribute to the prudent use of natural resources and
                climate-resilient management of the region. Climate budget tagging was expected to enable a stronger
                understanding of the composition and levels of public expenditures with climate benefits, thereby providing
                important information to policymakers to drive an increase in climate investment and assist in monitoring
                climate policy implementation. Establishing the legal and governance framework to address groundwater
                exploitation and providing incentives for more efficient irrigation systems would help prevent land subsidence
                and contribute to improved management of water resources, especially in the face of increasing climate
                change impacts.

                There was a clear line of sight from the reform efforts to the expected outcomes except in the case of the
                climate budgeting policy track. The outcome focused on measuring an increase in climate financing while the
                PA focused on strengthened capacity to identify and report on climate public expenditure rather than
                encourage increased climate-responsive investment. There were no critical assumptions highlighted in the
                ICR.

                Outcomes



                                                                                                               Page 14 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Climate Change and Green Growth DPF (P171006)



Several key results in the areas of climate-smart landscape planning, climate budgeting, and improving water
resources protection and use efficiency were critical in achieving the objective of improving climate resilience
landscape management. Firstly, by the end of 2020, approximately 1 million hectares of production forests
have their forest management plans approved by the relevant authorities compared to a target of 250,000
hectares. However, the area under natural forests could not be tracked as described earlier. Moreover, even
though not formally part of the indicator, 2.1 million hectares of specialized forests and 4.6 million hectares of
protection forest also had their forest management plans approved. The area of production and natural
forests with approved sustainable forest management plans was substantially achieved and could have
exceeded the target if the indicator had been better defined.

Furthermore, the approval of the Mekong Delta Regional Master Plan (RMP) in February 2022 marked a shift
towards integrating spatial planning, considering climate change as a major challenge. The ICR notes (para
31) that the RMP has set a precedent for future planning exercises by considering climate change as a major
challenge for development, analyzing and modeling potential impacts of climate change, and identifying
solutions to address them. However, the target of using the RMP to inform the Medium-term Investment Plan
(MTIP) was not met because of the misalignment in the timing of the two plans. The MTIP coordinated by the
Ministry of Planning and Investment for 2021-2025 was approved by the National Assembly in late 2021 prior
to the RMP approval. Hence, the priority investment list could not be formulated in time to inform the
development of the MTIP.

Regarding climate public investment allocations, two out of the four targeted sub-sectors- irrigation and
fisheries -witnessed increased allocations from 2016-2020. However, forestry and agriculture sub-sectors
experienced decreased allocations. From 2016 to 2020, climate-responsive public investment allocations
increased by 62 percent in the irrigation sub-sector and by 8 percent in the fisheries sub-sector but fell by 57
percent and 42 percent in the forestry and agriculture sub-sectors, respectively. Overall, given that investment
in the irrigation sub-sector constituted the majority of public investment financing during this period, climate
public investment spending across the four sub-sectors increased by 49 percent which was higher than the
increase in public investment spending (33%) across the four sub-sectors. However, the result was not
directly attributable to the prior action. As discussed earlier, the causal chain of the PA is weak since the prior
action focused on enhancing the government’s capacity to report on climate public expenditures rather than
promoting an increase in climate public spending.

Moreover, delegation of responsibility for groundwater and sand management to the provincial authorities
helped to increase accountability and enforcement on the ground. By mid-2022, 24 provinces had approved
the groundwater zoning plans surpassing the target of 20. However, groundwater exploitation is still ongoing
where local governments are slow in formulating underground water restriction maps and implementing
restriction measures. Also, about one-third of provinces in Vietnam have implemented the policy (Decree 23)
regarding zoning and protection measures for river sand and river management amid high domestic demand
for sand for construction. Moreover, the Decree stipulated that within three years of effectiveness (i.e., by
February 2023), all provinces must complete groundwater zoning. The Bank team informed IEG that, the
overall target of the decree has not yet been met and there are 41 remaining provinces that have yet to
complete the zoning plans.

Lastly, following the policy on incentivizing farmers to adopt water-saving techniques, by mid-2020, 528,624
ha of farmland applied the incentive mechanism for improved water-saving practices (compared to the target
of 500,000 ha). It is, however, important to note that the level of support to farmers and farming companies
varied in the 21 provinces, with the average of support ranging from 25-45 percent value of the irrigation
equipment (approximately US$1,000 per ha on average), which is lower than that guided in the Decree 77.

                                                                                                    Page 15 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Climate Change and Green Growth DPF (P171006)



Limitations in the implementation of this Decree in selected provinces, especially in the poorer ones, have led
to the request of MARD leadership to revise the Decree to provide better financial incentives (i.e., increase
the support ratio to at least 50 percent for the poor provinces) for selected technical solutions and expand the
beneficiary group to cooperatives and farmers’ groups.

Overall, the achievement of the objective related to climate-resilient management of landscapes had some
moderate shortcomings. While progress has been made across all five reform areas under this objective, it
fell short of achieving the desired targets, or the indicators could have been better defined for three reform
areas. The targets associated with the reform areas on improving water resources protection and use
efficiency were exceeded. On improved forest landscape management, while one of the two targets was
exceeded substantially, the other indicator/target was defined incorrectly. In strengthening the resilient
planning of the Mekong Delta, the RMP itself has been a pioneer for regional and climate-informed master
planning in Vietnam. However, the list of priority investments that seek to address multiprovincial issues
compounded by climate change under the RMP was not formulated in time to inform the development of the
MTIP. On climate budgeting, there were increased climate public investment allocations in two of the four
sub-sectors in MARD from 2016-2020 even though total climate public spending across the four sub-sectors
increased. As noted earlier, there were no results indicators to measure the policy impact of regulations
pertaining to coastal protection and irrigation service fees. Overall, the efficacy of the first objective is rated as
Moderately Satisfactory.



Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To promote adoption of cleaner transport and energy systems

Rationale
Theory of Change: Reforms supported the government’s efforts to promote the adoption of cleaner transport
and transition towards low-carbon energy systems. Policies for improving automobile emission standards and
regulating emissions from in-use and imported vehicles would likely contribute to reducing air pollution and
GHG emissions from road transportation. Adopting a national energy efficiency program and strengthening
energy efficiency action at the provincial level would contribute to energy savings. The establishment of an
enabling legal and regulatory framework, including the tariff regime would likely attract commercial financing
for scaling up renewable energy investments.

There was a clear line of sight from the reform efforts to the expected outputs and outcomes, and the actions
appeared appropriate to achieving the desired outcomes. There were no critical assumptions highlighted in
the ICR.

Outcomes

The implementation of new emissions standards for in-use and imported used road motor vehicles has played
a pivotal role in promoting cleaner transport. These standards have effectively contributed to the reduction of
carbon monoxide (CO) and hydrocarbon (HC) emissions, as well as exhaust units (HSUs). The relative

                                                                                                      Page 16 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Climate Change and Green Growth DPF (P171006)



reductions in CO and HC emissions were estimated at 9.86% and 14.76%, respectively, for the 2019-2021
period, exceeding or meeting the 3% and 7% targets, respectively. The relative reduction of exhaust units is
estimated at 9.21 percent compared to the target of 9%. The ICR team clarified that the targets were
exceeded mainly because they were initially set based on projected vehicle numbers and types. However, the
actual impacts were determined using real data from Vietnam's vehicle register, which accounted for the
variation between the projected and actual figures.

In terms of advancing clean energy, the adoption of energy efficiency plans in 58 out of 63 provinces
demonstrates a significant commitment towards national energy savings targets. These plans align with the
broader objectives at the national level. The overall average energy savings target is 5.42 percent for the
2019-2025 period and 8.03 percent for the 2019-2030 period, in line with the 8 percent target for this DPF as
well as the national level program targets of 5-7 percent for the 2019-2025 period and 8 -10 percent for the
2019-2030 period. These plans encompass high-level energy savings targets, specific targets for key sectors
such as cement, steel, plastic, chemical, textile, beverage, and paper industries, and goals related to the
adoption of energy management systems, energy efficiency measures in industrial parks and clusters, and
the certification of green buildings. To achieve these targets, the provincial plans incorporate various solutions
and actions, including the review and development of energy efficiency policies and regulations, providing
technical and financial support for investment in energy efficiency projects, establishing energy databases,
capacity building initiatives, monitoring and evaluation of energy efficiency regulations, communication and
awareness campaigns, international cooperation, and research and development of energy efficiency
technology. The plans also assign clear responsibilities to local departments and designated energy users,
ensuring effective implementation and coordination. Moreover, the plans generally include financial resources
and budget requirements for their successful execution.

Following the prior action 8 on revising the feed-in tariff (FIT) and establishing a standard power purchase
agreement to promote clean energy development, particularly in wind power, about 4GW of privately financed
(and operated) wind-based power projects have been commissioned. The outcome significantly exceeded the
target of 800 MW (baseline of 300 MW) as a substantial capacity of around 4GW in privately financed wind-
based power projects was commissioned. Based on the average capital cost of $1.2 billion per GW of wind
power capacity (per Bank staff estimates based on industry standards), this indicates an estimated
deployment of $4.8 billion in private investment, primarily from domestic independent power producers. As
noted earlier, the ICR team emphasized that PA 8, which revised the feed-in tariff and established a standard
power purchase agreement for wind power, contributed towards the progress of all wind projects in the
pipeline, as it prevented delays and ensured financial closure, especially for offshore developments. The
Bank team shared with IEG that the significant increase can be attributed to multiple factors, including the
generous FIT, declining costs of wind technologies, a stable political environment, and the growing demand
for electricity in Vietnam.

Overall, the progress towards the clean transport and energy objective has been substantial. The targets
under all three results areas were either achieved or exceeded. The enforcement of emission standards for
in-use and imported used road vehicles has been maintained. The target for national energy savings
committed to in provincial energy efficiency programs has been met, and commercial financing for wind
power development has exceeded expectations. However, there are some challenges. The revised feed-in
tariff (FIT) expired as planned, and there is uncertainty regarding future wind power pricing. Decision 39
proposed a reverse auction system to replace the FIT, but it has not been implemented yet. The ICR team
informed IEG that to bridge this transition period, the Ministry of Industry and Trade has introduced decision



                                                                                                   Page 17 of 24
                         Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                         Climate Change and Green Growth DPF (P171006)



                      21/QD-BCT, which specifies the tariff range for solar and wind projects, and developers will negotiate the tariff
                      with the utility company (EVN).

                      The overall efficacy for the second objective is rated as Satisfactory.



                      Rating

                      Satisfactory


OVERALL EFF TBL OLD




Overall Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
Rationale

In terms of climate-resilient management, progress has been made across all five reform areas, but there were
some shortcomings in achieving the desired targets or defining indicators correctly. While improvements were
seen in water resources protection and use efficiency, there were moderate shortcomings in the achievement of
the targets for forest landscape management, climate investment allocations, and informing the priority
investments for the Mekong Delta. Additionally, there were no indicators to measure the policy impact of
regulations related to coastal protection, sand mining, and irrigation service fees. On the other hand, the progress
towards clean transport and energy have been substantial, with targets being achieved or exceeded in all three
areas. However, there are challenges regarding the expiration of the revised feed-in tariff and uncertainty about
future wind power pricing. Overall, the efficacy is rated as Moderately Satisfactory.



Overall Efficacy Rating
Moderately Satisfactory


      6. Outcome

      Rationale

      The PDOs were relevant to the Government and Bank strategy for Vietnam and built on the prior DPF. The prior
      actions were timely, relevant, and aligned well with the PDOs. The relevance of the operation's prior actions is
      rated satisfactory. The relevance of the results indicators is rated as moderately satisfactory given the moderate
      shortcomings in the definition and target setting of some indicators. The overall efficacy with which the project's
      objectives were achieved is rated as moderately satisfactory mainly because of moderate shortcomings in the
      achievement of the first objective. The overall outcome is rated as Moderately Satisfactory.


      a. Rating

      Moderately Satisfactory

                                                                                                                        Page 18 of 24
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Climate Change and Green Growth DPF (P171006)




7. Risk to Development Outcome

Government ownership/ Commitment: The sustainability of the development outcomes does not face
substantial risk. The ICR notes that there continues to be strong government commitment to the policy
reform areas in the DPF. The government has recently taken bolder international climate commitments,
including the Prime Minister’s declaration that Vietnam would reach net-zero GHG emissions by 2050 at
COP26, the commitment to halt deforestation by 2030 and to slash methane emissions by 30 percent (from
2020 levels) by 2030, and the commitment to end all investment in new coal power generation, scale up
renewable energy deployment and phase out coal power by 2040.

Future pricing of wind power: The draft of Vietnam’s Power Development Plan VIII anticipates wind power
to lead the next phase of Vietnam’s renewable energy transition with 18 GW of wind needed by 2030 and an
estimated 42.7 GW of onshore wind and 54 GW of offshore wind by 2045. This will require massive
investments and an incentive framework to support it. As noted earlier, the feed-in tariff was an interim
mechanism for developing wind power in Vietnam. To further scale up RE investments in Vietnam, the
government intended to accelerate the deployment of an auction-based procurement framework for sourcing
additional RE generation capacity, which would replace the current FIT mechanism. Due to the delay in
implementing the planned reverse auction system to replace the feed-in-tariff by 2021, there is uncertainty
surrounding the future pricing of wind power. This uncertainty can potentially impact the sector's ability to
attract commercial financing in the sector and hinder the establishment of market-based competition and
efficient price recovery. Additionally, these challenges may have implications on the affordability of wind
power and its ability to scale up effectively.

Further, the roll-out of the recent Country Climate and Development Report (CCDR) in 2022 offers the World
Bank and other donors an opportunity to continue and deepen dialogue on climate policy reform and
implementation. The CCDR builds on policy reform areas of this DPF operation, namely the reform area on
strengthened resilient planning of the Mekong Delta under Pillar 1 and the entirety of Pillar 2 on adopting
cleaner transport and energy systems. The actions identified in the CCDR to build climate resilience will
likely contribute towards sustaining the development outcomes achieved under this DPF.


8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Bank Performance – Design

Rationale


This DPF was developed based on strong analytical underpinnings and the policy dialogue under
the preceding DPF series. The World Bank assisted MARD in strengthening the technical quality of the
criteria for classifying coastal protection forests. The World Bank has also been actively involved in the
Mekong Delta, directly contributing to developing an integrated regional master plan. In addition, the
Ministry of Planning and Investment (MPA) Guidelines for the identification, classification, and reporting of
public investment allocations related to climate change and green growth benefited from technical
assistance provided by the World Bank. The policy reforms supported by this DPF were informed by the
World Bank's extensive lending engagement on irrigation. The impact of policy reforms under Pillar 2 was

                                                                                                     Page 19 of 24
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Climate Change and Green Growth DPF (P171006)



supported by World Bank modeling in the transport and energy sectors. The quality of technical
discussions around the potential reforms was enhanced by the dialogue supported under complementary
IPFs, including the Forest Sector Modernization and Coastal Resilience Enhancement Project (P157127),
the Mekong Delta Integrated Climate Resilience and Sustainable Livelihoods Project (P153544), the
Vietnam Irrigated Agriculture Improvement Project (P130014), and the Vietnam Energy Efficiency for
Industrial Enterprises (P151086). These were coupled with a multi-sector ASA program, the Supporting
Systematic Action to Implement Vietnam’s NDC program (P171403), which brought substantive technical
expertise and coordination support to the DPF engagement.

As discussed in Section 3, the DPF also drew on the lessons learned and aimed to build on the results
delivered under the previous DPF. A key lesson was that the operation should be supported by a broader
technical and analytical support program that responds to the country’s needs and demands. Given the
cross-sectoral nature of the operation, there was a strong World Bank engagement at both sector and
coordinating levels across ministries.

Several risks were identified at appraisal, including sector strategy and policy risks, technical design, and
institutional capacity for implementation risks, given the program's complex political economy and multi-
sectoral nature. The mitigation measures incorporated in the design, including complementary technical
assistance, IPF, and ASA support from the Bank to strengthen policy design and implementation, proved
largely adequate.

The ICR notes that coordination with other development partners was strong due to the SP-RCC program,
which brought together MONRE, key line ministries, and development partners and was a useful model for
policy dialogue and technical assistance. However, some momentum was lost when it became clear that
the program would end in 2020 with no immediate follow-up program to support it. As a result, the World
Bank had to go through other channels to keep the momentum for policy dialogue, donor coordination, and
monitoring progress. (ICR, para 65)

As discussed in Section 3, while most of the prior actions were appropriate along the results chain for
realizing the intended objectives, few prior actions primarily consisted of procedural steps, which, on their
own, were unlikely to make significant contributions towards achieving the objectives. M&E design also
needed to be stronger at appraisal. For example, the indicators for the “improved forest management,”
climate budgeting,” policy reform areas could have been better defined, and the causal chain
strengthened. Additionally, there were no indicators to measure the policy impact of regulations related to
coastal protection, sand mining, and irrigation service fees.



Rating

Satisfactory

b. Bank Performance – Implementation

Rationale




                                                                                                      Page 20 of 24
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Climate Change and Green Growth DPF (P171006)



The World Bank adequately assessed the government's implementation capacity in the reform areas covered
by the operation. The Bank mobilized additional support when required to monitor progress, for example in the
case of the transport indicator.

As this was a standalone operation rather than a series of operations, no implementation support missions were
carried out by the DPF team following Board approval, which could have been enhanced. The ICR notes (para
67), that it would have been beneficial to engage in regular and structured discussions with the Ministry of
Natural Resources and Environment (MONRE) and relevant line ministries to strengthen policy dialogue and
potentially realize impact beyond the immediate outcomes indicated by the results indicators.



Rating

Satisfactory

c. Overall Bank Performance

Rationale

Given the Satisfactory performance at design and implementation, the overall Bank Performance is rated as
Satisfactory.


Overall Bank Performance Rating

Satisfactory

9. Other Impacts

a. Social and Poverty

The ICR notes that an ex-post review was conducted vis-a-vis the ex-ante findings from the 2019 PSIA report to
evaluate the potential direct and indirect impacts on poor/vulnerable groups caused by certain policies,
specifically Prior Actions #1, 4, 5, and 8. Secondary data and expert options were used for the review. The
remaining four Prior Actions were not reviewed as they were not anticipated to adversely impact poor/vulnerable
groups.

Prior Action 1, which aimed to translate the Law on Forestry (2017) into practice, has positively impacted the
management, use, and protection of forests in the country. Forest-dependent households and ethnic minority
communities have been able to access forest land legally through land titles, allowing them to invest in their
land, generate additional income, and use it as collateral for loans. This has increased forest coverage and
protection through increased participation and Payment for Ecosystem Services. Customary rights to forest land
use by ethnic minorities are ensured through forest land allocation to these communities.

Prior Action 4, which includes Decree 23 and Decree 167, has had overall positive impacts, but enforcement
has been slow. Decree 23 has strengthened the protection of riverbeds, riverbanks, and riversides by regulating

                                                                                                 Page 21 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Climate Change and Green Growth DPF (P171006)



sand and gravel exploitation. However, the main target group of this policy is organizations and individuals who
are adversely by income loss due to restrictions on the extraction of river sand and gravel. Approximately, one-
third of the provinces in Vietnam have adopted this policy amid the high demand for sand in the construction
industry. Still, some continue to exploit groundwater due to the slow implementation of restrictions, which may
lead to reduced surface water supplies, lowered water tables, and land subsidence in critical areas. Decree No.
167 targets the private sector, including companies and individuals who are engaged in the exploitation of
groundwater. Secondary data reveals that in cases where local governments have been slow in developing
maps to restrict groundwater use, the extraction of groundwater persists. In critical areas, groundwater overuse
may result in a lowered water table, reduced surface water supplies and quality, and land subsidence.

Prior Action 5 has had initial positive impacts in improving irrigation access for farming communities, but there is
a lack of incentives for private sector investment and constraints to effective implementation. These constraints
include a lack of investment budget at the local level and advanced/water-saving technologies not always being
suitable for all farming conditions. As a result, some poor and vulnerable populations cannot benefit from the
policy due to a lack of matching funds from investors and the affordability of irrigation fees, exacerbating
livelihood difficulties for those relying on irrigation for food security and livelihood improvement.

Prior Action 8 has successfully enabled private sector investment in wind power, although technical constraints
have led to delayed operations and loss of expected income. There are also site-specific social impacts,
including land acquisition for installation and construction, and ongoing social risks during operation, such as
flicker, noise, and blade throw for plants located onshore.



b. Environmental

The policies supported by this DPF operation have positively impacted the environment, forests, and natural
resources aspects, as articulated in the preceding sections. For example, PA3 has led to increased public
investment in climate resilience. PA6 has led to a cleaner vehicle fleet with reduced local air pollutants. PA8 has
led to increased investment in wind energy, displacing fossil fuel sources and contributing to GHG emissions
reductions and decreased air pollution.



c. Gender

The Program Document (paras 95) indicated that the team had conducted a gender analysis for prior actions at
preparation and concluded that "this DPF is not a candidate for gender tagging because a complete result chain
could not be established". The ICR team confirmed the findings and the ICR reported no gender impact of this
operation.



d. Other

The policy dialogue supported by this DPF and associated advisory services and analytics (ASA) strengthened
the government’s institutional capacity to undertake climate reforms. Drawing from the lessons and experience
gained from the SP-RCC, the World Bank supported the development of an implementation support program for

                                                                                                     Page 22 of 24
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Climate Change and Green Growth DPF (P171006)



Vietnam’s NDC. Informed by this support, the Prime Minister adopted the Scheme on tasks and solutions to
implement COP26 on July 25, 2022. This Scheme serves as the official government program to support the
government’s implementation of Vietnam’s COP26 net zero commitments. It is funded by the state budget and is
supervised by a newly established National Steering Committee charged with implementing Vietnam’s COP
commitments. This program would improve the government’s ability to implement critical policy reforms to support
these commitments.

The ICR reported no unintended outcomes or impacts in relation to this operation.




10. Quality of ICR

Rationale

The ICR is overall well-written and comprehensive. It provides a clear rationale for the selected prior actions
and clearly illustrates the causal links between the prior actions, the results indicators, and the intended
outcomes. The ICR is evidence-based, candid, and internally consistent. The ICR appropriately discusses
complementary technical assistance, IPF, and ASA support from the Bank to strengthen policy design and
implementation. Additionally, the ICR also draws relevant lessons from the experience of implementing this
operation.

There were minor shortcomings. The theory of change in the ICR did not include any critical assumptions. The
narrative focused mainly on the short-term results, with only brief descriptions of the sustainability of the
development outcomes. Overall, the quality of the ICR is rated Substantial.



a. Rating

Substantial

11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                    IEG
                                                                                  Disagreement/Comments
                                 Moderately
Outcome                                                Moderately Satisfactory
                                 Satisfactory
Bank Performance                 Satisfactory          Satisfactory
Relevance of Results
                                 ---                   Moderately Satisfactory
Indicators
Quality of ICR                   ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons


                                                                                                    Page 23 of 24
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Climate Change and Green Growth DPF (P171006)



The ICR draws the following main lessons from the experience of implementing this operation.

Climate DPFs have been effective in supporting the cross-sectoral approach needed to address climate
change and policy, bringing together expertise from various sectors to advocate and provide technical support
for impactful policy reforms. Like the previous series, this DPF operation involved a broad team across World
Bank global practices, including Environment, Water, Agriculture, Transport, Energy, and Social, to ensure all
policy reform areas and prior actions are rooted in existing sectoral dialogue and have a strong analytical basis.

Policy reforms can be effectively supported by using a combination of World Bank instruments. Using
different World Bank instruments, such as dialogue supported by Investment Project Financing (IPF) and a
multi-sector ASA program, proved effective in enhancing the quality of technical dialogue around potential
reforms to support policy changes in Vietnam. Going forward, given the constrained lending environment for
DPF operations in Vietnam, continued support for policy reforms will need to be undertaken through advisory
services and analytics which can be linked with IPF. The recently launched CCDR builds on policy reform areas
of this DPF operation and the lapsed preceding DPF series and offers an opportunity to continue and deepen
dialogue on climate policy reforms.

Programmatic DPFs are likely to be effective in addressing wide-ranging sector reforms that are
challenging to achieve in the short run: While benefiting from a prior engagement, the stand-alone operation
had some limitations compared to a programmatic approach. Programmatic series offer advantages such as
fostering long-term government commitment, focusing on medium-term results, conducting supervision missions
for stronger policy dialogue, and allowing sufficient time for policy engagement. This approach is particularly
valuable for broader climate reform goals which require sustained dialogue and time to yield outcomes.

A multi-sectoral government program on climate policy development is largely effective in enhancing
development partner coordination: The SP-RCC program enhanced development partner coordination on
climate policy development by bringing together the three development partners with parallel policy lending and
associated ASA. However, the quality of policy dialogue and coordination diminished towards the end of the
program. Moreover, development partners not providing policy lending did not actively engage in policy
dialogue. It is important to have a program with a longer time horizon, including key development partners and
continued high-level chairpersonship within the government to ensure continued momentum.

IEG draws the following additional lesson from this operation.

Selecting weak prior actions that will require important additional steps to achieve results creates a risk.
In this DPF, some prior actions required only minor procedural steps rather than the needed reform action – for
example the establishment of a national council for issuing master plans, rather than the actual issuance of
plans. It turned out in this case that the needed reform actions were largely carried out as expected, and so
there was no serious consequence on the program outcomes. But better practice would be to condition the prior
actions on the main reform step that will achieve the desired results, especially in a non-programmatic DPF.


13. Project Performance Assessment Report (PPAR) Recommended?

No




                                                                                                    Page 24 of 24
