     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     EATS (P174348)



                                                                              Report Number: ICRR0023333

1. Project Data



 Project ID                              Project Name
 P174348                                 EATS

 Country                                 Practice Area(Lead)
 Afghanistan                             Agriculture and Food


 L/C/TF Number(s)                        Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-D7120,TF-B3535                      31-Aug-2022                                         15,025,205.27

 Bank Approval Date                      Closing Date (Actual)
 04-Aug-2020                             31-Aug-2022

                                         IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                        100,000,000.00                                   45,000,000.00

 Revised Commitment                            62,557,138.37                                  7,557,138.37

 Actual                                        15,025,205.27                                  6,761,297.37




 Prepared by               Reviewed by                 ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Maria Shkaratan           Christopher David           Avjeet Singh                   IEGSD (Unit 4)
                           Nelson




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) was stated as follows: “In response to Covid-19 emergency, the
   proposed project development objective is to support critical food supply chains and create short-term
   economic opportunities.”

   The PDO was not revised.



                                                                                               Page 1 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     EATS (P174348)



   For the purposes of this ICR review, the objective will be assessed as follows:

   PDO1: In response to Covid-19 emergency, to support critical food supply chains; and

   PDO2: In response to Covid-19 emergency, to create short-term economic opportunities.

   Reverse Split Evaluation – Due to the collapse of the government in Afghanistan, this evaluation will
   undertake a reverse split evaluation approach as approved by OPCS.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   1. Original components:

   The Project was designed to respond to the food security and reduced income challenges posed by the
   COVID-19 crisis in line with the broader World Bank support to Afghanistan.

   Component A: Productive agricultural water systems (cost at appraisal: US$ 65.7 million; actual cost: US$
   1.01 million). The component was to support increased production capacity in irrigated and rain-fed grain
   production areas. It comprised two subcomponents:

          Subcomponent A1. Rehabilitation and improvement of selected irrigation systems, as well as
           improvement of water management and agronomic practices through: (a) the provision of grants to
           eligible Community Development Council (CDC); (b) establishment of irrigation associations; (c)
           cleaning of canals and construction of small hydraulic structures and canal linings; (d) training of
           farmers on water, soil, and pest management; and (e) provision of planting material and garden kits.
          Subcomponent A2. Watershed management and rainfed agriculture support for dryland farming
           through: (a) establishment of community-based committees to develop participatory watershed
           management plans; (b) rehabilitation of degraded and eroded lands; (c) construction of small
           structures; (d) provision of grants to eligible CDCs; (e) training of farmers on improved rainfed
           agriculture and dryland farming practices; and (f) provision of planting material.

   Component B: Critical food supply chain management (cost at appraisal: US$26.4 million; actual cost: US$
   8.86 million). The component comprised two subcomponents:

          Subcomponent B1. Seed production, supply, and emergency distribution, specifically: (a) distribution
           of certified wheat seeds to eligible farmers; and (b) provision of technical and operational assistance
           to Agricultural Research Institute of Afghanistan (ARIA), State-Owned Seed Corporation (SOSC),
           and Ministry of Agriculture, Irrigation and Livestock (MAIL) for producing seeds, disseminating

                                                                                                     Page 2 of 15
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    EATS (P174348)



         information on new seed varieties, creating private seed enterprises to strengthening market
         linkages with farms, and strengthening seed certification and seed quality awareness.
        Subcomponent B2. Food processing and distribution, specifically: (a) provision of technical
         assistance to MAIL and selected government agencies for strengthening policy, institutional, and
         coordination framework for critical food value chains; (b) provision of sub-grants to increase
         productivity; and (c) provision of CDC Grants to eligible CDCs for storage and processing centers.

  Component C: Project management (cost at appraisal: US$ 7.9 million; actual cost: US$ 1.5 million). The
  component was to finance technical and operational assistance to MAIL and to the Project Management
  Unit (PMU) established within MAIL. As per MAIL’s request, this component would also finance a technical
  assistance contract with the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) to provide technical advice as well as
  monitoring and evaluation services using remote-sensing tools.

  Component D: Contingent emergency response (cost at appraisal: US$0 million; actual cost: US$0 million).
  This was a zero-cost component to enable rapid mobilization of funds in the event of an eligible crisis or
  emergency following an adverse natural or man-made event.

  2. Changes in components during implementation:

  The components stayed the same during implementation.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost: The actual Project cost was US$15.03 million, compared to the appraisal estimate of
  US$100.0 million. The actual cost reflects the disbursements to the Project’s designated account. The cost
  of components (please see Section d.1) reflects the expenditures that were verified and documented. The
  balance of US$ 3.9 million was expected to remain in the Project’s designated account, less outstanding
  liabilities of about US$ 2 million that included payments to contractors and Projects staff.

  Project Financing: The Project was financed by an International Development Association (IDA) grant
  (US$55.0 million at appraisal and US$8.3 million at closure) and an Afghanistan Reconstruction Trust Fund
  (ARTF) grant (US$ 45 million at appraisal and US$6.8 million at closure).

  Borrower/Recipient contribution: There was no Borrower contribution.

  Changes in Project financing during implementation: Following the takeover of the government on August
  15, 2021, the Bank suspended the Project disbursements, both under IDA and ARTF. On April 2, 2022, the
  Bank canceled the amount of US$37,442,862 from proceeds of the ARTF grant for the Project reducing the
  total Project financing to US$62,557,138 from the original amount of US$100,000,000.

  Project Dates: The Project was approved on August 4, 2020 and became effective on September 20, 2020.
  The mid-term review (MTR) was not conducted. After the government takeover on August 15, 2021, the
  project was suspended and disbursements discontinued. The original closing date was August 31, 2022.
  Actual closing date was also August 31, 2022.




                                                                                                 Page 3 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     EATS (P174348)



3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country context: At Project approval, Afghanistan was experiencing economic stagnation and deterioration,
an increasing conflict, and deepening internal political fragmentation. Average annual GDP growth fell to
2.5 percent between 2015-2020, below the rate of population increase. The impact of COVID-19 was
significant and led to a two-percent economic contraction and a sharp increase in poverty. An estimated 60-
70 percent of the population lived in poverty at the end of 2020. The collapse of the government in August
2021 triggered further economic crisis and a withdrawal of most international aid.

Relevance to the national priorities at approval: The PDO was relevant to the country conditions and well-
aligned with national priorities, specifically with the reform agenda outlined in the paper Realizing Self-
Reliance: Commitments to Reforms and Renewed Partnership, which was issued by the National Unity
Government in December 2014. The paper prioritized seven programmatic areas of critical importance,
including the following one: Bolstering Private Sector Confidence, Promoting Growth, and Creating Jobs.
One of the core initiatives within this area was Promoting Growth in Key Economic Sectors; it aimed at
supporting agriculture, transport, and extractive industries as “the main pillars of economic development
over the next decade”. Within the agriculture sector, the objective was to raise agricultural productivity
through “investments in irrigation and the development of value chains”. The Project was fully aligned with
this objective. The project was also aligned with the Government’s Comprehensive Agriculture
Development National Priority Program (CADNPP) and the Afghanistan National Peace and Development
Framework (ANPDF) 2017-2021 (ICR, para 4).

Relevance to the WBG’s assistance Strategies at approval and until the suspension of the country portfolio
in August 2021: The PDO was consistent with the FY2017-2020 Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for
Afghanistan (extended to FY2022 as per the Performance and Learning Review), which had three pillars: (i)
building strong and accountable institutions; (ii) supporting inclusive growth; and (iii) expanding and
deepening social inclusion. The Project was designed to directly contribute to Pillar I through capacity
building support to MAIL and community-based organizations; Pillar II through support to food supply
chains, agricultural productivity and private sector engagements in light of COVID-19 impact; and Pillar III
through support to climate-resilient agriculture, community-level food security in vulnerable zones, and
women’s empowerment.

Relevance to WBG assistance Strategies at the time of Project suspension and at closure. The PDO was
no longer relevant after the suspension of the Project. Due to the government takeover in August 2021, the
following political turmoil, and significant changes in the support provided to the country by the international
community, the WBG’s country portfolio was suspended on February 17, 2022 and then phased out. Two
weeks later, the World Bank’s Board endorsed the Afghanistan's Approach Paper 2.0, which was focused
on acute food security emergency affecting more than half of the population. While the Project was also
focused on food security, the objectives and the design were not aligned with the new WBG priorities in the
country (especially the institutional arrangements and the private sector involvement in food processing and
supply were no longer relevant).

The relevance of objectives is rated high due to its full alignment with the country strategy and government
priorities at appraisal and throughout Project implementation.



                                                                                                      Page 4 of 15
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      EATS (P174348)



               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             In response to Covid-19 emergency, to support critical food supply chains.

                             Rationale
                             The theory of change (ToC), developed for the PAD, showed a direct, logical causal chain from inputs to
                             outputs, and then to Project level outcomes and to long-term outcomes. There are three sets of inputs, each
                             leading to a specific Project level outcome. The first set of inputs –support to the wheat supply chain, and
                             establishment of storage and processing facilities - would result in strengthened supply chains of staple
                             crops. Though whether these inputs are emergency oriented is somewhat doubtful. The second set of inputs
                             – emergency seed distribution, support to the seed production supply chain, improvement of irrigation
                             infrastructure, and creation of irrigation associations – would lead to increased food production to address the
                             COVID-related crisis. The third set of inputs – support to soil and water conservation and rainfed agriculture –
                             would result in improved management of natural resources (watershed). Some of these inputs - including
                             support to the wheat supply chain, improvement of irrigation infrastructure, and soil and water conservation –
                             would provide the additional Project level outcome of created short-term economic opportunities. The long-
                             term outcomes would be: (i) improved food security through increased production and access and (ii)
                             increased resilience to shocks such as COVID-19 and climate change.

                             The inputs were logically linked to the outputs, and the TOC showed how the outputs, in turn, were linked to
                             various outcomes, as well as the interlinks in the cause-effect relationships between outputs and outcomes.
                             There is one limitation: the listed outputs, in fact, combine actual outputs (e.g., “seeds distributed”) and
                             intermediate outcomes (e.g., “area with improved irrigation increased” or “irrigation associations
                             strengthened”), while the part of the ToC chart dedicated to intermediate outcomes was missing and there is
                             no articulation of how the immediate emergency responses built into the longer-term objectives. The logic of
                             the Project’s interventions would be clearer if the intermediate outcomes were formulated across the results
                             chain, showing how and through what processes the combination of outputs would result in the Project level
                             outcomes and therefore in the achievement of the Project objective.

                             Outputs

                             Prior to the government takeover on April 15, 2021, none of the outputs under Objective 1 were achieved.
                             Progress with some of the indicators was adequate, but in many other cases, it was either impossible to
                             estimate the achievement of output targets yet or their delivery was delayed. Regarding the latter, the ICR
                             notes that some of the activities, including the irrigation and watershed ones, were taking more time to
                             implement than planned (ICR, page 22, 24). The achievement of the specific output targets was as follows:



                                                                                                                               Page 5 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   EATS (P174348)



1. The number of private sector entities in food supply chains, supported by the Project, was expected to be
120 by Project closure (PDO indicator 3), but the actual output was zero entities. The target was not
achieved. Before the Project was suspended, it had provided only limited technical assistance to private seed
companies and was designing interventions to support flour mill processors and seed companies via
consultations (ICR, page 27).

2. The new/improved irrigation or drainage services, provided by the Project, were expected to cover 45,000
hectares, but the actual output was zero hectares. The target was not achieved. The Project had made good
progress against the target, but it was taking more time than expected (ICR, pages 22,24,28).

3. The number of farmers reached with agricultural assets or services was expected to be 80,000, but the
actual achievement at closure was 4,324 farmers. The target was not reached.

4. The crop seeds distributed to farmers were expected to amount to 30,000 tons. The actual achievement
was 14,000 tons. The target was not reached.

5. The breed seeds distributed to farmers were expected to amount to 150 tons. The actual achievement was
85 tons. The target was not reached.

6. The number of food supply chain infrastructure units supported through grants was expected to be 1,000;
however, the result was zero. The target was not achieved.

Outcomes

By the time of Project suspension, none of the outcomes under Objective 1 were achieved. In some cases,
progress was adequate, but in many other cases, there was no estimate of progress yet. The ICR also
reports that some of the activities were delayed, namely the irrigation and watershed ones (ICR, pages 22,
24). Specifically:

1. Wheat crop production in Project intervention areas was expected to increase by 15 percent (PDO
indicator 1). This target was not achieved. The first year target – which would show whether the progress was
adequate - could not be estimated: the monitoring of this indicator was to begin at the time when the Project
was suspended (ICR, page 26).

2. The number of farmers using emergency packages of certified seed provided by the Project was 280,000
at closure, well below the target of 600,000 farmers (PDO indicator 2). The target was not achieved.
However, the first year target, to be achieved by August 2021 (the time of Project suspension), was 280,000,
and it was reached (ICR, page 9). This shows that the progress was adequate (ICR, page 27).

The ICR reports that the use of certified seeds by the recipients was verified through a phone survey
conducted through an Interactive Voice Recording (IVR) system. Of the total number of 2,393 respondents
who received the seeds, 98 percent said that they had planted them, 90 percent said that the seeds were
germinating, and 87 percent were satisfied with the germination (ICR, page 10).

3. Cropping intensity on operational irrigation schemes was expected to increase by 10 percent, but the
actual outcome was zero percent. The target was not achieved.




                                                                                                Page 6 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   EATS (P174348)



4. Sustainable landscape management practices were expected to be implemented on 20,000 hectares, but
the actual achievement was zero hectares. The target was not achieved. By the time of Project suspension,
the design stage was completed, but the physical structures had not been installed. The ICR reports that the
works were taking more time than expected (ICR, pages 22,24,28).

5. The number of irrigation associations to be created and to become functional was targeted at 180;
however, none was created. The target was not achieved.

Overall, under Objective 1, Original Project, none of the expected outcomes or outputs were achieved by
Project closure. While the progress made according to several indicators was adequate and pointed to the
potential to reach the RF targets by the originally planned closure, Project suspension in the middle of
implementation and then cancellation prevented it from happening. At the same time, some of the activities
were delayed and were expected to take more time than originally planned. The achievement of Objective 1
under Original Project is rated as negligible.



Rating
Negligible


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
In response to Covid-19 emergency, to support critical food supply chains.

Revised Rationale
Please see the discussion of the TOC under Objective 1, Original Project.

Outcomes:

After the government takeover on August 15, 2021, implementation data was limited. Assessment surveys
were not conducted, and the planned borrower’s Project Completion Report was not prepared. The Project
activities were discontinued on August 15, 2022. The ICR states that despite the lack of data, it is reasonable
to believe that some of the activities implemented prior to the takeover continued to bring benefits. For
example, almost 47 percent of emergency packages of certified seeds were provided to farmers, and it was
verified that the farmers were planting those seeds while access to data was still available. Also, the breeder
seeds were provided to the private sector prior to Project suspension, to produce foundation and certified
seeds and thus support the seed chain. This system was functioning during 2021 and 2022. Further, the ICR
reports that 86 percent of the targeted 180 irrigation schemes were finalized, and irrigation equipment
rehabilitation covered 38 percent of the targeted area. (ICR, pages 12-13)

Overall, while the flow of benefits from Project activities continued between August 15, 2021 and Project
suspension, none of the targets were reached, and data on the achievements is very limited. The rating of
Objective 1 under the Revised Project is negligible.



Revised Rating

                                                                                                  Page 7 of 15
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               EATS (P174348)



                            Negligible


                            OBJECTIVE 2
                            Objective
                            In response to Covid-19 emergency, to create short-term economic opportunities.

                            Rationale
                            Please see the discussion of the TOC under Objective 1, Original Project.

                            Outcome:

                            The achievement of this objective was to be assessed by one indicator (PDO indicator 4): “Days of short-term
                            labor financed by the Project”, and by a sub-indicator to capture female representation. The target was not
                            achieved by actual closure. The indicator measured the number of days worked by unskilled workers on
                            irrigation and watershed activities. At the time of suspension, the Project was making progress on this
                            indicator, however, this objective was overambitious considering the two-year timeframe of the Project:
                            creating labor opportunities through irrigation and watershed activities that require design, planning, and
                            capacity and institution-building required more time (ICR, page 22). The rating of Objective 2 under the
                            Original Project is negligible.



                            Rating
                            Negligible


                            OBJECTIVE 2 REVISION 1
                            Revised Objective
                            In response to Covid-19 emergency, to create short-term economic opportunities.

                            Revised Rationale
                            PDO indicator 4, which was designed to measure the achievement of Objective 2, “Days of short-term labor
                            financed by the project”, was to mostly gain traction in the second year of Project implementation, after the
                            initiation of the construction works. However, construction works could not start due to the suspension of
                            disbursements for the Project (ICR, page 13). The rating of Objective 2 under the Revised Project is
                            negligible.



                            Revised Rating
                            Negligible


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY

                                                                                                                             Page 8 of 15
             Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
             EATS (P174348)




         Rationale
         For both objectives under the Original Project, the efficacy is Negligible: while adequate progress was made
         toward several RF targets, none of those targets were achieved by the actual closure date.



         Overall Efficacy Rating                                 Primary Reason
         Negligible                                              External shock
 OBJR1_TBL




         OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
         Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
         For both objectives under the Restructured Project, the efficacy is Negligible: while there are reasons to
         believe that more progress was achieved on Project activities between August 15, 2021 and Project closure,
         none of the RF targets were reached and the evidence of the achievements is very limited.



         Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating                      Primary Reason
         Negligible                                              External shock


 5. Efficiency
At appraisal, economic analysis took into account the benefits to be generated from Component A and
Component B, specifically: increased crop productivity resulted from the certified seeds, improved irrigation,
climate resilient practices, and improved management of natural resources. No further information on the
methodology of the economic analysis at appraisal is available from the ICR or the PAD. The PAD reports the
economic internal rate of return (EIRR) of 27 percent and the economic net present value (ENPV) of US$112
million. Adding the positive externality of reduced emissions, the EIRR was estimated at 30 percent at a
conservative (low) shadow price of carbon and at 50 percent at a higher shadow price of carbon.

Appraisal-level financial analysis was conducted for: (i) the integrated watershed management, where the
internal rate of return (IRR) was estimated at 15 percent and the financial net present value (FNPV) at
US$4,560; (ii) productivity of rainfed certified wheat seed, where the FNPV over ten years was US$92, while the
IRR was not calculated; (iii) productivity of irrigated certified wheat seed, where the FNPV over ten years was
US$212, while the IRR was not calculated; and (iv) canal rehabilitation, with the FNPV over 10 years of
US$1,319, and no estimate for the IRR.

No economic or financial analysis was conducted at closure, due to insufficient data. Considering that the
Project did not achieve any of its expected outcomes by the actual closure, the expected level of efficiency was
not achieved, due to Project suspension and cancellation.

Administrative efficiency. The Project achieved most of its first-year disbursement targets in the first 10 months
of implementation, and the disbursement rate stood at 75.2 percent of projections for 2020 (ICR, page 14).
However, the ICR also reports on implementation delays, explaining it by security situation deterioration,
COVID-19 impact, and issues with procurement. The delays were also in the onboarding of key staff, and in the
release of grants to CDCs for civil work sub-projects. These were proactively brought to the attention of the
Bank management and senior government officials. For example, the procurement of seeds for distribution in

                                                                                                          Page 9 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      EATS (P174348)



the 2020 planting season involved the Bank’s follow-up with the Minister of Agriculture, the National
Procurement Agency, and the Office of the President.

Overall, while the Project’s expected EIRR was not achieved at closure, the administrative efficiency during
implementation was adequate, especially considering the conditions in the country - the deteriorating security
situation - and the COVID-19 impact. Therefore, the Project efficiency is rated modest.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     92.10
 Appraisal                                                 27.00
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     0
 ICR Estimate                                               0
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The relevance of objectives is rated high due to its full alignment with the country strategy and
government priorities at appraisal and up to the August 2021 government takeover. For both objectives under
the Original Project and under the Revised project, the efficacy is Negligible: while progress was made toward
the outcome targets, none of those targets was achieved by the actual closure date. Therefore, the overall
efficacy is negligible for both the Original and the Revised projects. The Project’s expected EIRR was not
achieved at closure, but the administration efficiency during implementation was adequate, especially
considering the deteriorating security situation and the COVID-19 impact. Therefore, the Project efficiency is
rated modest. The overall outcome rating is Unsatisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Unsatisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The risk to development outcome is rated Substantial. The threat to food insecurity and vulnerabilities in
agricultural production increased after the government takeover, creating an emergency situation. In
response, a TF-financed Emergency Food Security Project (EFSP) was approved by the World Bank in June
2022. EFSP was designed to restore production of food security crops for targeted smallholder farmers

                                                                                                    Page 10 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      EATS (P174348)



within two years. It can be viewed as a continuation of the reviewed Project because it finances the same
key activities, specifically: (i) food production restoration (wheat production, wheat seed production, backyard
gardening to grow crops with higher nutritional value) and (ii) rehabilitation of irrigation schemes and
watersheds. However, the increased fragility, uncertainty and insecurity in the country creates risks to the
EFSP implementation, and therefore the risk to development outcomes of the reviewed Project is estimated
as Substantial. (ICR, page 23)




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  Project preparation took into account Afghanistan’s high-level of insecurity and fragility. The Enhanced
  Accountability and Fiduciary Management Framework was adopted, and remote monitoring tools were
  deployed under Third-Party Monitoring. The monitoring and implementation (M&E) arrangements were
  adequate given the implementation capacity and the field security situation. Financial management and
  procurement systems were designed with prior identification of risks and mitigation measures. Project
  preparation was conducted by a qualified multi-disciplinary team, in consultations with the Client, ARFT
  donors, stakeholders, and beneficiary groups. (ICR, page 21-22)

  However, risks associated with political uncertainties after the 2019 elections were not fully accounted
  for, leading to a delayed implementation of certain activities. Considering that the functionality of
  implementing the Project with the government as the main partner was decreasing, alternate institutional
  arrangements should have been explored including support of NGOs and facilitation partners to reach
  beneficiaries. In addition, it was overambitious to aim at delivering - within a two-year timeframe - short-
  term labor opportunities through irrigation and watershed activities that require design, planning, and
  capacity and institution-building. Implementing such activities requires a longer duration. (ICR, page 21-
  22) It could also be argued that the longer-term elements in the program were not ideally suited to this
  kind of project, and more resilience based components might have made more sense rather than the
  sophisticated undertaking required of some of the project activities.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The Bank allocated adequate budget and staff resources for effective Project supervision and monitoring.
 The task team carried out regular implementation support missions with timely reporting, as well as interim
 technical missions to assess bottlenecks. The implementation issues were proactively brought to the
 attention of Bank management and senior Government officials. The Bank introduced innovative
 approaches for M&E and data management and helped the government in promoting cross-ministerial
 collaboration to support the Project. The recruitment process was in line with the agreed guidelines to
 ensure transparency. However, this led to significant delays in procurement, affecting the overall Project’s


                                                                                                    Page 11 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     EATS (P174348)



 performance. Also, as mentioned above, alternate implementation arrangements could have been
 instituted. (ICR, page 22-23)



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 Overall, the Project's RF adequately reflected the Project interventions and was sufficiently linked to the
 PDO and the ToC. All indicators were quantitative, time-bound, attributable to the Project, and had
 baselines and targets. There were four gender indicators. The RF was detailed and covered all areas of
 Project investments: physical results (such as the area provided with new/improved irrigation), economic
 development results (such as increase in wheat crop productivity and days of short-term labor), and the
 level of beneficiary satisfaction with Project’s results (such as share of community members satisfied with
 support provided by the Project).

 The M&E system was designed to support decision making, learning, transparency and accountability, and
 results monitoring. Several workshops to discuss results, progress, implementation problems, and best
 practices were planned. The M&E system included innovative tools: digital data collection through
 KoboToolbox, satellite imagery for monitoring land use and crop production, and Interactive Voice
 Recording (IVR) system for surveys of the beneficiaries. The team was trained by the Geo-Enabling
 initiative for Monitoring and Supervision (GEMS) of the World Bank on the use of KoboToolbox and remote
 monitoring. Third-Party Monitoring was used for periodic reports with field observations. A dedicated
 service provider was to be hired to conduct beneficiary satisfaction surveys. (ICR, page 18-19)



b. M&E Implementation
  Adequate resources were deployed to support the M&E system. The Bank’s team worked with the
  counterparts to develop common understanding of the definitions of the indicators, data to be collected,
  and methods of analysis. During implementation support missions, reports on Project implementation
  progress were discussed and vetted. Verification of reported progress was conducted by Third-Party
  Monitoring agents. An innovative IVR system supported the registration of seed recipients. The
  performance of each district in distributing seeds was monitored in real time. However, several planned
  activities, including the surveys to estimate increased crop production, yield analysis, and beneficiary
  adoption and satisfaction could not be completed due to Project suspension. (ICR, page 19)




                                                                                                  Page 12 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     EATS (P174348)



c. M&E Utilization
  The M&E was routinely utilized for operational decisions. KoboToolbox’s data on seed distribution and
  orchard establishment, including individual entries for each recipient, was used to monitor progress by
  district and address bottlenecks. At the peak of the seed distribution campaign, reports were generated
  daily. Any possible issues were elevated to the Minister's level for resolution. The M&E information was
  also used for decision making to refine Project implementation strategy. (ICR, page 19-20)



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Environmental and Social Safeguards. The Project prepared an Environmental and Social Management
   Framework (ESMF), including Pest Management Plan and IPM approach within 90 days of Project
   effectiveness as appropriate. The Project also prepared a Labor Management Plan (LMP), a Stakeholder
   Engagement Plan (SEP), and an Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP) during design stage.
   These plans were largely followed during implementation. Environmental safeguards training sessions were
   conducted for decentralized technical services and beneficiary groups. Compliance with the plans was
   verified during implementation support missions. A grievance redress management (GRM) system for the
   Project was established as per the approved GRM manual, and grievance redressal committees (GRC)
   were established at the center and field levels. The GRC committee at the central level was active and
   received regular grievances. At the subproject sites, no major issues were recorded. (ICR, page 20)




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management (FM). Throughout implementation, the Project was compliant with the financial
   management legal covenants regarding the submission of acceptable financial reports, and the Interim
   Unaudited Financial Reports (IUFRs) were timely and in an acceptable form. The internal controls
   instituted by the Project were assessed during the regular FM supervision missions. The following FM
   weaknesses were identified during reviews: record management, liquidation of advances, and low budget
   utilization. These weaknesses were communicated to the Project management for a follow-up action and
   resolution. The FM performance rating was downgraded from Satisfactory to Moderately Satisfactory
   during the last supervision mission in July 2021 due to the minimal progress with some of the agreed
   arrangements, the questionable expenditure of US$105,203.73, and a slow progress in completion of
   actions agreed during the first supervision mission in February 2021. (ICR, page 20-21)

   Procurement. Since this was an emergency project, the fast-tracking procurement and HIES arrangement
   were agreed at design. However, delays in procurement of large contracts were noted due to weak
   capacity and lack of proper coordination between MAIL and National Procurement Authority (NPA) (who
   was procuring large contracts). This issue was noted during the procurement of one of the largest



                                                                                                  Page 13 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     EATS (P174348)



   contracts related to the distribution of seeds. Overall, as per the post-procurement reviews’ audits, there
   were no mis-procurements under the Project. (ICR, page 21)




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                   Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                   Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Unsatisfactory         Unsatisfactory
                                Moderately
Bank Performance                                       Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                  Substantial            Substantial

Quality of ICR                  ---                    Substantial


12. Lessons

The following lessons are based on the ICR, with minor adjustments.

- It is important to recognize that in FCV countries like Afghanistan, food security is a systemic issue
that cannot be resolved by short-term emergency projects. The reviewed Project was prepared as
an emergency operation after agriculture projects in the country were cancelled as part of
adjustment of the WBG portfolio for COVID-19 response. While the implementation period lasted
only one year, after which the Project was suspended and then cancelled, it was already clear that
some of the targets, including those related to irrigation and watershed activities and associated
employment opportunities, were overambitious and would take more time to achieve than planned.
The lesson is that such complex interventions in fragile and high-insecurity context require a longer
timeframe, and separating long-term institutional strengthening and development action from short-
term emergency food support could have been a viable solution. (ICR, page 24)

- In FCV situations, usage of innovative M&E systems, including remote monitoring tools, often
offers the only opportunity for obtaining adequate and sufficient project implementation data.
KoboToolbox, combined with the IVR system and complemented by Third-Party monitoring and
verification, provided a powerful tool to track the implementation of the Project at the beneficiary
level when the security situation did not allow for regular methods of data collection. The extra
benefit of these tools is to support transparency and therefore ensure the mitigation of the risk of
corruption. However, the adoption of KoboToolbox at scale by the MAIL staff throughout the country
was not easy and required not only a lot of fine-tuning, but also a political buy-in for their continued


                                                                                                     Page 14 of 15
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       EATS (P174348)



use. The lesson is that a wider and continued usage of these technical tools can only be ensured if
they are (progressively) transferred to and owned by the counterparts. (ICR, page 24)

- In the context of increasing insecurity, coupled with movement restrictions due to COVID-19,
standard fiduciary arrangements may not be appropriate to mitigate high governance risks, including
the risk of corruption. The Enhanced Accountability and Fiduciary Management Framework and the
support of the ARTF Third-Party Monitoring were critical tools that helped safeguard the Project
against fiduciary risks and supported transparency. The importance of using such tools in the
context of countries with high governance risks cannot be overestimated. (ICR, page 25)



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provides a detailed history of the project; a good justification of the PDO relevance; comprehensive
and robust evidence; a clear linking of evidence to findings; and sufficient information and analysis to
understand how the activities led to the expected outcomes and further to the intended impacts. The ICR has
internal consistency. The lessons learned are related to the narrative and the ratings and are useful for future
lending operations. However, the ICR’s information regarding project efficacy is somewhat confusing: the
narrative in the ICR’s efficacy section creates an impression that the project was on track to achieving its
objectives (and Outcome 1 prior to August 15, 2021 is rated as Substantial), while (i) it is clearly stated in the
other ICR sections that the Project design was overambitions and some activities would not be implemented
within the existing timeframe (ICR, pages 22, 24, and 28) and (ii) none of the RF targets were achieved by
closure. Despite this weakness, the overall quality of the ICR is substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                      Page 15 of 15
