     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DJ: Governance for PSD & Finance Project (P146250)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0022974

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P146250                                   DJ: Governance for PSD & Finance Project

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Djibouti                                  Finance, Competitiveness and Innovation


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-55180,IDA-59350                       31-Dec-2019                                            7,147,387.24

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 23-Jun-2014                               30-Jun-2021

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            2,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                             7,093,026.49                                               0.00

 Actual                                         7,154,824.57                                               0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Nestor Ntungwanayo         J. W. van Holst               Christopher David Nelson       IEGSD (Unit 4)
                            Pellekaan




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   As per the Financing Agreement (FA) on page 5, the Project Development Objective (PDO) was "to help
   improve Djibouti's business environment". The PDO in the Project Appraisal Document (PAD) on page 8 was
   identical.

   In November 2016, the approval of an additional financing (AF) coincided with the revision of the PDO, which
   was restated on page 4 of the FA as follows: "To improve the efficiency of business regulation and establish


                                                                                                  Page 1 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DJ: Governance for PSD & Finance Project (P146250)



   an automated National Payment System". The revised PDO in the restructuring paper on page 1 was
   identical.

   The original and the revised PDOs are significantly different, because they were underpinned by (i) a
   few similar activities, and several different activities, and (ii) they had two different result frameworks and
   theories of change. Therefore this review differs from the ICR approach, and will undertake a split assessment
   of outcomes based on the following objectives:

          Original PDO: To improve the efficiency of business regulation
          Revised PDO: To improve the efficiency of business regulation and establish an automated National
           Payment System



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  28-Dec-2016

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   Original project

   Component 1: Investment Climate Reform (cost at appraisal US$1.4 million; AF US$2 million for a
   total amount of US$3.4 million; actual cost of US$ 3.4 million).

   Subcomponent 1. Commercial and Civil Justice. This subcomponent focused on improving the
   settlement of commercial disputes by providing technical and institutional support to the Commercial
   Chamber of civil courts. Activities included revising the main functions of the Commercial Chambers from
   organizational structure to operational processes, improving the digitalization of the Ministry of Justice,
   training judges and court staff, modernizing key commercial justice documents, improving access to legal
   information, modernizing the Registre du Commerce et des Sociétés, and improving access to relevant
   information for business transactions for the public.

   Subcomponent 2. Establishment of the One-Stop-Shop and Technical Assistance for Investment
   Climate Reforms through the One-Stop-Shop. This subcomponent focused first on the rehabilitation and
   equipment of the building allocated by the Government for the One-Stop-Shop and setting up the relevant
   services it will host. It also provided technical assistance to improve the process for delivering construction
   permits and revamping procedures for property transfer.

   Component 2. Project Management (appraisal US$0.6 million, actual cost of US$1.1 million)


                                                                                                     Page 2 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DJ: Governance for PSD & Finance Project (P146250)



   Subcomponent 1. Support to the Steering Committee Meetings. This subcomponent financed the project
   steering committee meetings.

   Subcomponent 2. Support to the National Agency for the Promotion of Investments (Agence Nationale
   pour la Promotion des Investissements, ANPI) for Project Implementation. This subcomponent supported
   training and operating costs for the project implementing agency for project management, implementation,
   monitoring, and evaluation.

   Revised project

   (i) Revised component 1: Investment Climate Reform (Cost at appraisal of US$0.6 million, actual
   cost of US$3.4 million).

   This component was to provide advisory/consultancy services, organizing for reforms, and communication,
   including associated equipment and systems for beneficiary agencies.

   (ii) Revised component 2: Establishment of an Automated National Payment System (Cost at
   appraisal of US$2.6 million, actual cost of US$2.6 million)

   This new component intended to support the establishment of a modern automated national payment
   system in Djibouti, to replace the manual processing of checks and create the foundation for the
   development of an interbank market. The first subcomponent was to develop the Core Payments System
   Infrastructure while the second subcomponent was to create Data Centers, Systems Integration Services,
   and provide Capacity Building of the Central Bank of Djibouti (CBD).



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
       Cost: Actual project cost amounted to US$7.2 million, or about 79 percent of committed IDA
          resources
         Financing: The project was financed by two tranches of IDA resources totaling US$9.0 million: A
          first tranche at approval in the amount of US$2.0 million, and (ii) an additional financing in the
          amount of US$7.0 million at the 2018 restructuring.
         Borrower Contribution: A borrower contribution in the amount of US$1.2 million was budgeted,
          but there was no disbursement.
         Dates: The project was approved on June 23, 2014, and made effective on March 12, 2015. The
          project was closed on the revised closing date, 18 months after the original closing date.
         Restructurings: The project was restructured three times as follows:
                 o The first restructuring in November 2016 aimed to undertake key changes related to the
                   provision of an additional financing, the revision of project's PDO and the results framework
                 o The second restructuring on December 28, 2018 aimed to revise the results framework and
                   the disbursement estimates
                 o The third restructuring on December 10, 2020 intended to extend the project closing date
                   to allow fulfilment of some indicators that might not be achieved by the current closing date,
                   and provide additional room for implementation as the COVID-19 pandemic was
                   still ongoing.



                                                                                                     Page 3 of 16
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      DJ: Governance for PSD & Finance Project (P146250)




   3. Relevance of Objectives

               Rationale
               The assessment of the relevance of objectives draws from the material presented on pages 11-12 of the
               ICR.

               The PDOs were consistent with the country's priorities. The PDOs were highly relevant to the
               Government’s overarching Vision 2035 developed in 2014 and is still highly relevant to the new National
               Development Plan (NDP), Djibouti Institutions-Connectivity-Inclusion (ICI) for 2020–24. The PDOs were
               particularly relevant for two out of the three strategic pillars of the NDP: a) Pillar 1: Inclusion’ aiming to: (i)
               rethink and operationalize the inclusive sustainable development model, with an increased role for private
               initiatives as an essential lever for the diversification of production and trade and (ii) ensure a better
               distribution of the fruits of growth; and b) ‘Pillar 3: Institution’ aiming to strengthen the country’s human and
               institutional capacities to: (i) guarantee the realization of rights and freedoms; (ii) provide Djibouti with
               democratic, stable, transparent, and effective institutions; and (iii) strengthen social cohesion.

               The PDOs were in line with the Bank's planned interventions in Djibouti at the project's close. The
               PDO remains highly relevant to the current FY22–26 World Bank Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for
               the Republic of Djibouti. The CPF’s overarching objective is to support Djibouti’s goal of reducing poverty
               through broad-based and inclusive private sector-led growth. The PDO supports the CPF’s two focus areas:
               (a) promoting inclusive private sector-led growth job creation and human capital and (b) strengthening the
               role and capacity of the state. Moreover, it builds on the foundation of the CPF’s three cross-cutting themes:
               fostering digital transformation, strengthening transparency to support good governance, and promoting
               gender parity. It leverages the WBG’s ongoing engagement in human capital development, governance,
               and institution building while expanding support to productivity and job creation.

               Based on the close alignment between the PDOs and the Borrower's development priorities and the Bank's
               partnership strategy, overall the relevance of both PDOs is rated high.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                                                                                                                         Page 4 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   DJ: Governance for PSD & Finance Project (P146250)




OBJECTIVE 1
Objective
To help improve Djibouti's business environment.

Rationale
     Theory of change
          o The ICR recreated a theory of change, based on the content of the original PAD, and the
             associated assumptions. The theory of change toward the PDO was built on the logic that
             activities aimed at improving Djibouti's business environment would lead notably to (i) a
             reduction of the average number of days to create a business, (ii) a reduction of the average
             number of days to register a property, (iii) a decrease in the average number of days to settle a
             commercial dispute, and (vi) a number of direct project beneficiaries, including a certain
             percentage level of female population. The above achievements were expected to generate (i)
             an improved environment for private sector development, (ii) a reduction of unemployment and
             poverty, and (iii) a diversified and competitive economy. The key assumptions for this theory
             of change to hold were (i) the promotion of country's governance and business environment,
             and (ii) an improved capacity, efficiency, and transparency of key agencies so as to
             increase confidence in the public institutions.
      Outputs
           o Four magistrates specialized in commercial disputes were all trained, reaching the target of
             100 percent;
           o The totality of property titles has reached the first level of digitalization, meaning scanned and
             electronically managed with the possibility to search by title, identification number, or owner
             information, exceeding the target of 80 percent;
           o The number of formally registered companies was 2,005, greatly exceeding the target of
             1,200, including exceeding the 20% target for women-owned/led companies (308 registered
             versus 140 planned);
           o The Commercial Chamber's decisions were not published on the website due to the
             counterparts' reticence emerging from data privacy concerns. The statistics of judgments
             rendered are available on the website until the year 2018;
           o At completion, 10 laws and regulatory texts from the report have been adopted as targeted,
             including: (i) an amendment of the Commercial code to strengthen the legal framework for
             secured transactions, protection of minority investors, and resolving insolvency; (ii) a law for
             the Office of Intellectual and Commercial Property to reduce the cost of registering a business;
             (iii) a new Civil Code; (iv) a new code of civil procedures strengthening contract enforcement
             and protection of minority investors; (v) a law amending the tax code to reduce costs to create
             a business and register a property; and (vi) a law amending the land management code in
             order to improve the quality of land administration;
           o The country strengthened minority investor's protections by requiring greater disclosure of
             transactions to interested parties, strengthening remedies against interested directors,
             extending access to corporate information before trial, increasing shareholders’ rights and role
             in major corporate decisions, clarifying ownership and control structures, and requiring greater
             corporate transparency;
           o The reformed business environment facilitated contract enforcement thanks to the newly
             established dedicated division within the specialized court to resolve commercial cases and the
             newly adopted Code of Civil Procedure that regulates voluntary conciliation and mediation
             proceedings, as well as time standards for key court events. Finally, resolving insolvency was

                                                                                                 Page 5 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   DJ: Governance for PSD & Finance Project (P146250)



             made easier by making insolvency proceedings more accessible for creditors and increasing
             their participation.
      Outcomes
           o The average number of days to create a business was significantly reduced reaching the
             target of 3 days. This result was confirmed during IEG’s meeting with the Bank project team
             as being consistent with revisions to the Bank’s Doing Business report published in 2023.
           o The target for the average number of days to register a property was partially achieved, as it
             decreased from 39 days to 24 days instead of the 10-day target.
           o The outcome indicators target related to the decrease in the average number of days to settle
             a commercial dispute was not assessed.

The project helped Djibouti make a start to improving the efficiency of business regulations. The extent to
which improvements in the business environment were achieved was, however, rated modest.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
To improve the efficiency of business regulation and establish an automated National Payment System

Revised Rationale
Theory of change

      The ICR recreated a different theory of change, based on the content of the restructuring paper, and
       the associated assumptions. The theory of change of the revised PDO posited that activities aimed at
       improving the efficiency of business regulation and establish an automated National Payment System
       would lead notably to (i) a reduction of the average number of days to create a business, (ii) a
       reduction of the average number of days to register a property, and (iii) a decrease in the average
       number of days to settle a commercial dispute, (iv) a number of direct project beneficiaries, including a
       certain percentage level of female population, and (v) the establishment of an automated transfer
       system. The above achievements were expected to generate (i) an improved and more efficient
       business environment, (ii) a modernized and efficient business infrastructure, (iii) an increased FDI,
       and private sector development, and (iv) an economic and MFD toward the twin goals. The key
       assumptions for this theory of change to hold were (i) the promotion of country's governance
       and business environment, and (ii) an improved capacity, efficiency, and transparency of key agencies
       so as to increase confidence in the public institutions.

Outputs

      At completion, 10 laws and regulatory texts from the report have been adopted as targeted, including:
       (i) amendment of the Commercial code to strengthen the legal framework for secured transactions,
       protection of minority investors, and resolving insolvency; (ii) a law for the Office of Intellectual and
       Commercial Property to reduce the cost of registering a business; (iii) a new Civil Code; (iv) a new


                                                                                                     Page 6 of 16
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               DJ: Governance for PSD & Finance Project (P146250)



                                     code of civil procedures strengthening contract enforcement and protection of minority investors; (v) a
                                     law amending the tax code to reduce costs to create a business and register a property; and (vi) a law
                                     amending the land management code in order to improve the quality of land administration;
                                    All property titles have achieved a first level of digitization against 80 percent planned;
                                    The number of Enterprises registered per year reached 2,005.00, against a target of 700, of which
                                     305 are led by women, against a target of 140, largely exceeding the target;
                                    The Commercial Chamber's decisions were still not published on the website due to the counterparts'
                                     reticence emerging from data privacy concerns. The statistics of judgments rendered are available on
                                     the website back to the year 2018;
                                    All magistrates identified for training were trained, exceeding the target of 50%;
                                    The national Automated Transfer System (ATS) is fully operational and as of the November 2021 (six
                                     months after the project's close)100 percent of the transactions were supported by the system,
                                     exceeding the target of 10 percent;
                                    The primary data center for the national payment system was successfully set up for the
                                     NPS. The CBD has signed a contract of US$50,000 with Djibouti Telecom to host the disaster
                                     recovery back-up site; and
                                    The number of financial institutions connected to the ATS was exceeded, with all banks connected
                                     and interfaced either directly or manually with the ATS+, against a target of 8 percent.

                            Outcomes

                                  The target for the average number of days to register a property was partially achieved, as it
                                     decreased from 39 days to 24 days instead of the 10-day target
                                    Achieved results for the average number of days to create a business reached the target of 3 days
                                    The national payment system is operational and the average settling time for credit transfer
                                     successfully reached half a day as targeted
                                    According to the CBD and the ATS+ system records, all banks are connected and linked to the
                                     system, and all transactions are processed through the system with the average settlement time for
                                     credit transfers being half a day as planned, and the average settlement time for checks being a day,
                                     improving on the initial target of two days
                                     A survey conducted of users of the One-Stop Shop in 2019 showed a 90 percent user satisfaction,
                                     exceeding the 60 percent target
                                     The outcome indicator target related to the decrease in the average number of days to settle a
                                     commercial dispute was not assessed.

                            The extent to which Objective 1: Revision 1 was achieved is rated as substantial.



                            Revised Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                                                                                                                               Page 7 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      DJ: Governance for PSD & Finance Project (P146250)




  Rationale
  (i) Toward the original PDO, key achievements were limited to the following: (i) the target for the average
  number of days to create a business was fully achieved; (ii) the target for the average number of days to
  register a property was partially achieved, as it decreased from 39 days to 24 days instead of the 10-day
  target; and (iii) the time to settle a commercial dispute was not assessed.

   (ii) Toward the revised PDO, achieved results were as follows: (i) the average number of days to register a
  property decreased, (ii) the target for the average number of days to create a business was fully achieved
  (iii) the national payment system is operational and the average settling time for credit transfers and
  settlement times for checks were substantially reduced, and (iv) a survey conducted of users of the One-Stop
  Shop in 2019 showed a high level of user satisfaction. However, achieved results for the average number of
  days to create a business is uncertain, and the average time to settle a commercial dispute were not
  assessed.

  Overall efficacy is rated substantial, because there was satisfactory progress toward efficiency in the
  business environment, through improved business regulation and the establishment of an automated National
  Payment System.




  Overall Efficacy Rating
  Substantial



 5. Efficiency
The project supported principally technical assistance activities for which achieved outcome and benefits with
which to calculate an NPV or IRR are elusive. Therefore, a qualitative analysis was conducted for each
subcomponent and presented in Annex 4 of the ICR, as was done at project appraisal. The qualitative analysis
mirrored the results discussed under the efficacy section corroborating the efficiency achieved from the reforms
supported by this project.

The total amount of US$7.1 million in project funds and US$1.2 million in client counterpart funds were
disbursed to finance a number of structural reforms creating a conducive investment climate in Djibouti and
establishing a national payment system. The benefits of the project were positive and far-reaching. The cost-
effectiveness of the operation was relatively stronger than expected at appraisal, primarily due to the expanded
scope of the project, and the additional financing triggered by the Government’s increased momentum to move
ahead toward improving the business environment. Consequently, far-reaching reforms were completed and
more beneficiaries than-targeted were served, with expenditures per beneficiary remaining low. Finally, the
project benefitted from exchange rate gains arising from an appreciation of the SDR against the dollar, in
comparison to the exchange rate used at the effective date.

The project design was simple and well-defined with several inter-connected subcomponents, and implemented
in six years, 18 months after the original closing date. Overall, operational and administrative efficiency was
high, despite some setbacks due to disruptions caused by the COVID-19 pandemic. The NPS implementation

                                                                                                    Page 8 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      DJ: Governance for PSD & Finance Project (P146250)



suffered the longest delay as it required physical travel of international experts to Djibouti and physical
acquisition and installation of systems, all delayed by the pandemic.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?              Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                       0
 Appraisal                                                    0
                                                                                        Not Applicable
                                                                                       0
 ICR Estimate                                                 0
                                                                                        Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of objectives was high while efficiency was substantial throughout the period of project
implementation. Efficacy was Modest before restructuring and Substantial after restructuring. As detailed in the
table below, the overall weighted outcome is rated Satisfactory as derived in the following table.

                                            Rating of the original      Rating of the revised       Weighted Average of
                                            PDO                         PDO                         Ratings
 Relevance                                  High                        High
 Efficacy                                   Modest                      Substantial
 Efficiency                                 Substantial                 Substantial
                                            Moderately
 Outcome                                                                Satisfactory
                                            Unsatisfactory
 Rating value                               3.0                         5.0
 Weight (% disbursed amount)                0.3                         0.7
 Weighted value                             1.2                         3.5
 Total of weights/Overall Outcome
                                                                                                    4.7/Satisfactory
 Rating




                                                                                                        Page 9 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      DJ: Governance for PSD & Finance Project (P146250)



a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The major risk identified by the ICR on page 28 that could endanger the sustainability of the good
results achieved by the project is the lack of technical capacity of Borrower institutions that will continue to
manage, sustain and spearhead the achieved outcome, particularly as regards to the One-stop-Shop, the
NPS and the structural reforms.

The risk mitigation approach identified in the ICR focused on the recent engagement by the Government to
launch discussions around the need to pursue more private sector development reforms and provide
additional support to MSMEs. Moreover, the World Bank is also working with the European Union to mobilize
resources to build on these achievements and support Djibouti by providing Business Development Services
for MSMEs. In particular, the World Bank portfolio supporting the private sector was boosted by the adoption
of the following projects: (i) Support for Women and Youth Entrepreneurship, P165558; (ii) Djibouti MSMEs
Business Development Services, P176690; (iii) Djibouti Affordable Housing Finance Project, P176772,
(iv) De-risking, inclusion and value enhancement of pastoral economies in the Horn of Africa, P176517.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The ICR discussed quality at entry issues on page 26-27 which are summarized below.

  (i) The operation was underpinned by a strong analytical base. The design of the operation was
  underpinned by studies including (a) the 2012 World Bank study “A New Growth Model for Djibouti”
  highlighting constraints facing the private sector and economic growth; (b) the Bank’s Financial Sector
  Assessment Program (FSAP) in 2008; and (c) an FSAP module on financial access in 2010, which
  identified important deficiencies in the country’s financial infrastructure. More specifically, to support
  business creation and facilitate private investment, the FSAP recommended simplification of business
  registration procedures.

  (ii) Implementation readiness was insufficient at approval. While the project was approved in June
  2014, the Borrower took a long time to fulfill the effectiveness conditions, namely to recruit
  fiduciary specialists, and approve the final draft of the Operations Manual. But by the proposed date of
  effectiveness in September 2014, there was very little progress in drafting the operations manual
  and subsidiary agreements and hiring the specialists. It was not until March 12, 2015 that the project
  became effective and implementation could start.

  (iii) The original PDO statement was unclear and partly justified the 2016 project
  restructuring. The design suffered from the absence of a clearly defined PDO, supported by a

                                                                                                       Page 10 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DJ: Governance for PSD & Finance Project (P146250)



  corresponding theory of change. The 2016 restructuring included the revision of the PDO and the results
  framework. The restructuring operation provided additional financing, and added activities aimed at
  developing the country's financial infrastructure with an automated NPS.

  The ICR did not discuss key quality-at-entry themes including the strategic relevance of the project, the
  implementation and M&E arrangements, or the risk assessment. Nevertheless, the project was consistent
  with the country's priorities and the Bank's plans of intervention as argued in Section 3 of this review.
  However, implementation, M&E arrangements, and risk assessment were generally weak, as illustrated
  by several restructurings and implementation delays.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The quality of supervision aspects are discussed on page 27-28 of the ICR, and covered the themes
 summarized below.

 Quality of supervision improved considerably overtime. According to the ICR during the early years
 after effectiveness, implementation was slow mainly due the National Agency for the Promotion of
 Investments’ (ANPI’s) insufficient capacity, weak coordination of the institutions involved in implementation,
 and several delays in procurement and financial management. This was exacerbated by staff turnover
 when the original financial management (FM) specialist left the PIU in December 2015. However, as a
 result of sustained implementation support by the Bank team, coordination of activities across agencies,
 and the strengthening of client technical capacity, good progress was made which led to the approval of
 the 2016 restructuring.

 Disbursement rates improved significantly following the 2016 restructuring and a closer monitoring
 and support from the World Bank team. By the closing date, 100 percent of the committed funds were
 disbursed. According to the ICR reinforcement of the implementation capacity was the key ingredient of the
 AF, which promoted smoother coordination, better FM, and more effective implementation across the
 various project agencies/beneficiaries. WBG sustained implementation support helped accelerate project
 progress, including the technical support from the WBG global payments specialists in the implementation
 of the NPS. The Bank team support helped to establish a new M&E system and a monitoring plan, and to
 hire a new procurement specialist and a project manager to support the project coordinator and help
 manage the day-to-day activities of the project.

 The Bank team exerted flexibility in sustaining project supervision under the difficult
 conditions of the COVID-19 pandemic. The pandemic severely impeded the import of hardware for the
 automated payment system and the physical presence of international experts supporting
 the establishment of the NPS. The Bank team organized remote supervision missions and close
 implementation support for the Government during this time. The WB was flexible during the COVID-19
 pandemic and processed a six-month extension of the project closing date to give authorities additional
 time to implement project activities. Partial lifting of global health measures finally made travel and
 equipment delivery possible in 2021 and the NPS was implemented successfully.


                                                                                                   Page 11 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DJ: Governance for PSD & Finance Project (P146250)



 The close supervision of the Bank team allowed the identification of concrete next steps toward
 Djibouti’s development goals based on lessons learned from this project. Even though most of the
 results related to the business climate improvement component were achieved before the extension of the
 project closing date, going forward, a continued emphasis on implementation capacity is required to ensure
 sustainability of reforms. The close supervision of the World Bank team has allowed to identify concrete
 next steps in supporting Djibouti’s development goals with lessons learned from this project. The Bank
 team, the CBD and other project agencies discussed these during the project closing mission to make
 recommendations for the project’s post-closure period including: (i) the continuation of digitization efforts
 undertaken under this project to maintain the strong momentum , and (ii) the strengthening of
 the institutional capacities of the CBD to ensure the sustainability of the NPS.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The ICR discussed some aspects of the M&E design of the project on page 24 as summarized below.

 The original PDO was not clearly stated, and was restated during the 2016 restructuring with a
 revised result framework. The PDO was not clearly stated at appraisal, as discussed under Section II.
 Following a request from the Borrower triggered by the reform momentum, the Bank approved an
 additional financing, which became an opportunity for the revision of the original PDO. Hence the project
 ended up with two different PDOs, and two different results framework, justifying a split assessment of the
 project’s overall outcome in this review.

 The ICR recreated two theories of change, corresponding respectively to the two PDOs and results
 frameworks. The PAD did not have a theory of change, and very little emphasis was given to developing
 an M&E system, further exacerbated by the limited capacity at the ANPI to implement the project. These
 shortcomings weakened the project's capacity to successfully track results of reforms which by principle
 are hard to measure. While the initial project design included a basic results framework to guide the project
 implementation, the ICR recreated two theories of change, based of the two DPOs and their respective
 results framework. While this case called for a split assessment, the ICR assessed only the revised PDO
 and its result framework.

 While there was a congruence between each PDO and its corresponding RF, the project M&E
 system and arrangements remained generally confusing. The existence of two different PDOs,
 two different results frameworks, and two different theories of change was a source of confusion regarding
 the M&E design and implementation arrangements. The expansion of the project did not improve clarity in
 terms of M&E design.



                                                                                                   Page 12 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DJ: Governance for PSD & Finance Project (P146250)



 While indicators were specific, measurable and achievable, there was room to have more
 streamlined results frameworks. While the original M&E system had limited indicators, the revised M&E
 expanded unduly the results indicators on account of an expanded project.




b. M&E Implementation
  The ICR discussed M&E implementation on pages 24-25, and key messages are summarized below.

  The M&E system was revamped and strengthened during the 2016 restructuring. The M&E system
  was redrafted at restructuring, based on a revised PDO and results framework. In addition, the original
  component on Project Management and Coordination was scaled up
  to implement the fiduciary procedures applicable to the expanded project. The revised PDO better
  reflected project activities, and the revised results framework was designed to better align the key and
  intermediate indicators with the revised PDO. However, six new indicators were added to reflect the new
  project component and activities and one indicator to track citizen engagement/user satisfaction for the
  One-Stop Shop developed under the parent project to strengthen results reporting. In addition, the
  language for five of the existing indicators was revised to better reflect project activities, and a redundant
  indicator on “direct project beneficiaries” was removed

  The ICR states that ISRs were prepared on a regular basis and reported on the progress toward
  expected outcomes. Based on the newly designed M&E system, a strengthened capacity of the PIU,
  and an increased attention from local authorities, the PIU systematically tracked and reported on the
  progress toward identified outcomes. The indicators discussed above were tracked consistently on a
  semi-annual basis by the executing agencies. The indicators were closely tied to the outputs of the
  project, and therefore provided information to the CBD and to the World Bank on project implementation
  and were the basis for project follow-up and mission discussions. Progress arose from overall project
  management improvement including improvements in coordination amongst members of the PIU and
  between beneficiary agencies.

  The PIU was in charge of coordination in the collection and sharing of M&E data and information.
  According to the ICR the PIU was not well equipped to adequately monitor and update the Results
  Framework and a dedicated staff was deployed to lead project results supervision and reporting. The
  Bank project team continues to stress the need to adequately update the Results Framework
  regularly. Both the Bank’s project team and the CMU staff based in country supported the project's
  Steering Committee and the PIU through close coordination, capacity building and training, and
  strengthening of the client team to ensure progress on development objectives. Training was provided to
  PIU members and heads of agencies within the framework of the project institutional capacity building
  activities.



c. M&E Utilization


                                                                                                     Page 13 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DJ: Governance for PSD & Finance Project (P146250)



  M&E data and information underpinned project management decision making. Throughout project
  implementation, the Bank team stressed that continued effective M&E is necessary to facilitate
  coordination, monitoring, and follow-up of reforms implemented. The Results Framework was used to
  inform project decision making as well as encouraging longer-term sustainability of the program’s
  results.

  The M&E system of the project set the stage for strengthening the M&E of the National
  Payment System (NPS). There is a critical need to strengthen the institutional capacities of the CBD to
  ensure the sustainability of the NPS. The ICR noted that because skills required for oversight differ from
  those required for implementation of the payment system, a specific department with appropriate
  capacity needed to be established within the CBD. Technical assistance was provided to the CBD from
  the WBG payments group to create and manage the oversight function.. To sustain the business climate
  reforms under the program, the World Bank advised the government to mobilize additional resources to
  contribute to the digitization of all the process indicators (building permits, transfer of ownership,
  connection to electricity, payment of taxes, cross-border trade, and so on) to make significant progress.

  On balance this review rates M&E quality as substantial, but only marginally so.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as a Category C operation at the time of project screening. The project was
   focused mainly on technical assistance and did not trigger any safeguard policies.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Procurement. According to the ICR a procurement specialist, with adequate training and experience on
   WB procedures and requirements had worked with the project since effectiveness. The Bank team and
   consultants provided constant support to mitigate capacity constraints with the client counterparts. During
   implementation, the ANPI has succeeded in establishing a system of accountability with clearly defined
   responsibilities and delegation of authority on procurement decisions. Procurement reviews rated
   the project implementation to be Moderately Satisfactory throughout due to the same implementing agency
   capacity issues.

   Financial Management (FM). Financial management recorded delays in submission of the
   FM deliverables including periodical Interim Financial Reports (IFRs) and the annual budget, because
   of the weak capacity of the ANPI. The PIU staff was reinforced to include a coordinator, an FM specialist,
   a procurement specialist, a manager, and an assistant, and the project FM improved after the

                                                                                                  Page 14 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DJ: Governance for PSD & Finance Project (P146250)



   implementation agency was strengthened. Audit reports and management letters were regularly submitted
   and found to be acceptable by the Bank. FM performance during project implementation was continuously
   rated as Moderately Satisfactory, reflecting delays in transmission of financial reports, in disbursements,
   and in initial installation of the accounting software.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   The ICR reported on page 21 that an important unintended outcome of the project was the reform of the
   credit information system through the implementation of a collateral registry and an upgrade of the credit
   registry.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                   IEG
                                                                                Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Satisfactory         Satisfactory
                                                                                Moderately satisfactory rating of
Bank Performance                Satisfactory         Moderately Satisfactory
                                                                                Quality at Entry.
Quality of M&E                  Substantial          Substantial

Quality of ICR                  ---                  Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR listed eight findings, lessons and recommendations, from which this review selected two
lessons of particular importance to project implementation as rephrased to some extent below.

i) A project implementation unit (PIU) needs competent leadership and staffing. As for most
World Bank operations in this project a PIU was to be used to implement this project. The
establishment of the PIU and its staffing was a condition of effectiveness. A PIU was chosen and
staffed but its performance fell short of expectations because of lack of appropriate skills and
motivation. After restructuring, with the leadership of the Ministry of Finance and close technical
assistance of WB experts, the project team was able to reorganize, improve staffing and deliver the
reform action plan through sectoral and technical work groups. The lesson is that PIU selection
needs to be underpinned by a sound and thorough review of the required capacities to run a specific
project, and then allocate the required human, financial, and technical resources to support a
project's activities throughout all phases. Without attention to such details project implementation
will almost inevitably be hampered.



                                                                                                  Page 15 of 16
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       DJ: Governance for PSD & Finance Project (P146250)



(ii) Strong Bank management and local staffing are key to successful implementation as they
provide proximity support to the client and mitigate crisis situations. When the COVID-19
pandemic hit with the associated travel restrictions, the presence of a dedicated expert in the Bank's
field office was crucial for the project’s successful implementation. Moreover, the Bank staff played a
key role in supporting project implementation in difficult contexts. The Bank also worked with the
Government, the National Agency for the Promotion of Investments (ANPI), and the PIU to find
practical solutions for the various project management challenges in order to ensure on-time
delivery.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is structured according to the guidelines, evidence-based, clearly written and internally consistent. It
provides a detailed storyline of the operation’s context, implementation and the results achieved. The results
orientation and the quality of analysis were of good quality, and well illustrated by detailed graphs, and
annexes. The eight lessons proposed in the ICR were cogent and based on experiences in the project. Thus,
the quality of the ICR is rated Substantial.




  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                    Page 16 of 16
