     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Trans-Hindukush Road Connectivty Project (P145347)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0023474

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P145347                                   Trans-Hindukush Road Connectivty Project

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Afghanistan                               Transport


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-D0930                                 31-Dec-2022                                          60,624,159.54

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 20-Oct-2015                               31-Dec-2022

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                          250,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                           149,996,369.65                                               0.00

 Actual                                         60,624,159.54                                              0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Ranga Rajan                Christopher David             Kavita Mathur                  IEGSD (Unit 4)
 Krishnamani                Nelson




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) as stated in the Financing Agreement (Schedule 1, Page 4) and in
   the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, page 8) is:

   " To improve road transport connectivity across the Hindukush mountain range ".




                                                                                                  Page 1 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Trans-Hindukush Road Connectivty Project (P145347)



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  02-Nov-2020

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   There were two original components (PAD, pages 11 - 12).

   1. Road construction and rehabilitation. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$240.00 million. The
   revised estimate with project restructuring was US$120.00 million. The actual cost was US$40.00 million.
   Activities in this component included upgrading the Baghlan to Bamiyan (B2B) road to asphalt standard and
   rehabilitating the Salang road and repair and restoration of the tunnel. The activity of rehabilitating the
   Salang road was dropped with the project restructuring (discussed in Section 2e).

   2. Institutional support and project management. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$25.00 million.
   The revised estimate with project restructuring was US$30.00 million. The actual cost was US$20.02
   million. Activities in this component aimed to strengthen the capacity of the Ministry of Public Works (MPW).
   There were five sub-components: (i) Road Safety, including a review of the design for the two roads for
   detecting and remedying any potential road safety design deficiencies; (ii) Defining and implementing
   appropriate arrangements for effective and efficient management of the roads; (iii) Community engagement,
   including executing MPW's information and communications campaigns with an information
   communications technology-based citizen feedback mechanism and a Grievance Redress Mechanism
   (GRM); (iv) Training, capacity building and institutional development of MPW and the Department of Public
   Works (DoPW); and (v) Project Management support.

   This component was added with the project restructuring on November 2, 2020.

   3. Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC). The revised estimate was US$100.00
   million. This component would allow for repaid reallocation of uncommitted grant funds in the event of an
   eligible emergency. Funds were not disbursed for this component.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project cost. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$270.00 million. The revised estimate was
   US$169.99 million. The actual cost was US$60.62 million. The difference between the revised estimate and
   actual cost was due to the non-completion of several activities during implementation as a consequence of
   the project's suspension.




                                                                                                   Page 2 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Trans-Hindukush Road Connectivty Project (P145347)



   Project financing. The project was financed by a IDA credit of US$250.00 million. US$100.00 million of the
   credit was cancelled for reasons discussed below. With this, the revised estimate was US$150.00 million.
   US$60.64 million was disbursed.

   Recipient contribution. Recipient contribution of US$5.00 million was planned at appraisal. Recipient
   contribution was increased to US$20.00 million through the project restructuring. There was no recipient
   contribution during implementation.

   Dates. The project was approved on October 20, 2015, became effective on January 17, 2016, and closed
   as scheduled on December 31, 2022.

   Other changes. The main changes made during implementation are as follows:

   Following the global COVID - 19 pandemic, the Bank cancelled US$100.00 million from this project and
   diverted the funds to fund COVID - 19 pandemic response activities at the government's request.

   The main changes made through the first level 2 restructuring on November 2, 2020 are as follows:

         The activity of rehabilitating the Salang road, which had been subject to significant cost overruns,
            was dropped from the project scope. The target of project beneficiaries was reduced to the
            population living along the B2B road.
           The scope of the upgrading the B2B road was reduced to reflect the design optimization following
            the Mid-Term Review.
           The project's procurement strategy for B2B road was changed to increase participation of local
            contractors.
           The financing for component two activities (institutional support and project management) was
            increased.
           A new project component - Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC) was added.
           A gender indicator was added to reflect the project's ongoing engagement of women in formal
            employment.
           Funds were reallocated among disbursement categories.

   The project was suspended through a Level 1 restructuring in August 15, 2021, following the government
   collapse in August 2021.

   Split rating. This review is based a split rating of objectives, when US$52.74 million was disbursed before
   the collapse of the government in August 2021 in the wake of a Taliban offensive that led to a complete halt
   of project activities. There was no progress since then.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country context. Afghanistan is one of the least developed and impoverished countries in the world. This
is due to a combination of factors such as decades of war and conflict within its borders, political instability,

                                                                                                       Page 3 of 13
                       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                       Trans-Hindukush Road Connectivty Project (P145347)



weak state institutions, governance deficiencies and dysfunctional societal relations leading to violent
conflict between groups. As a result, the World Bank classifies Afghanistan as a fragile state, due to
institutions' weaknesses and their vulnerability to instability, conflict and violence (FCV).

Sector context. The two project roads, the Baghlan-Banyam (B2B) road and the Salang Highway (SH) are
the only two viable roads for normal traffic across the Hindukush mountain range, connecting the south and
southeastern parts of Afghanistan with the north and northeastern parts. The SH carries most of the traffic,
with a high share of trucks. Heavy snowfall and landslides often interrupted traffic on this road, sometimes
for several days or even weeks. The B2B road, on the other hand, is used less and mainly by smaller
vehicles. Although the B2B road provided a much longer road connection than the SH, the road was less
steep and hence less vulnerable to snowfall. Both roads were in a dilapidated state and subject to frequent
closures during extreme weather. Ensuring sustainable trans- Hindukush connectivity was the most critical
transport sector priority for Afghanistan.

Since the two roads provided the only connectivity across Hindukush mountain range, the project opted for
a phased and linked implementation approach to ensure that there is a reliable Hindukush road connection
at all times during project implementation. Under this approach, the design prioritized upgrading the B2B
road to establish an alternative primary road route across the HinduKush mountain range while the SH was
being rehabilitated.

Government strategy. The PDO was well-aligned with the three pillars of the strategy articulated in the
2017 Afghanistan National Peace and Development Framework: (i) building strong and accountable
institutions; (ii) supporting inclusive growth; and (iii) expanding and deepening social inclusion.

Bank strategy. At appraisal, the PDO was consistent with the three strategic objectives of the Bank's
Interim Strategy Note (ISN) for 2012 to 2014: (i) building legitimacy and institutional capacity; (ii) equitable
service delivery; and (iii) inclusive growth and jobs. The PDO was fully aligned with the three pillars of the
Bank's current Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for 2017 - 2020: (i) building strong and accountable
institutions including through improving the broader abilities of the road authorities to construct, maintain
and operate the road network; (ii) fostering domestic and regional trade through strengthening the transport
network; and (iii) promoting social integration by reducing the time and cost of travelling, particularly for the
poorer citizens of the central, northern and southern provinces.

Previous Bank experience. The Bank has previously financed the following transport projects in
Afghanistan (the National Emergency Rural Access Project, the Afghanistan Rural Access Project; and the
Emergency Transport Rehabilitation Project which included a rehabilitation of the Salang Pass). Given the
FCV context, this Investment Policy Financing (IPF) project had an implementation timeline of seven years
(as compared to the normal five years). The project appropriately combined transport infrastructure
activities and given the weak institutional capacity activities aimed at institutional strengthening of MPW.

The ICR (para 32) notes that while the PDO was consistent with the country's development and economic
needs as well as the Bank's country and sectoral priorities, extensive infrastructure projects are currently
not being given priority in Afghanistan due to urgent humanitarian needs and lack of funds. Therefore, the
relevance of the PDO is rated as Substantial.


Rating Relevance TBL




Rating

                                                                                                          Page 4 of 13
                   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                   Trans-Hindukush Road Connectivty Project (P145347)



               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                OBJECTIVE 1
                Objective
                To improve road transport connectivity across the Hindukush mountain range.

                Rationale
                Theory of change. Activities aimed at upgrading the B2B road and rehabilitating the Salang road, together
                with institutional strengthening of the Ministry of Public Works (MPW), were likely to improve transport
                connectivity across the Hindukush mountain range. The causal links between project activities, outputs and
                outcomes were logical. The intended outcomes were monitorable. The outcomes were likely to aid in the
                long-term development objectives of fostering trade and promoting social inclusion of poorer citizens in
                central, northern and southern Afghanistan.

                The outcomes were predicated on the following assumptions: (i) the road agencies will provide the needed
                support to contractors and that contractors have sufficient capacity; and (ii) there are suitable security
                arrangements for contractors. One shortcoming of the theory of change is with the cancellation of the Salang
                road activity, the PDO could not be realized, since both roads are required for improving connectivity in the
                Hindukush mountain range.

                Outputs.

                      Road Safety audit of engineering design was completed and their recommendations were
                         implemented along B2B road as targeted.
                        20 consultations were held with civil society and project-affected persons (with 30% of consultations
                         focused on women), exceeding the target of 18.
                        Women's participation in site clearance work ranged between two and eight percent. There were no
                         targets for this indicator.
                        Only 2% of the pavement work on the B2B road was completed, as compared to the target of 100%.
                         40% of the earthworks activities were completed, far short of the target of 100%. Culturally appropriate
                         rest facilities on the road were not constructed as targeted.
                        The activity associated with rehabilitation of the Salang road was cancelled.
                        The outputs associated with capacity building of MPW were not completed as targeted.
                        Mechanism for management, maintenance and operation of both the B2B road and the Salang Pass
                         were not established as targeted.

                Outcomes.

                Given that most of the activities were not completed, the three intended outcomes were not realized.



                                                                                                                   Page 5 of 13
                                 Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                 Trans-Hindukush Road Connectivty Project (P145347)




                                    The average time for trucks on B2B road (Dushi to Shibar) remained at 24 hours as at the baseline
                                     and did not decrease to five hours as targeted.
                                    The average number of days per year when road crossing of Hindukush mountain range was not
                                     possible remained at 20 days and did not decrease to 14 days as per the revised target.
                                    There were no direct project beneficiaries, the achievement was far short of both the original and
                                     revised targets of 870,000 and 1,462,000 respectively.

                              Few outputs were completed and the outcomes were not realized. Therefore, efficacy is negligible.



                              Rating
                              Negligible


                              OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
                              Revised Objective
                              To improve road transport connectivity across the Hindukush mountain range.

                              Revised Rationale
                              The project was suspended on August 15, 2022.

                              The outputs and outcomes described above were relevant, but there was no progress after the project was
                              suspended.



                              Revised Rating
                              Negligible


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Overall efficacy was negligible.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating                                   Primary Reason
                            Negligible                                                Low achievement
                  OBJR1_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
                            Overall efficacy was negligible after restructuring.



                                                                                                                               Page 6 of 13
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Trans-Hindukush Road Connectivty Project (P145347)




  Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating                       Primary Reason
  Negligible                                               Low achievement


 5. Efficiency
Economic analysis. The Bank conducted an economic analysis at appraisal for component one activity
(upgrading the B2B road and rehabilitating the Salang road) using the Highway Development Management
(HDM - 4) model. The roads accounted for 90% of the estimated cost at appraisal. The main quantifiable project
benefits were to come from the expected reduction in closure times of both roads. Other quantifiable benefits
were to come from reductions in vehicle operating cost and reduced accident costs. The Net Present Value
(NPV) at 12% discount rate was US$520.10 million and the ex-ante combined Economic Internal Rate of Return
(EIRR) for the two roads was 44.5%. The economic analysis indicated that upgrading the B2B road would be
economically viable even with low traffic volume. On the other hand, the Salang road would be highly viable,
given the traffic volume and the impact of reducing road closures on inventory holding costs. An ex post
economic analysis could not be undertaken as the construction and upgrading work for the B2B road was not
completed.

Administrative and Operational issues during implementation. After four years of implementation and
cancellation of US$100.00 million from the project in the second quarter of 2020, only US$52.74 million (36% of
the credit) was disbursed. The main factors affecting project implementation were the slow progress of
procurement and inadequate contract management, security challenges which made it difficult to mobilize
qualified firms and contractors, poor contractor performance in terms of planning and implementing physical
works, exacerbated in the final years of the project by external factors due to the outbreak of the COVID - 19
pandemic.

The project did not demonstrate good value for money, even in the context of a fragile country. The cost of
rehabilitating Salang Pass was significantly underestimated. A detailed structural assessment of the Salang
Pass was not conducted at appraisal. The PAD indicated that a cost escalation of 50 to 100% could be expected
following detailed inspection. However, cost estimates based on assessments during implementation placed the
cost of rehabilitating the Salang road at 300% of the appraisal estimate. This led to the cancellation of this
activity. The project scope of the B2B road was also reduced and most institutional strengthening activities were
not completed when the project closed. There were outstanding payments to contractors when the project
closed.

In sum, overall efficiency is rated as negligible.


Efficiency Rating
Negligible


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?            Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)


                                                                                                    Page 7 of 13
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Trans-Hindukush Road Connectivty Project (P145347)



                                                                                     90.00
Appraisal                                                  44.50
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     0
ICR Estimate                                                0
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of the PDO to the Government Strategy and the Bank Strategy is rated as substantial. Efficiency is
rated as Negligible. Overall efficacy was negligible both before and after project restructuring. Overall outcome
is Highly Unsatisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Highly Unsatisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Technical risk. There is high risk to sustainability of development outcomes, given that project activities
were only partially completed and the PDO was not achieved. Construction work at closure was limited to
partially constructed culverts and other concrete works. These works were abandoned by the contractors
and the ICR (para 79) noted that it is highly unlikely that partially completed construction would withstand
either the traffic or environmental conditions.

Government commitment. There is high risk that the Government will not remain committed to completing
the project activities.

Security risk. There is high risk to the development outcomes, given that security concerns in the country
context.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The Bank prepared this project based on the experiences from Bank-financed transport projects in
  Afghanistan (discussed in section three). The lessons incorporated at design included: (i) as the
  experience from these projects had shown that projects can only be implemented successfully if local
  communities are convinced of their benefits, the Bank prepared this project in consultations with local
  communities; (ii) given the weak implementation capacity in the fragile country context, the design was
  simple with only two components and starting the project with an Implementation Consultant to support
  MPW in procurement and training MPW civil servants staff to eventually handle procurement: and
  (iii) recognizing that cost estimates in the fragile context should take into consideration the additional

                                                                                                     Page 8 of 13
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Trans-Hindukush Road Connectivty Project (P145347)



insurance cost of insurance for contractors and consultants, and the cost of private security. The
analytical underpinnings of this operation were sound and based on the World Bank's Systematic
Country Diagnostic (SCD).

The implementation arrangements were appropriate. The MPW was in overall charge of implementing
the project. A Project Management Unit (PMU) was established within MPW and was responsible for day-
to-day project implementation. As the MPW and PMU had substantial capacity deficiencies in key areas
of fiduciary management and disbursements, an Implementation Consultant was to be hired to support
the PMT in the initial years (PAD, paras 40 and 41).

The Bank identified several risks at appraisal including political and governance risks, risks to the
medium and long-term sustainability of the road infrastructure, and the weak institutional capacity of
MPW. Even with mitigation measures, the overall risk at appraisal was rated as High, due to the fragile
conditions (PAD, para 49). Appropriate arrangements were made at appraisal for safeguards and
fiduciary compliance (discussed in sections 9 and 10).

However, there were significant shortcomings in preparation. One, the project adopted a phased
implementation plan to minimize the impact of the rehabilitation of the Salang pass, including its possible
closure for almost a year. The plan envisioned rehabilitation of the B2B first to make it a viable alternative
during this period. Apart from the fact that implementing this phased approach was challenging, the
approach meant that for achieving the original targets for the PDO indicators, both phases would need to
be completed. Thus, targets were unrealistic and did not reflect the phased approach.

Two, the Bank identified the governance risks and incorporated mitigation measures such as training
MPW staff through hiring an Independent Consulting Firm. The assumption that training and support
provided by the Bank and implementation support by the Independent Consultant firm to the Government
staff would bring their capacities to the required level proved unjustified, as the Government continued to
exhibit weak capacities across all fronts (that is technical, fiduciary management and social safeguards).

Three, the project preparation team factored in the possibility of cost escalation of up to 50% to 100% for
rehabilitating the Salang Pass, since detailed structural assessment was not conducted at appraisal.
However, the cost estimate based on assessments during implementation was about US$170.00 million
(that is, over 300% of the original estimate).

Four, although the preparation team did identify security and political upheaval risks, it adopted a reactive
approach to mitigate the risks. The Bank flagged that it was uncertain how contractors and consultants
would have been able to price the constantly evolving security risks that could affect construction work in
the project area, since they may not be able to able to obtain security-related insurance in the market.
However, it did not specify any solutions to how this risk could be addressed.

Taking these into account, the quality-at-entry was moderately unsatisfactory.



Quality-at-Entry Rating
Moderately Unsatisfactory




                                                                                                    Page 9 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Trans-Hindukush Road Connectivty Project (P145347)




b. Quality of supervision
 The Bank conducted twelve supervision missions during the project implementation period of seven years
 (on average, twice a year missions). The ICR (para 77) observed that the Bank teams conducted field visits
 to obtain firsthand information and provided advice on road works and associated issues. As security
 conditions worsened, the Bank relied on Third Party Monitoring (TPM) contracted under the Afghanistan
 Reconstruction Trust Fund to carry out site visits and report on contract management. The Bank cancelled
 US$100.00 million from this project and diverted this amount to carry out COVID - 19 activities, at
 the government's request. However, as the ICR notes, the Bank's efforts at diligent supervision did not
 have much impact given the quality-at-entry issues and the deteriorating security situation.

 The quality of supervision was Satisfactory.

 In sum, overall Bank performance is rated as moderately unsatisfactory, mainly due to the shortcomings
 at Quality-at-Entry.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The key outcome indicators for monitoring project performance - the average travel time for trucks to cross
 the B2B road and the average number of days for which the Salang road would be closed - were specific,
 measurable and appropriate for monitoring project performance. Similarly, the indicator for measuring the
 number of direct project beneficiaries included the population of at least 11 provinces that would benefit
 directly from the improved B2B road and the Salang Pass. Finally, there were measurable indicators for
 institutional improvement and support, including the development of staff capacities to implement projects.



b. M&E Implementation
  The MPW was responsible for monitoring project performance. The staff of the provincial offices of the
  three provinces where the project roads were located were responsible for collecting data for monitoring
  performance. The ICR (para 63) notes that the staff were not always able to carry out adequate
  monitoring due to the security situation.



c. M&E Utilization


                                                                                                 Page 10 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Trans-Hindukush Road Connectivty Project (P145347)



  The M&E data was used to inform and steer the project. The ICR (para 65) notes that continuous
  change in project design, reduced the accuracy of efforts to monitor progress. Further, given the
  deteriorating security situation, the veracity of the collected data could not be ascertained.

  In sum, although the M&E design was robust, overall M&E is rated as modest given that the veracity of
  the data could not be ascertained due to the security situation.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as a Category A (full assessment) project under the World Bank safeguard
   policies. Three safeguard policies were triggered at appraisal: Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01);
   Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11); and Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12). (PAD, page iv).

   Environmental Assessment. Given the mountainous terrain through which the B2B road corridor passes
   and the construction activities, environmental impacts related to the construction activities. The MPW
   conducted an Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) and prepared and publicly-disclosed an
   Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF), and an Environmental and Social
   Management Plan (ESMP) for addressing the environmental impacts (PAD, para 94). There were no
   significant environmental issues during implementation (ICR, para 68). There were no specific incidents
   related to occupational health and safety.

   Physical Cultural Resources. This safeguard was triggered as a precautionary measure as the ESIA
   identified a structure presumed to be from Buddhist times on B2B road. The ICR does not report of any
   issues with the safeguards on physical cultural resources.

   Involuntary Resettlement. This safeguard was triggered as land acquisition was expected for rehabilitation
   and upgrading works for the two roads. The MPW conducted a Social Impact Assessment (SIA) at appraisal
   and a stand-alone Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) was prepared and publicly-disclosed at appraisal
   to address involuntary settlement issues. The ICR notes that untimely land clearance and acquisition
   negatively impacted the project timeline. The process for land clearance was longer than anticipated due to
   the weak coordination between the Ministry of Urban Development and Land Affairs and the office of the
   local governor. This was exacerbated by the incomplete census survey of the affected people, as people
   were absent due to the prevailing security situation.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial management. The Bank conducted an assessment of the financial management arrangements
   of the MPW at appraisal. The assessment concluded that the arrangements were adequate, subject to
   implementation of mitigation measures. The residual financial management risk was rated as substantial at

                                                                                                 Page 11 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Trans-Hindukush Road Connectivty Project (P145347)



   appraisal (PAD, para 64). Financial management was rated as moderately satisfactory during
   implementation (ICR, para 73), mainly due to some delays in the submission of quarterly unaudited
   financial assets and payments to contractors.

   Procurement. The Bank conducted an assessment of MPW's procurement
   arrangements. An Implementation Consultant (IC) was to be hired to support procurement. With mitigation
   measures, the procurement risk was rated as substantial at appraisal (PAD, para 75). Procurement
   performance was rated as moderately unsatisfactory (ICR, para 74). The project aimed to build the
   procurement capacity of MPW staff with the help of the IC. Given the lengthy procurement process to hire
   the IC firm, the United Nations Office for Project Services (UNOPS) was selected to play this role. The
   UNOPS contract had to be extended a few times and the project's effort at capacity building of MPW did
   not have much impact. The ICR does not report any case of mis procurement.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   There were no unintended impacts (ICR, para 51).



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                    IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
                               Highly
Outcome                                              Highly Unsatisfactory
                               Unsatisfactory
                               Moderately            Moderately
Bank Performance
                               Unsatisfactory        Unsatisfactory
Quality of M&E                 Modest                Modest

Quality of ICR                 ---                   High


12. Lessons

The ICR draws the following three lessons from the experience of implementing this project, with
some adaptation of language.

1. In Fragile, Conflict, and Violent (FCV) situation, complex infrastructure projects involving
design and construction are more likely to succeed, if implemented through a series of
projects or a multi-phased approach. This project showed that challenges in FCV conditions are
much higher when design and construction are packaged under a single project, as it was not
possible to determine the costs and logistical needs prior to the detailed design. This necessitated
re-engineering and delays in initiating works.


                                                                                                   Page 12 of 13
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Trans-Hindukush Road Connectivty Project (P145347)



2. Long term Bank engagement is necessary for rebuilding institutions in FCV countries.
While this project made considerable efforts in strengthening contract administration and the
technical capacities of the Ministry of Public Works (MPW), the combination of political upheavals,
security and personnel safety risks outweighed the Bank's efforts.

3. Adapting Bank's procurement approaches would help in the FCV context. The Bank's
approach to the procurement of project works in this project did not adequately take into account the
challenges of delivering works in the Afghanistan context. This resulted in larger packages and pre-
qualification requirements that precluded most Afghan firms from bidding. The awarded contracts
proved unviable as the international firms were unable to operate effectively in the environment and
the project was unable to verify the qualifications of the Afghan sub-contractors.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is well-written and clear. The theory of change articulated in the text shows the clear and logical links
between the project activities, outputs and outcomes. The theory of change explicitly states the assumptions
under which the intended outcomes are likely to be realized. The ICR provides a candid analysis of the
shortcomings at the Quality-of-Entry and acknowledges that these shortcomings could not be rectified, despite
the Bank's efforts at supervision. The ICR draws good lessons from the experience of implementing this project
in a FCV environment. The quality of ICR is High.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       High




                                                                                                   Page 13 of 13
