     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Mozambique Forest Investment Project (P160033)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0023386

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P160033                                    Mozambique Forest Investment Project

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Mozambique                                 Environment, Natural Resources & the Blue Economy


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-59590,TF-A4201,TF-A4295,TF-            30-Jun-2022                                         45,098,071.61
 A4296

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 07-Mar-2017                                30-Jun-2022

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           47,000,000.00                                    32,000,000.00

 Revised Commitment                            47,000,000.00                                    31,935,597.45

 Actual                                        45,098,071.61                                    31,935,597.45




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Cynthia Nunez-Ollero       Vibecke Dixon                 Avjeet Singh                   IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Financing Agreement (FA, p 5) and the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, paragraph 29) the
   Project Development Objective (PDO) of the Mozambique Forest Investment Project was "to improve the
   practices and enabling environment for forest and land management in targeted landscapes."

   This project was to be the first of three in a ‘Series of Projects’ (SOP) that would implement the Mozambique
   Sustainable Rural Development Program to improve the livelihoods of rural households and to achieve

                                                                                                  Page 1 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Mozambique Forest Investment Project (P160033)



   sustainable natural resources. This project was expected to be scaled up by expanding its geographic
   coverage. This first of three SOPs was to focus on landscapes with high levels of poverty and forestry
   potential in two provinces - in the central (nine districts in Zambezia) and northern (seven districts in Cabo
   Delgado) regions of the country.

   This review will assess the project performance against the following objectives:

          To improve the practices for forest and land management in targeted landscapes
          To improve the enabling environment for forest and land management in targeted landscapes



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   1. Promoting Integrated Landscape Management (US$19.1 million at appraisal, US$21.0 million at
   restructuring, US$21.0 million actual) This component was to finance the regularization of land tenure;
   develop and promote community-level land use planning and integrated landscape management tools; and
   promote multipurpose planted forests (Esquema de Fomento Florestal or EFF), agroforestry systems
   (Sistemas Agroflorestais, or SAF), and sustainable charcoal production by local communities and small and
   medium landholders.

   2. Strengthening the Enabling Conditions for Sustainable Forest Management (US$20.2 million at
   appraisal, US$18.4 million at restructuring, US$18.4 million actual) This component was to finance activities
   to develop Mozambique’s National Land Use Plan that promoted balanced, long-term land use decisions.
   It was also to finance a dynamic modeling platform for evaluating interventions for improved land use
   management, forest sector patrolling and inspections to reduce the forest crimes and illegal activities, a
   forest information system (Sistema de Informacao Florestal or SIF), dialogue in the forest management
   sector, train forest operators, and support small-scale sustainable forest businesses.

   3. Project Coordination and Management (US$7.7 million at appraisal, US$7.6 million at restructuring,
   US$7.6 million actual) This component was to finance the project management costs of the unit within the
   National Sustainable Development Fund (Fundo Nacional de Desenvolvimento Sustentavel or FNDS) of the
   Ministry of Land, Environment and Rural Development (Ministerio de Terras, Meia, Ambiente e
   Desenvolvimento Rural or MITADER) and costs of the Landscape Coordination Units in each province. This
   included financing project coordination and management, including fiduciary and safeguards management,
   monitoring and evaluation (M&E), and communications.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
                                                                                                      Page 2 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Mozambique Forest Investment Project (P160033)



   Project Cost: The original total project cost was US$47.0 million. The credit disbursed US$45.1 million. The
   balance was canceled.

   Financing: The International Development Association (IDA) provided a credit of US$15.0 million. The
   Strategic Climate Fund Trust Fund (Forest Investment Program of the Climate Investment Funds or CIF),
   administered by the World Bank on behalf of its donors, provided a loan of US$13.2 million and a grant of
   US$8.8 million. The Integrated Landscape and Forest Management (ILFM) Multi-Donor Trust Fund (MDTF)
   provided a grant of US$10.0 million.

   Borrower Contribution: None

   Dates: The Board approved the project on March 7, 2017. The credit was made effective on August 9,
   2017. The Mid Term Review (MTR) was conducted on August 4, 2020. The project closed on June 30,
   2022, as initially planned. The Bank approved a level 2 restructuring on March 16, 2021. Emergencies, such
   as the intensification of conflict in Cabo Delgado in 2018, Cyclone Kenneth, which hit Cabo Delgado in April
   2019, and the 2020 COVID-19 pandemic beginning in 2020 led to adjusting the target areas,
   cost allocations of the components, and corresponding changes to the indicators of the results framework.

   Split Rating: A split rating of the outcome is to be undertaken. The PDO and the financing envelope
   remained unchanged throughout project implementation, but the scope of activities was revised at
   restructuring and some outcome indiicator targets were reduced.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Context: Mozambique is rich in natural resources, with 36 million hectares of arable land and 40 million
hectares of natural forests. Forests contribute to the country's economy. Many households derive their
income from agricultural and forest-related activities. However, small-scale agriculture, biomass energy
production, weak governance, and unsustainable forest management contribute to a rapid annual
deforestation rate of 0.23 percent or an annual loss of almost 140,000 hectares (ha) of forest. Insecure land
tenure, inadequate land use planning, and demographic pressures also contributed to deforestation. For
example, the target province of Zambezia reported a high rate of deforestation due to shifting cultivation,
illegal logging, and wood extraction for biomass.

Country Plans: The PDOs were highly relevant to the country's plans to combat forest losses contained in
its Five-Year Development Plan for 2020–2024 (Programa Quinquenal do Governo - PQG), the National
Development Strategy (Estratégia Nacional de Desenvolvimento - ENDE) for 2015–2035, the Action Plan
for the Conservation of Biological Diversity in Mozambique, the Strategic Plan for Development of the Rural
Sector (PEDSA 2011–2020), and the Five-Year Government Plan (2020–2024). The project
also contributed to the Biomass Energy Conservation and Sustainable Use Strategy (2014–2025) and the
Renewable Energy Development Policy (Resolution No. 62/2009), promoting modern and
efficient renewable energy resources.

The government established a new Ministry of Land, Environment, and Rural Development (MITADER) to
consolidate responsibilities across several ministries and coordinate cross-sectoral challenges. MITADER

                                                                                                   Page 3 of 21
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                    Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Mozambique Forest Investment Project (P160033)



               adopted a ‘National Sustainable Development Program to enhance the livelihoods of the rural population
               and improve the management of natural resources. In 2016, MITADER established an independent law
               enforcement agency, the National Agency for Environmental Quality Control (Agencia Nacional para o
               Controle da Qualidade Ambiental, or AQUA), and set up a National Sustainable Development Fund (Fundo
               Nacional de Desenvolvimento Sustentável, or FNDS). FNDS has a current portfolio of more than US$1
               billion, mainly from World Bank financing.

               World Bank Country Partnership Framework: The PDOs were relevant to the World Bank Group
               (WBG) Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for Mozambique for FY 2023 to FY 2027. The CPF
               supported Mozambique’s progress toward greener, more resilient, and inclusive development. This project
               was to contribute to achieving Objective 4 - enabling green growth through the sustainable use of natural
               resources; and Objective 5: Growth of small enterprises in selected labor-intensive sectors and new
               industries. This project's objectives were to implement the integrated forests and landscape portfolio
               and operationalize the Mozambique Sustainable Rural Development Program (MozRural or P174002) and
               Mozambique’s Forest Investment Plan.

               World Bank Experience in the Country and the Sector: The World Bank implemented an “Integrated
               Forests and Landscape Portfolio” in Mozambique financed by the International Development
               Association (IDA), trust funds such as the Forest Carbon Partnership Facility ((FCPF), the Program on
               Forests (PROFOR), and the Mozambique Multi-Donor Trust Fund (MDTF) for Integrated Forests and
               Landscape Management. By January 2023, this portfolio had committed US$5.2 billion to finance 35 active
               projects and another US$486.4 million to finance 23 trust-funded operations. Ongoing Bank-financed
               operations include two SOPs - the IDA/Global Environment Facility (GEF) financed Phase 1 of the
               Mozambique Conservation Areas for Biodiversity and Development project (MozBio I), the IDA-financed
               Agriculture and Natural Resources Landscape Management project, the FCPF-financed Reducing
               Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation (REDD+) Readiness Support project, the Dedicated
               Grant Mechanism for Local Communities (MozDGM), and the Programmatic Advisory Services and
               Analytics on Forests and Landscapes.

               Overall, the relevance of the PDO is substantial. The project aligned with the country's plans and
               commitment to addressing deforestation and rural poverty. The PDOs directly supported the objectives of
               the World Bank CPF for the country, and and complimented the other forests and landscape portfolio of
               projects in Mozambique.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To improve the practices for forest and land management in targeted landscapes

                                                                                                                          Page 4 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Mozambique Forest Investment Project (P160033)




Rationale
Theory of Change: No Theory of Change (TOC) was presented at the appraisal since it was not required. A
TOC was prepared for the ICR. Inputs were to include the financing of activities to improve practices in
managing land and forests by delimiting land, regularizing tenure, strengthening land use planning, planting
new multipurpose forests (Esquema de Fomento Florestal EFF), establishing agroforestry systems (Sistemas
Agroflorestais, SAF), engaging local communities to form partnerships, including with the private sector, to
explore economic opportunities for food security and reduce slash and burn agricultural expansion, promoting
sustainable biomass/charcoal production, and increasing local investments. Outputs were to include land
delimitation certificates awarded to communities, titles given to forest landholders for concessions,
agroforestry system holders, land users who have adopted sustainable land management practices, charcoal
producers associations; kilns and woodlots for charcoal production in use, dialogue platforms for multi-
stakeholder land use forum (MSLF), community-level land use planning and integrated landscape
management tools; GIS system developed for forest management planning, and staff trained. Outcomes
included the size of land (in ha) using sustainable land management practices, with concessions for
organized or restored forests, established agroforestry systems, forests managed for charcoal production,
and conservation areas under improved landscape management. The TOC expressed these outcomes as (i)
the land area that adopted sustainable management practices and (ii) the number of land users who have
adopted sustainable management practices. These contribute to the long terms outcomes of reduced
deforestation and enhanced and diversified sustainable income and livelihood opportunities.

The TOC made the following critical assumptions, which, if actualized, would increase the likelihood that the
outcomes would be achieved: (i) availability of critical inputs (seedlings and markets) was adequate, and (ii)
communities were willing to adopt alternative livelihood models.

ORIGINAL OUTPUTS: In improving forest and land management practices, the following were the outputs:

      Planted forests (EFF) were established in 3,020 ha exceeding the original target of 3,000 ha
      7,195 ha in Zambezia and Cabo Delgado of agroforest systems (SAF) were established,
       exceeding the target of 1,500 ha. These smallholder plots were to improve yields and food security
       while reducing slash-and-burn agriculture. Thirty-five percent of women from Zambezia participated in
       the SAF scheme, while another 31-41 percent were from Cabo Delgado, not meeting the 50 percent
       target.
      Forest management allocated 7,675 ha in the Cabo Delgado landscape for charcoal production,
       exceeding the original target of 2,000 ha. Charcoal production was to increase wood transformation
       efficiency into charcoal and reduce the overall use of native wood species. Two legalized producer
       associations were created with their own sales stations and 639 and 439 members, respectively.
       These two associations were legally allowed to exploit the wood for charcoal production. Seedlings
       were also provided to the two associations to establish 20 ha of eacwoodlotts. The technology helped
       formalize charcoal production and provide sustainable use of noncommercial tree species.
      27,059 ha of conservation areas under improved landscape management did not achieve the original
       target of 850,000 ha, i.e., achieving less than 5 percent of the original target value. This
       indicator measured the area that incorporated or improved sustainable land management practices to
       track progress toward sustainability at the farm and landscape level within the agroecological zones,
       watersheds, or basins. The target area was reduced because the insurgency in the Cabo Delgado
       area beginning in 2018 led to the withdrawal of other activities in QNP, which covered at least 50
       percent of the original target area.


                                                                                                 Page 5 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Mozambique Forest Investment Project (P160033)




      The original target of awarding two forest concession holders was not achieved. Restructuring
         dropped this indicator. This indicator was dropped because forest certification became less relevant
         during implementation as market conditions did not favor certified timber from Mozambique. There
         was also a lack of interest from the private sector.
        The original target of 50,000 ha to have been under forest concessions was not achieved and dropped
         (see below)
        223 landholders of planted forests exceeded the original target of 100; 36 percent were female,
         exceeding the 30 percent target.
        3,100 individual land titles (DUATs) to small and medium landholders engaged in forest plantation
         and agroforestry system landholders exceeded the original target of 3,000. Data was obtained from
         32,693 individual producer plots, of which 29,255 underwent community consultation, 28,916 were
         cleared and registered in the Land Titling Information System (SIGIT) and were issued DUATs, 48
         percent of these DUATs corresponded to plots that were exclusively owned by women and another 5
         percent were co-owned by women. 19,757 DUATs were delivered to project beneficiaries, exceeding
         the original target of 16,000.
        3,170 agroforestry system landholders exceeded the target of 3,000; 34 percent were female and did
         not achieve the 50 percent target.
        200 charcoal producers met the target, of which 37 percent were female exceeding the target of 10
         percent.
        189 certificates of communities were delimited, exceeding the target of 160.
        Strategic Action Plans were prepared and implemented to promote the dialogue between the various
         stakeholders regarding the sustainable development of landscapes and to monitor this project.
         Funding for the plans only came in the third year of the project. By the time of closing, implementation
         had only reached 30 percent, not achieving the target of 80 percent. This rate of implementation
         constrained the project's ability to raise funds from other sources to implement planned activities not
         covered by the project.

The ICR reported the following additional results were reported in the ICR which were not part of the results
framework and thus without target values:

      Geo-spatial tools and GIS systems were developed and used with analytics and plans shared with
       provincial and district decision-makers to improve land use planning. Beneficiaries perceived a relative
       increase in fertility and productivity in their fields. However, the late delivery of crop inputs led to a
       lower-than-expected survival rate of fruit tree seedlings, averaging 51 percent in Zambezia and 46
       percent in Cabo Delgado.
      The project trained 172 Natural Resources Management Committees on law and land ownership
       rights and trained 439 community leaders on land tenure legislation.

ORIGINAL OUTCOMES:

      Land area where sustainable land management practices were adopted reached 39,949 ha against an
       original target of 906,500ha
      Landholders adopting sustainable land management practices reached 3,593 against a target of 3,310
      Sustainable forest management continued by developing a Forest Management Unit (FMU) model as
       an alternative approach to concessions management.


                                                                                                   Page 6 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Mozambique Forest Investment Project (P160033)



The project's efficacy in achieving this objective is rated Modest, given the shortcomings in achieving the
targets.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
To improve the practices for forest and land management in targeted landscapes

Revised Rationale
Beginning in 2018, safety concerns due to the rising insurgency in Cabo Delgado led to the withdrawal of
significant conservation activities in the Quirimbas National Park (QNP). QNP provided at least 50 percent of
the target conservation area. The project area was expanded to include the remaining districts of Zambezia
province but not equal to the reduced area. Hence, the target values of the affected indicators were reduced.
The cyclone in Cabo Delgado in 2019 and seasonal droughts during the same period further reduced the
target values of the original indicators. The COVID-19 pandemic in 2020 reallocated funds toward emergency
support, reduced the original scope and introduced new activities and new targets.

Theory of Change: The TOC did not change. However, the target values of an outcome and output
indicators were adjusted.

REVISED OUTPUTS: In improving forest and land management practices, the revised outputs included the
following:

      Area where planted forests (EFF) were established reached 3,020 ha exceeding the revised target of
         2,000 ha
        More than 2,280 ha of commercial plantations (EFF-planted forests and sustainable biomass
         production) were established in the Zambezia landscape, and 800 ha was restored, exceeding the
         revised target of 2,000 ha. The target was revised due to procurement delays. This led to the loss of a
         rainy season for planting.
        223 landholders of planted forests exceeded the revised target of 110, of which 36 percent were
         female exceeding the target of 30 percent.
        The Management Effectiveness Tracking Tool (METT) used to assess improved conservation area
         management had 13 indicators, such as law enforcement, staff capacity, and monitoring and
         evaluation (M&E) systems in place. Managing the conservation of biodiversity was to target a score of
         8.5 points. Still, it scored only 5 points because of two factors: activities in the Quirimbas National
         Park, which constituted half of the original target, had to be withdrawn due to continuing armed
         conflict, and the criteria used to calculate the target area was redefined. METT used a rapid
         assessment based on a scorecard questionnaire. A score was associated with the area covered by
         the conservation activity. With the withdrawal of the QNP land area, the score had to be redefined
         against the reduced area from 906,500 to 43,000 (PAD, Annex 4 and ICR, Table 2).
        US$1.02 million of Contingency Emergency Response was disbursed, almost achieving the target of
         US$1.1 million.

                                                                                                   Page 7 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Mozambique Forest Investment Project (P160033)




      Matching grants added at restructuring encouraged the adoption of land management strategies with
       delayed benefits, including forest planting and agroforestry. MGS supported new income-generating
       activities. US$0.79 million was approved for 26 community grants and six grants for small and
       medium-sized enterprises, but these were not disbursed before the project ended. US$1.2 million was
       approved but not disbursed. Community groups and enterprises provided 10 and 40 percent matching
       funds, respectively.

REVISED OUTCOMES:

      In improving forest management practices, sustainable land management practices were adopted in
       39,949 ha of land area, slightly below the revised target of 43,000 ha.
      27,059 ha of conservation landscape areas improved its management but did not achieve the reduced
       target of 37,500 ha.

The project's efficacy in achieving the revised outcome targets is rated Substantial, given the substantial
achievement of the revised targets.



Revised Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To improve the enabling environment for forest and land management in targeted landscapes

Rationale
Theory of Change: At the national level, activities were to improve the enabling environment toward
sustainable land and forest management through an integrated landscape approach. The project results were
expected to indicate that the forest and land use practices in targeted landscapes would be more sustainable
and benefit the local communities. At the same time, an improved enabling environment would support and
sustain local, landscape, and national project activities by building institutional capacity and policy
development. Inputs included preparing the national land-use plan; strengthening forest governance through
transparent dialogue in the sector, inspection, detection, and compliance; supporting the reform of natural
forest management regulations and practices through training of forest operators, and support for sustainable
small-scale forest businesses. The expected Outputs were the following: a National Land Use Plan, a
National Forest Program Agenda 2035, a Forest Policy and Strategy, and a draft Forest Law. Other outputs
included a dynamic modeling platform for evaluating interventions for improved land use management, a
strengthened forest sector patrolling and inspection to reduce forest crimes and illegal activities, a new digital
forest information system (SIF), small-scale forest businesses established, community on-job training
delivered, MRV Unit created, operators evaluated, national forest forum institutionalized, matching grants
delivered, and OCBs legalized. Outcomes were an improved enabling environment for land and forest
management measured by (i) the average score received from forest governance assessment of targeted
landscapes and (ii) the share of target beneficiaries satisfied with the information about and their participation




                                                                                                    Page 8 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Mozambique Forest Investment Project (P160033)



in forest and land use decisions that affect them. This was expected to lead to a reduced incidence of forest
crimes and illegal activities, even though this was not reflected explicitly in the ToC.

The TOC made the following critical assumptions, which, if actualized, would increase the likelihood of
achieving outcomes: (i) Community willingness to adopt alternative livelihood models, and (ii) the government
introducing adequate incentives and measures to address illegal deforestation.

The TOC was clear, and the causal link between inputs and outcomes was logical.

OUTPUTS:

Achievements to improve the enabling environment for forest and land management outputs included:

      A national forest information system (SIF) was operational, as targeted. The system and data were
         accessible to relevant users and stakeholders. The United Nations Food and Agricultural Organization
         (FAO) developed the SIF to increase transparency and accountability. Five modules were in the initial
         stages of operationalization. The central data center and the National Directorate of Forests (Direccao
         Nacional de Florestas, or DINAF) offices in Zambezia and Cabo Delgado were completing the basic
         equipment specifications at closing for the Sustainable Rural Economy Program (MozRural) to
         purchase.
        100 percent of forest concessions were inspected annually, achieving the original target of 100
         percent. This measured the effectiveness of forest and enforcement institutions and an aspect of
         legality through compliance and forest management plans.
        With a baseline of 40 percent, 65 percent of forest operators in targeted landscapes who scored at
         least 80 in government assessments achieved the original target of 65 percent overall. The Zambezia
         forest operators scored 75 percent exceeding the original target of 70 percent, coming from a baseline
         of 50 percent. No score was reported to have been achieved for the Cabo Delgado forest operators,
         with an original target of 60 percent from a baseline of 30 percent. This indicator measured the
         performance of forest operators against legal and basic sustainability requirements. A multi-
         stakeholder group defined these criteria. They covered the following: compliance with fiscal
         obligations, social security, having an approved management plan, qualified rangers, concession
         contracts, availability of statistical information, an inspection of industrial plants, technical capacity,
         delimitation of areas and harvesting blocs, and reforestation. Operators would be scored up to a
         maximum of 100.
        A national land use plan was submitted and adopted, as targeted. The first National Plan for Territorial
         Development (PNDT) outlined the priorities of various land uses. Several ministries led by the National
         Directorate of Territorial Planning participated in developing the PNDT. The Assembly of the Republic
         approved the legal instrument on December 28, 2021. The FMU system was established, and a pilot
         unit was created in Zambezia Province. A manual was prepared to operationalize its approach to be
         implemented in the other ten provinces to promote the sustainable use of forest resources
         and manage the restoration of productive forests using community participation.
        A National Forest Program Agenda 2035, Forest Policy and strategy, and draft Forest Law was
         developed, as targeted. FAO also provided technical assistance to draft a Forest Law, completed
         public consultations, incorporated comments to improve the bill, and submitted the proposed law to
         the Council of Ministers in July 2022, after the project closed.
        189 community delimitation certificates were issued, exceeding the original target of 160 certificates.


                                                                                                      Page 9 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Mozambique Forest Investment Project (P160033)




      45 percent completion of activities in the annual strategic action plans of the Multi-Stakeholder
       Landscape Forums (MSLF), lower than the original target of 80 percent.

In addition to the indicators in the results framework, the ICR reported the following achievements at the
output level without target values:

      Forest concessions for sustainable charcoal exploitation were legalized. The provincial Services of
       Geography and Registration (SPGC) identified 1,932 ha in the Ancuabe district and 5,815 ha in the
       Metuge district, both in Cabo Delgado, for legalization as concessions for the exploitation of charcoal.
       Inventories were conducted, and DINAF approved management plans for coal exploration in each
       area
      Forest operator assessments were conducted. Technical assistance was provided to forest operators
       to obtain forest certification and add value to forest products. DINAF conducted a structured
       evaluation process of operators in 2018 and 2021, covering 63 percent of operators. DINAF agreed to
       reform the legal framework for forest concessions, incorporating provisions prohibiting the awarding of
       forest exploration permits to operators who were not evaluated, had preliminary evaluations, or with
       scores below 80 points.
      The management of two conservation areas, the Gile National Park and QNP) improved surveillance
       of natural forests in the protected areas through improved patrolling, inspection, prevention of
       infractions, and detection of poachers by supporting AQUA, the national forest law enforcement
       institution. This included the establishment and operationalization of delegations of AQUA in both
       Zambezia and Cabo Delgado landscapes. AQUA provincial teams in Zambezia and Cabo
       Delgado conducted the annual surveillance of 47 forest concessions in both provinces at the fixed
       posts and through mobile brigades to ensure the legality of the wood being transported to markets or
       ports. 42 AQUA rangers were trained in Zambezia and Cabo Delgado. As a result, ANA and AQUA
       joint surveillance resulted in illegal wood seizure (5,750 m3 of logs and about 300 m3 of sawn wood)
       and the ban, elimination, and relocation of all forest operators surrounding the park. The project also
       contributed to improved interagency coordination in processing illegal exploitation of forest resources,
       including the Police of the Republic of Mozambique (PRM), Attorney General's Office (PGR), Tax
       Authority (AT), National Criminal Investigation Services (SERNIC) State Information and Security
       Services (SISE) and the courts.


OUTCOMES:

      The forest governance assessment received a score of at closing 3 (on a scale of 1-5), achieving the
       original target. This score was an aggregate of various issues that measured the strength of forest
       governance as perceived by forest holders. The assessment methodology was adapted from the FAO
       and PROFOR framework for assessing and monitoring forest governance. Strengthened forest
       governance by forest law enforcement institutions strengthened surveillance, detection, and control
       activities. The ICR notes that these reduced forest-related crimes and illegal activities and increased
       benefits for the government and local communities.
      69 percent of target beneficiaries, of which 70 percent were female, expressed satisfaction with
       information about and their participation in forest and land-use decisions that affected them. This
       almost achieved the original target of 70 percent overall and exceeded the 30 percent female target.



                                                                                                 Page 10 of 21
                                 Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                 Mozambique Forest Investment Project (P160033)



                              The project made substantial progress towards improving the enabling environment for forest and land
                              management in targeted landscapes based on the above forest governance assessment and beneficiary
                              satisfaction. The efficacy is rated as Substantial.



                              Rating
                              Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The efficacy of the project to achieve the original PDOs is rated Modest. Severe climatic events (Cyclone
                            Kenneth and seasonal droughts), armed conflicts in a significant project area, and the operational restrictions
                            imposed by COVID-19 led to a reduced scope, implementation delays, and the reallocation of project funds to
                            emergency support. The first objective was rated as modest, and the second as substantial based on the
                            original targets. Overall, efficacy was rated as Modest.




                            Overall Efficacy Rating                                   Primary Reason
                            Modest                                                    Low achievement
                  OBJR1_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
                            Given the substantial achievement of both objectives, the project's efficacy against the revised targets is rated
                            Substantial.



                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   Economic and Financial: At appraisal, economic and financial analysis using a cash flow model concluded that
   the project interventions were economically feasible and would generate benefits at a Net Present Value (NPV)
   of US$188 million and internal rate of return (IRR) of 27.3 percent (PAD, paragraph 72). Two principal benefit
   categories were quantified: carbon sequestration and livelihood benefits. The livelihood benefit streams
   were derived from four activities: natural forest management, forest plantations, agroforestry, and charcoal. The
   carbon sequestration economic benefit stream was estimated at US$ 179 million and the financial benefit

                                                                                                                               Page 11 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Mozambique Forest Investment Project (P160033)



stream at US$33 million at 6 percent, reflecting the difference between the economic (US$30 per ton) and
financial (US$5.5 per ton) carbon values. With the overall ENPV estimated at US$188 million, conservative price
projections and a sensitivity analysis confirmed that significant benefits outweighed costs and estimated the
economic benefit-to-cost ratio at 4.9.

In closing, the economic and financial analysis replicated the methodology used at appraisal. Actual costs
included changes to investment costs due to emergencies that affected the target areas. The cost-benefit model
calculated the incremental net benefits between ‘with’ and ‘without’ the project. The financial discount rate was
20 percent, and the economic discount rate was 6 percent (ICR, Annex 4, paragraph 9). Benefit streams were
similar to those identified at appraisal but with actual values at closing. The quantified benefit streams at closing
included forest plantations, agroforestry, matching grants, improved charcoal production, reduced illegal
logging, reduced greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions, and a counterfactual for annual cropping on areas where
deforestation has been avoided. The following benefit streams were excluded from the calculations (i) impact
from tax revenues, job creation, long-term impact from regulating land tenure, improved nutrition from food
consumption, improved capacity, and other downstream impacts.

Without GHG emissions, the economic IRR of the project was estimated at 7 percent, and the financial IRR was
at 6 percent during appraisal. The low rates of return were reported to be common in forestry projects because
benefits were further in the future. The estimated returns were also conservative because benefit flows that
could not be quantified were excluded from the benefit streams. Without GHG emissions, there were no
comparable estimated IRRs at closing. With GHG emissions, the economic IRR of the project at appraisal was
27 percent, while the financial IRR was estimated at 9 percent; with GHG emissions, the economic IRR at
closing was estimated at 217 percent, and no comparable estimate was presented for the financial IRR. The
ICR notes that due to the time value of money, the social value of carbon is higher than in the PAD due to
avoided deforestation on 42,000 ha being accounted for in the project implementation years (ICR, para 58).

Administrative and Operational: The budget envelope remained the same throughout implementation but was
reallocated among the components due to the conflict and instability in Cabo Delgado, the cyclone in Cabo
Delgado in 2018, and COVID-19 beginning in 2020. Funds (US$1.3 million) were used to finance emergency
response to the disasters. Other key project activities such as land delimitation and titling, forest law
enforcement, and implementation of SAF also affected implementation in target districts of Cabo Delgado.
Activities including sustainable charcoal production, SAF, the multi-stakeholder platform, and support to the
provincial land administration agency continued in Metuge, Ancuabe, and Pemba. In the last year of project
implementation, safeguards performance was affected significantly because the safeguards specialist was not
replaced after resigning in 2021, causing delays in subproject screening, elaboration of ESMPs, lack of
monitoring, and grievance redress mechanism (GRM)-related issues (ICR, paragraph 87).

Implementation delays also reduced the project efficiency: difficulties in securing a service provider, reported
problems with a low survival rate of seedlings, and trampling of planted trees were resolved with replanting to
meet targets within the planned budget; the agroforestry initiative was delayed by initial problems with low
survival of tree seedlings during transport, slow seed distribution, and delayed e-voucher system – these
problems were corrected by the third season. The matching grant facility was not introduced until restructuring
after the MTR (ICR, paragraph 63).

Overall, the efficiency of the project is rated Substantial. The project's economic efficiency was substantial, and
the delays in implementation were compensated by the project being completed as originally planned, with most
of the project resources used and the outcomes substantially achieved.



                                                                                                       Page 12 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Mozambique Forest Investment Project (P160033)




Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?            Point value (%)            *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     0
 Appraisal                                               27.00
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     0
 ICR Estimate                                            217.00
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

A split rating of the outcome is presented below.

                                                                                               After
                         Rating Dimension                                 Original
                                                                                          Restructuring
Relevance of Objective                                                                 Substantial
Efficacy
Obj 1- To improve practices for the forest, land management          Modest              Substantial
Obj 2 - To improve the enabling environment for forest and land
                                                                     Substantial         Substantial
management
Overall Efficacy                                                     Modest              Substantial
Efficiency                                                                           Substantial
                                                                     Moderately
Outcome Rating                                                                          Satisfactory
                                                                     Unsatisfactory
Outcome Rating Value                                                 3                  5
Amount Disbursed (US$ million)                                       31.22              13.88
Disbursement (%)                                                     69.22              30.78
Weight Value                                                         2.08               1.54
Total weights                                                        3.62 = 4
Overall Outcome Rating                                               Moderately Satisfactory
a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome


                                                                                                  Page 13 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Mozambique Forest Investment Project (P160033)




The following pose risks to the development outcomes:

      Security risks. This is a substantial risk. In this project, the security situation in certain project areas
         caused suspension of activities and reduced target values of outcome indicators. Restructuring
         addressed the security risk by reallocating resources. After the project closed, this risk remains.
        Technical risks. This is a moderate risk. In this project Innovative practices and technologies were
         introduced (e.g., the Forest Information System (SIF), the e-voucher system to facilitate access by
         SAF beneficiaries to agricultural inputs, the provincial and district levels' use of geo-spatial tools to
         improve land use planning, and use of low-cost equipment as an income generating service). This is
         a moderate risk because resources were to be allocated from the National Directorate of Forests
         (Direccao Nacional de Florestas, DINAF) offices in Zambezia other World Bank operations, such as
         Sustenta, MozRural and MozNorte. For example, MozRURAL was set to procure the equipment to
         make SIF operable after the project closed
        Financial risks. This is a moderate risk. In this project, financial flows and viability at farm level
         operations affected production schemes introduced by the project. This risk is also mitigated by the
         availability of resources from other ongoing Bank-financed projects in Mozambique. For example,
         MozNorte would need to provide operational support to the legalized charcoal producers with their
         own sales stations to continue its operations, assess adoption rates of using the improved kilns; scale
         up the initiative; develop marketing plans for the sale stations; and issue DUATs for the woodlots to
         sustain the initiative.
        Stakeholder ownership and social risks. This is a moderate risk. In this project, several
         beneficiaries with DUATs had not received the actual titles by the time the project closed.
         Beneficiaries agreed that the DUATs would protect them against potential land conflicts and need to
         have these titles on hand. MozLand reported that DUAT printing continued after project closing but
         not disaggregated to show beneficiaries attributable to this project. Community meetings to inform
         members and promote the participation of women and young people in implementing sustainable
         charcoal production and SAF may not continue after closing. This risk is mitigated by community
         participation aspects in ongoing Bank-financed projects. Stakeholders asked for further training on
         regularizing of land tenure and SIF.
        Political and institutional risks These are moderate risks. In this project, political and institutional
         commitment at the federal and provincial levels allocated the human and financial resources to
         implement reforms. The World Bank is supporting FNDS’ to expand this project's results by
         allocating resources from other ongoing projects (e.g., MozRural, MozNorte, Sustenta, and MozLand)
         (ICR, Annex 5).
        Institutional support. This is a moderate risk. In this project, the sustainable charcoal production
         was legalized. Beneficiaries asked for continued training and links to market. The newly established
         law enforcement agency (AQUA) improved its presence and inspectors reduced illegal logging,
         collected fines, and sold confiscated forest products. Preventing logging too early and reducing illegal
         logging, require continued enforcement work by AQUA. A lack of technical assistance and
         maintenance of equipment may provide difficulties because public financing is scarce SIF was
         established staff training would be required to maintain the system. There will be a need for ongoing
         technical assistance to ensure viability and continued forest planting efforts. The agroforestry initiative
         was also reliant on continued technical assistance. Crop failure due to poor management, or low or
         irregular rainfall, may make it difficult for farmers to purchase improved seeds and inputs in future
         years. The sustainability of forest plantations relies on the skill of the producers in managing the
         forests, connecting with markets, and obtaining viable seedlings from local nurseries. The


                                                                                                        Page 14 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Mozambique Forest Investment Project (P160033)



      sustainability of several parts of the project may benefit from support through other Bank-
      financed projects.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The Project was relevant to the Government strategy and the Bank team designed this project
  to implement the Mozambique Forest Investment Plan. This ambitious, modular government program
  framework addressed deforestation and promoted sustainable rural development. Projects were to be
  implemented in three phases (i) readiness under the National Reducing Emissions from Deforestation
  and Forest Degradation (REDD+) Strategy, (ii) implementation and investments, which included this
  project, and (iii) the results and performance payments phase. Financing under all three phases has been
  secured from various sources. Three projects were to implement the REDD+ strategy: (i) this project, (ii)
  the Emissions Reductions in the Forest Sector through Planted Forests, and (iii) MozDGM (P161241).
  The Bank team designated MITADER's FNDS, the main interlocutor of the forest investment plan, to
  implement this project.

  The Bank team designed this project as the first in a "Series of Projects" (SOP) that would implement
  Mozambique’s National Sustainable Development Program to improve the livelihoods of rural households
  and the sustainability of natural resources (PAD, paragraph 29). The Bank team designed the
  project informed by lessons from similar activities worldwide, environmental sector experience in the
  country, and analytical studies at the national and provincial levels (Zambezia and Cabo Delgado) under
  the REDD+ Readiness process (ICR, paragraph 93). The PDO was simple, and the outcome indicators
  were well-defined. The Bank team adequately assessed the technical, financial, economic, safeguard,
  and fiduciary aspects of the project, except for the impact of the insurgency risk on the project's
  outcomes. However, the mitigating measures to address readiness to implement, sequencing of
  the interventions, procurement capacity, and introducing participatory decision-making at the landscape
  level proved insufficient. The Bank team acknowledged that the project design was ambitious and
  complex, and the implementation period was short (ICR, paragraph 76).

  Overall, the Bank's performance at entry is rated as Moderately Satisfactory. The project was highly
  relevant to the country's deforestation approach and the Bank's environmental sector strategy. There
  were moderate shortcomings in risk assessment and mitigating measures to address these.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The Bank team conducted 13 supervision missions over the five-year project period, including virtual
 missions during COVID-19. Experts in technical and fiduciary requirements of the project and locally
 based financial management, procurement, and safeguards specialists participated in these missions. The

                                                                                                    Page 15 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Mozambique Forest Investment Project (P160033)



 Bank staff from the country office also conducted technical field missions to supervise specific activities or
 locations. Early environmental and social safeguards compliance training was conducted. Three task team
 leaders supervised the project, with one of them based in the country office until the project closing. Close
 coordination allowed for the adoption of corrective measures during implementation, such as reallocating
 funds from reduced activities in five districts in Cabo Delgado due to conflict to finance disaster response
 from Cyclone Kenneth, which hit Cabo Delgado in April 2019, and the COVID-19 pandemic. The Bank
 team also reallocated financing to help the Integrated Development Agency of the North to prepare a larger
 regional program to increase the resilience of local communities. The Bank team used the Mid Term
 Review (MTR) to introduce three changes to the project:(i) expand the Zambezia target area from nine to
 all 16 districts of the province, (ii) add to the Matching Grants Scheme (MGS), a government program
 financed by the MozBio and Sustenta; and (iii) modify indicators in the results framework. However,
 there was insufficient time to implement the MGS.

 Bank supervision was hampered by the following outside its control: (i) COVID-19 pandemic limited
 mobility; (ii) armed insurgency in the target areas of Cabo Delgado; and (iii) cyclones that
 affected implementation and required disaster response. In addition, the SOP series did not materialize as
 designed, MTR and restructuring were delayed, and difficulties were encountered at project closing. The
 Bank team addressed the institutional changes after the elections in October 2019, delays in FNDS
 financial management system, and procurement in a Management Letter. Many project activities were
 completed at, or shortly before, the project closing date (ICR, paragraph 50).

 Overall, the Bank's performance at supervision is rated as Moderately Satisfactory. There were moderate
 shortcomings in supervision reflected in the delayed corrective measures introduced after the MTR, with
 little time to implement these. In closing, the Bank team coordinated with other ongoing Bank-financed
 natural resources portfolio project teams to allocate resources that would continue the interventions started
 in this project (ICR, Annex 5).

 Overall, the Bank's performance is rated Moderately Satisfactory. Bank performance at entry and
 supervision were both rated Moderately Satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The M&E used the indicators in the results framework at appraisal, including core gender disaggregated
 beneficiary indicators. The PDO was simple and specified "improving practices" and "improving the
 enabling environment." In preparation, the methodology used for the outcome indicator, the METT
 approach, measured land areas where sustainable land management practices were adopted in protected
 areas. But measurement complexity and attribution factors proved difficult. The intermediate results

                                                                                                   Page 16 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Mozambique Forest Investment Project (P160033)



 indicators adequately captured the contribution of the operation’s components and outputs toward
 achieving the identified PDO-level outcomes. The indicators were specific, measurable, achievable,
 relevant, and time-bound. The baseline data collection was planned to be conducted during the first year of
 project implementation. The M&E design and arrangements were institutionally well-embedded.



b. M&E Implementation
  MITADER's FNDS , through its International Funds Management Unit (UGFI), implemented the M&E
  system. Tools were developed and standardized to consolidate field data at the national level for
  decision-making, planning, and reporting. FNDS UGFI developed a database with real-time geographic
  information implemented for public access. However, delayed contracting of service providers, the
  primary source of project data at the field level led to initial reporting delays. Data was reported to be
  reliable. Beneficiaries participated in defining targets and assessing achievement, evident in the surveys
  conducted as planned. M&E functions and processes were likely to be sustained after the project closing
  because the same institution was engaged in implementing the other projects under this portfolio.



c. M&E Utilization
  M&E data was reported to stakeholders and used to assess progress on achieving targets. M&E data
  was also used to inform the suggested implementation changes covered by the restructuring. To
  address the impact of the seasonal drought, the cyclone, and COVID-19, funds were reallocated to
  respond to these emergencies, and indicators were added to report on their use. M&E data was used to
  provide evidence of achieving outcomes in addition to achieving progress. M&E data informed the Bank
  team's efforts to pursue continuity of the project interventions in the other Bank-financed projects under
  the portfolio. The end-of-project assessments were conducted as planned (ICR, paragraph 83).

  Overall, the quality of project M&E is rated Substantial despite the weaknesses in selecting some
  indicators and the initial difficulties in data collection.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Environmental: The project was classified as Category "B" because potential environmental and social
   impacts were expected to be localized, reversible, temporary, and manageable. The project triggered
   seven Bank Operational Safeguards Policies: five from the Environmental side, Environmental Assessment
   (OP/BP 4.01), Pest Management (OP/BP 4.09), Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04), Forests (OP/BP 4.36), and
   Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) and two from the social safeguards side (see below). Civil works under the
   project were limited and mainly consisted of the rehabilitation of existing SPGC offices, which generated
   limited environmental and social impacts as these works were implemented on existing sites that fully


                                                                                                   Page 17 of 21
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Mozambique Forest Investment Project (P160033)



  complied with these requirements; the Environmental and Social Framework and corresponding ESMP
  were prepared and cleared by the World Bank.

  Social Safeguards: The project triggered Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) and Involuntary
  Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12). A joint Environmental and Social Management Framework was prepared for
  the entire Forest Investment Program, including this project, the Mozambique Dedicated Grant Mechanism
  for Local Communities Project, and the Emission Reduction Program. These projects adopted a Process
  Framework from the related MozBio project for any access restrictions to natural resources used in
  protected areas to meet the requirements of Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12). A Strategic
  Environmental and Social Assessment was prepared. These instruments were disclosed both in-country
  and through the World Bank website. All site-specific subprojects had Environmental and Social
  Management Plans (ESMPs) prepared and implemented. The Process Framework was not activated
  because no restrictions on access to natural resources were identified in the protected areas. FNDS
  developed a joint Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM), called the ‘Dialogue and Grievance Mechanism,’
  for use by projects under the Bank-financed integrated landscape management portfolio in
  Mozambique, including this project (ICR, paragraph 89). Overall, the project satisfactorily resolved 180
  cases, of which 143 were grievances. These claims concerned land conflicts between neighbors and delays
  in the arrival of inputs in the last year of project implementation; the safeguards performance
  delayed subproject screening, elaboration of ESMPs, lack of monitoring, and grievance redress mechanism
  (GRM)-related issues when the safeguards specialist was not replaced after the resignation in 2021 (ICR,
  paragraph 81).

  According to the ICR, the project complied with all triggered safeguards policies (ICR, paragraph 85). The
  E&S Safeguards compliance rating at project closing was rated as Satisfactory. (based on the last approved
  ISR, Dec 2021).




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management. According to the ICR, financial management procedures were periodically
  reviewed, and the FM arrangements were found to be compliant with the Bank systems. The Bank team
  found the PIU FM system adequately staffed and managed, with adequate accounting, internal controls,
  and reporting. The quarterly unaudited interim financial reports were submitted on time and were
  acceptable to the World Bank (ICR, paragraph 91). The ICR did not report any issue regarding audited
  financial reports. The last ISR in the Bank's Operations Portal noted delays in submitting audited reports
  that may result in returning undocumented funds to the Bank. The poor coordination between financial
  management (FM) and procurement units of the PIU and the limited engagement of public extension
  agents from SDAE at the district level significantly affected the sustainability of project activities in the field.
  These factors affected the post-project continuity and adoption of improved practices by project
  beneficiaries (ICR, paragraph 80). The project closed with a Moderately Satisfactory FM rating (based on
  the last approved ISR, December 2021).

  Procurement The ICR reported that the procurement under the project complied with the World Bank’s
  guidelines. FNDS established a procurement unit before project effectiveness. Trainings on procurement
  were delivered during the initial stages of project implementation. Initial procurement delays affected the
  recruitment of key resources, such as service providers who collected primary data and service providers
  for the forest planting and agroforestry initiatives, which in turn negatively affected the project's

                                                                                                        Page 18 of 21
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Mozambique Forest Investment Project (P160033)



   achievements (see Section 4 Efficacy above). These were subsequently addressed. There were noted
   delays in documenting the completion of project activities in the Systematic Tracking of Exchanges in
   Procurement (STEP) tool. The implementing agency resolved these shortcomings (ICR, paragraph
   92). The project closed with a Moderately Satisfactory procurement rating.(based on the last approved
   ISR, December 2021).




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   .



d. Other
   .



11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                    IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
                                 Moderately
Outcome                                                 Moderately Satisfactory
                                 Satisfactory
                                 Moderately
Bank Performance                                        Moderately Satisfactory
                                 Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                   Substantial            Substantial

Quality of ICR                   ---                    Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR provided five lessons, four of which are slightly paraphrased below (ICR, paragraphs 103-
107):

        Support for forest plantations may require rotation periods longer than the project
         period. In this project, beneficiaries experienced management challenges in undertaking
         long-term plantations, e.g., in maintaining sales stands, marketing forest products,
         and adopting sustainable forest systems after the project closed. Designing forestry sector
         interventions may consider lengthier implementation periods with corresponding support
         for continuing plantation activities through existing institutional arrangements or other
         operations.
        Specifying targeting criteria for smallholders and emerging producers may ensure
         their participation and benefit over subsidizing established commercial enterprises. In
         this project, questions were raised against allocating subsidies to established enterprises.
         The subsidies were expected to generate a multiplier effect for similar forest/agroforestry

                                                                                                   Page 19 of 21
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Mozambique Forest Investment Project (P160033)



         undertakings. Incentives to smallholder communities and emerging producers who
         have strong market-oriented production and who may have financial capacity to implement
         and adopt the improved agroforestry and plantation schemes may generate the same
         multiplier effect. These smaller businesses may use the subsidies to expand their production
         schemes and contract out to other subsistence farmers. The contract production schemes
         could include technical and financial support for these farmers to generate the desired
         multiplier effect.
        Innovative solutions like hiring specialized service providers and recruiting local
         facilitators may improve the adoption and sustainability of new practices. In this
         project, innovative solutions including the hiring of private, specialized service providers such
         as MOZBAMBÚ, and Verde Azul, may be a cost-effective way to support beneficiaries of
         field-intensive projects. These specialized service providers conduct surveys and
         support beneficiaries. By hiring these providers early, deliverables may be integrated into
         local government and extension services. In the case of smallholder farmers, another
         innovation was the selection of facilitators from within the beneficiary communities. They
         were trained to support fieldwork directed at adopting improved agroforestry systems
         practices. This approach complemented the service providers and farmer-to-farmer technical
         assistance. Another innovative feature was the provision of low-cost equipment, such as
         manual sprayers, for facilitators to develop an income generating service for the other
         community members.
        Mainstreaming the Gender Action Learning System (GALS) initiative may be effective
         in addressing gender equality in agroforestry projects. In this project, FNDS
         included women in SAF and biomass activities. The project promoted co-titling of DUATs
         (land titles) to ensure that women do not lose the right to the land in the event of the
         husband’s death. Women’s participation in EFF was limited due to the financial contribution
         required in this program. But women’s association were actively supported. The participated
         in the planted forest scheme. The GALS initiative in the Uape community of Zambezia
         Province expanded in 2020. GALS beneficiaries increased from an initial 27 to 6,887 people
         (of which 2,631 were women) by 2022. An estimated 74 percent of GALS beneficiaries
         reported some degree of behavioral changes, improved cohesion and harmony within
         households, a decrease in gender-based violence incidents, redistribution of domestic tasks,
         reduction in alcohol consumption, and women’s improved sense of assets ownership.
         MozRural and MozNorte, have adopted the initiative for its agroforestry systems. Other
         projects designed for rural, and fisheries communities may also benefit.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR was comprehensive, candid, and consistent with the guidelines. The ICR presented the evidence base
for the reported achievements. Annex 6 (Borrower's ICR) reflected useful information about actions undertaken
by the government to address the sustainability of improvements made in forest management, including the


                                                                                                      Page 20 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Mozambique Forest Investment Project (P160033)



mandated use of planning instruments developed under the project was useful. Lessons were practical and
based on the implementation experience.

There were minor shortcomings. There was a mistake in using the split rating methodology. The achievement
under the original outcome targets should be assessed at the end of the project (across the entire project
duration) and not what was achieved at restructuring. The ICR also did not report on Safeguards and Fudiciary
compliance ratings at project closing. Overall, the ICR quality is rated as substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                Page 21 of 21
