     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MSME Emergency Response (P174292)



                                                                               Report Number: ICRR0023108

1. Operation Information



 Operation ID                             Operation Name
 P174292                                  MSME Emergency Response

 Country                                  Practice Area (Lead)
 India                                    Finance, Competitiveness and Innovation



 Non-Programmatic DPF

 L/C/TF Number(s)                         Closing Date (Original)                  Total Financing (USD)
 IBRD-91530                               30-Jun-2021                                        750,000,000.00

 Bank Approval Date                       Closing Date (Actual)
 30-Jun-2020                              30-Jun-2021

                                          IBRD/IDA (USD)                              Co-financing (USD)

 Original Commitment                        750,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                         750,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Actual                                     750,000,000.00                                               0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                 ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Nestor Ntungwanayo         Fernando Manibog            Avjeet Singh                   IEGSD




2. Program Objectives and Pillars/Policy Areas
DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives

As per the Program Document (PD) on page 17, the Project Development Objective (PDO) of the
Development Policy Financing (DPF) was " to support the Government of India (GoI) in preserving flows of
finance to Micro Small and Medium Enterprises (MSMEs) through the COVID-19 crisis and lay the
foundations for a stronger MSME financing ecosystem in the recovery phase". The program objective was not


                                                                                                Page 1 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MSME Emergency Response (P174292)



stated in the Loan Agreement (LA) and was unchanged throughout the period of implementation of the stand-
alone Development Policy Finance (DPF) operation.

Toward assessing the performance of the DPF and in line with Operations Policy and Country Services
(OPCS) guidelines (December 2021), this review will parse the PDO as follows:

      PDO-1: To support the Government of India (GoI) in preserving flows of finance to MSMEs through the
       COVID-19 crisis; and
      PDO-2: To lay the foundations for a stronger MSME financing ecosystem in the recovery phase.


b. Pillars/Policy Areas
As delineated below, the operation was underpinned by 7 Prior Actions (PAs), which were structured around
the three pillars of the program and completed before disbursement.

Pillar 1: Channeling financing flows to MSMEs

The 2 PAs described below were completed ahead of the operation's legal approval.

      Prior Action #1: The Borrower through the Ministry of Finance, Government of India, has notified the
       Guaranteed Emergency Credit Line (GECL) Facility, supported by a 100 percent guarantee scheme,
       Emergency Credit Line Guarantee Scheme (ECLGS).
      Prior Action #2: The Borrower through the Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises, has
       taken various steps to strengthen the already existing Credit Guarantee Scheme (CGS) managed by
       the Credit Guarantee Fund Trust for Micro and Small Enterprises (CGTMSE) to incentivize MSME
       lending: (i) by withdrawing the cap on utilizing guarantee cover and permitting utilization multiple times
       within the overall limit of Rs.20 million and (ii) by including fintech NBFCs in the scheme.

Pillar 2: Strengthening NBFCs

The 2 PAs detailed below were completed ahead of the operation's legal approval.

      Prior Action #3: The Borrower’s central bank, the Reserve Bank of India, (i) has launched a liquidity
       window that utilizes long-term repo operations (TLTROs) to channel liquidity through banks to
       investment-grade debt issuances by corporates, and a second liquidity window (TLTRO 2.0) of Rs.500
       billion exclusively for NBFCs, with specific targets for issuances by small and medium NBFCs and (ii)
       has approved a liquidity support facility of up to 1 year for NBFCs/Banks/ MFIs for on-lending to
       MSMEs during the crisis; and (iii) the Ministry of Finance, Government of India, has launched a
       Special Liquidity Facility to guarantee the liabilities (short term investment grade debt securities) of
       NBFCs/HFCs/MFIs

      Prior Action #4: The Borrower through the Ministry of Finance, Government of India, has approved
       amendments to strengthen the already existing Partial Credit Guarantee facility by (i) including new
       eligible funding instruments such as bonds and commercial papers issued by NBFCs in the guarantee
       facility; (ii) increasing the risk coverage for PSBs to up to 20 percent (for the newly included debt
       securities); and (iii) including lower-rated NBFCs in the scheme


                                                                                                      Page 2 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MSME Emergency Response (P174292)



Pillar 3: Incentivizing the use of Fintech and digital channels in MSME lending and payments

The 3 PAs summarized below were completed ahead of the operation's legal approval.

     Prior Action #5: The Borrower’s central bank, the Reserve Bank of India, has issued guidelines to
       operationalize the RBI Fintech Regulatory Sandbox (RS) including the requisite governance
       arrangements, eligibility criteria and exit strategies with appropriate risk mitigation actions, through
       circular issued on August 13, 2019

     Prior Action #6: The Borrower, through the Ministry of Heavy Industries & Public Enterprises, has
       notified that Central Public Sector Enterprises (CPSEs) should have their MSE vendors onboarded on
       the TReDS platform.

     Prior Action #7: The Borrower, through the Ministry of Finance, has launched the PSB Loans in 59
       Minutes (PSB59) platform through the setting up of the PSB59 company to enable the fast processing
       and quick disbursal of MSME loans by select banks.




c. Comments on Program Cost, Financing and Dates

The India's Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Emergency Response DPF was a one-off operation funded by
a US$750 million International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) loan disbursed in a single
tranche. The operation was approved on June 30, 2020, became effective on July 14, 2020, and closed on
schedule on June 30, 2021.




3. Relevance of Design

a. Relevance of Objectives

 The ICR was comprehensive (pages 4-8) in describing the rationale and the relevance behind the preparation
 of the DPL which are summarized below.

 (i) The COVID-19 impact on MSMEs was crippling and needed to be addressed head on. The pandemic
 affected the MSMEs through the cancellation of orders, loss of customers and clients, and supply chain
 disruptions, causing a sharp fall in revenues. This created a cash flow shortage, liquidity constraints, and
 difficulties in accessing finance, leading to potential solvency problems. The broad-based loss of cash flows
 triggerd a chain of nonpayments throughout the economy, including to the financial sector. The DPF intended
 to address immediate liquidity and credit needs of MSMEs so that viable firms can survive. Measures to unlock


                                                                                                        Page 3 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MSME Emergency Response (P174292)



the liquidity in the financial system included de-risking lending by banks, including Small Finance Banks
(SFBs), and NBFCs, while leveraging fintech/ DFS to incentivize on-time payments and faster lending
processes.

(ii) The DPF's PDO was fully consistent with the Borrower's priority of providing MSMEs liquidity to
mitigate the impact of the COVID-19 crisis on their balance sheets, and the potential solvency
problems and job losses. The DPL supported a set of policy, regulatory, and institutional reforms, that were
expected to promote an efficient and inclusive ecosystem of financing for MSMEs in India in the short and
medium term. The proposed DPF was structured around three pillars: (i) channeling financing flows to
MSMEs; (ii) strengthening Non-Bank Financial Companies (NBFCs); and (iii) incentivizing the use of Fintech
and digital channels in MSME lending and payments. The MSME sector was already grappling with low credit
growth in 2019 and early part of 2020, which has been further exacerbated by COVID-19 and the national
lockdown.

(iii) The DPF's PDO was fully consistent with the Borrower's priority of laying the foundations for a
stronger MSME financing ecosystem in the recovery phase. This operation intended to support the
government in reviving credit to enable the MSME sector to meet business obligations, protect jobs, and avoid
insolvency. Importantly, it aimed to leverage private intermediaries in the financial sector, so that they can
contribute to the GoI’s approach to complement and diversify a dominantly public sector financial system.

(iv) The DPL was well aligned with the World Bank Group’s (WBG) approach to supporting countries
with speed, and selectivity as they addressed threats posed by the COVID-19 crisis. This DPL was one
part of a comprehensive set of interventions to support MSMEs in India to be delivered by the WB and the
International Finance Corporation (IFC). Building on its extensive analytical and advisory engagement, the WB
brought risk mitigation funding solutions and regulatory reforms, while the IFC contributed with its substantial
MSME portfolio and a network of over 70 financial institutions and decades of successful track record as one
of the biggest MSME financiers in India, both in terms of financial mobilization and impact. As a package,
these interventions aimed to address structural reforms to increase MSME productivity and financing in the
economic recovery phase, crowding in private sector financing in the medium term, and tackling long-standing
financial sector issues that are holding back the growth of India’s real sector.


b. Relevance of Prior Actions

Rationale

The assessment and relevance rating of the Prior Actions draw from the material presented in paragraphs 14-
25 of the ICR.

                                                                                                                  Relevan
 PAs under each PDO
                                                                                                                  Rating
 PDO-1: To support the Government of India (GoI) in preserving flows of finance to MSMEs through
 the COVID-19 crisis.
 PA#1: The Borrower through the Ministry of Finance, Government of India, has notified the Guaranteed
 Emergency Credit Line (GECL) Facility, supported by a 100 percent guarantee scheme, Emergency Credit HS
 Line Guarantee Scheme (ECLGS).


                                                                                                   Page 4 of 23
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    MSME Emergency Response (P174292)



PA#2: The Borrower through the Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises, has taken various steps
to strengthen the already existing Credit Guarantee Scheme (CGS) managed by the Credit Guarantee
Fund Trust for Micro and Small Enterprises (CGTMSE) to incentivize MSME lending: (i) by withdrawing the           HS
cap on utilizing guarantee cover and permitting utilization multiple times within the overall limit of Rs.20
million and (ii) by including fintech NBFCs in the scheme.
PDO-2: To lay the foundations for a stronger MSME financing ecosystem in the recovery phase.
PA#3: The Borrower’s central bank, the Reserve Bank of India, (i) has launched a liquidity window that
utilizes long-term repo operations (TLTROs) to channel liquidity through banks to investment-grade debt
issuances by corporates, and a second liquidity window (TLTRO 2.0) of Rs.500 billion exclusively for
NBFCs, with specific targets for issuances by small and medium NBFCs and (ii) has approved a liquidity            HS
support facility of up to 1 year for NBFCs/Banks/ MFIs for on-lending to MSMEs during the crisis; and (iii)
the Ministry of Finance, Government of India, has launched a Special Liquidity Facility to guarantee the
liabilities (short term investment grade debt securities) of NBFCs/HFCs/MFIs.
PA#4: The Borrower through the Ministry of Finance, Government of India, has approved amendments to
strengthen the already existing Partial Credit Guarantee facility by (i) including new eligible funding
instruments such as bonds and commercial papers issued by NBFCs in the guarantee facility; (ii)                   S
increasing the risk coverage for PSBs to up to 20 percent (for the newly included debt securities); and (iii)
including lower-rated NBFCs in the scheme.
PA#5: The Borrower’s central bank, the Reserve Bank of India, has issued guidelines to operationalize the
RBI Fintech Regulatory Sandbox (RS) including the requisite governance arrangements, eligibility criteria         S
and exit strategies with appropriate risk mitigation actions, through circular issued on August 13, 2019.
PA#6: The Borrower, through the Ministry of Heavy Industries & Public Enterprises, has notified that
Central Public Sector Enterprises (CPSEs) should have their Micro Small Enterprises (MSE) vendors                 S
onboarded on the TReDS platform.
PA#7: The Borrower, through the Ministry of Finance, has launched the PSB Loans in 59 Minutes (PSB59)
platform through the setting up of the PSB59 company to enable the fast processing and quick disbursal of         S
MSME loans by select banks.

PDO-1: To support the Government of India (GoI) in preserving flows of finance to MSMEs through the
COVID-19 crisis.

PA#1: The goal of the PA#1 was to ensure a flow of fresh loan funds to MSMEs and to expand volume, tenors,
and modalities of funding to MSMEs in order for firms to keep their “lights on” and avoid staff layoffs because
the COVID-19 impact. Prior analytical underpinnings for this PA include the following: (i) an Expert Committee
on MSMEs in its report recognized the need for timely credit for MSMEs and the need for a strategy that
accounts for risk related aspects of MSME credit, and (ii) the WB note on impact of COVID-19 on MSMEs also
emphasized the need for de-risking MSME credit and temporarily withdrawing the guarantee fee for MSME
loans.

The key DPL action was to set up temporary liquidity facilities for MSME credit as part of the package of policy
measures through the creation of the Guaranteed Emergency Credit Line (GECL) Facility, supported by a 100
percent guarantee scheme, the Emergency Credit Line Guarantee Scheme (ECLGS). This action was specific
and credible because it was enabled and promoted by the national institutions responsible for financial
oversight and management and aimed to address a real national challenge. Moreover, the measures and
actions under PA#1 were determined based on a large consensus including key stakeholders in the financial
sector. PA#1 had the potential to mitigate the consequences of reduction of flows of finance to MSMES during


                                                                                                   Page 5 of 23
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    MSME Emergency Response (P174292)



the period of the COVID-19 crisis, and to contribute to achieving the PDO#1 outcomes. Its relevance is rated as
Highly Satisfactory.

PA#2: This PA aimed to strengthen the already existing Credit Guarantee Scheme (CGS) managed by the
Credit Guarantee Fund Trust for Micro and Small Enterprises (CGTMSE), to incentivize MSME lending,
address the risk aversion of lenders and allow the government to maximize the impact of limited fiscal
resources by leveraging the guarantee cover to increase MSME credit. Prior analytical work found that
strengthening the CGTMSE scheme can be used to leverage MSME credit with limited fiscal resources, and
that more lenders (especially NBFCs) and removing the one-time cap on the guarantee amount will help
improve usage of the scheme.

The key action by the Borrower was to take various steps to strengthen the already existing Credit Guarantee
Scheme (CGS) managed by the Credit Guarantee Fund Trust for Micro and Small Enterprises (CGTMSE) to
incentivize MSME lending: (i) by withdrawing the cap on utilizing guarantee cover and permitting utilization
multiple times within the overall limit of Rs.20 million and (ii) by including fintech NBFCs in the scheme. These
actions were specific and credible because they were enabled and promoted by the national institutions
(Finance Ministry and Central Bank) responsible for financial oversight and management and aimed to address
a real national challenge. Moreover, the measures and actions under PA#2 were determined based on a large
consensus including key stakeholders in the financial sector. The PA#1 had the potential to mitigate the
consequences of reduction of flows of finance to MSMES during the period of the COVID-19 crisis, and to
contribute to achieving the PDO#1 outcomes, and its relevance is rated as Highly Satisfactory.

PDO-2: To lay the foundations for a stronger MSME financing ecosystem in the recovery phase.

PA#3: This PA aimed to strengthen the Non-Banking Financial Companies (NBFCs), so that the NBFC sector
in India can provide an increasingly important channel of credit for MSMEs, and to preserve this role overtime,
and that the risk aversion of scheduled banks does not continue to hamper funding access to NBFCs as well as
the underlying MSMEs. Prior analytical studies found that Banks need to remain incentivized to channel excess
liquidity to NBFCs which have emerged as important sources of funding for MSMEs. TLTRO 2.0 provides
liquidity to banks to invest in NBFC debt securities, including issuances by small and medium NBFCs. Such a
facility would ensure systemic stability and avoid debt deflation and shock increases in debt interest
rates/reductions in debt security values. In terms of refinancing, second-tier state-owned DFIs play an important
counter-cyclical role in crisis times ensuring flow of credit to commercial lenders and ultimate beneficiaries such
as MSMEs. Finally a FCI note emphasized that a low-cost refinance facility will allow small and medium NBFCs
which cannot access capital markets to avail refinance through SIDBI for up to 1 year.

Actions supported by the DPL initiated by the Reserve Bank of India were as follows: (i) the launch of a liquidity
window that utilizes long-term repo operations (TLTROs) to channel liquidity through banks to investment-grade
debt issuances by corporates, and a second liquidity window (TLTRO 2.0) of Rs.500 billion exclusively for
NBFCs, and (ii) the approval of a liquidity support facility of up to 1 year for NBFCs/Banks/ MFIs for on-lending
to MSMEs during the crisis. Moreover, the Ministry of Finance, launched a Special Liquidity Facility to
guarantee the liabilities (short term investment grade debt securities) of NBFCs/HFCs/MFIs. These
measures were specific and credible because they were enabled by the national institutions (Finance Ministry
and Central Bank) responsible for financial oversight and management and aimed to address a real national
challenge. Moreover, the measures and actions under PA#3 were determined based on a large consensus
including key stakeholders in the financial sector. The PA#3 had the potential to strengthen the MSME




                                                                                                    Page 6 of 23
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    MSME Emergency Response (P174292)



financing ecosystem in the recovery phase and to contribute to achieving the PDO#2 outcomes, and its
relevance is rated as Highly Satisfactory.

PA#4: Prior analytical research found that NBFCs have been facing liquidity issues since the default of a few
large NBFCs in 2018 and 2019 and the government launched the partial credit guarantee scheme (PCG) to
provide liquidity to NBFCs in August 2019. The inefficient structuring of the scheme led to low utilization (35
percent) and the government recognized the need to strengthen the PCG scheme by including NBFC
borrowings under the scheme and withdrawing the rating criteria for the scheme.

This PA aimed to strengthen the already existing Partial Credit Guarantee facility by setting up liquidity
mechanisms to ensure a flow of fresh funds to NBFCs, for the NBFCs to be able to withstand market
headwinds and refinance their liabilities and provide new loans to MSMEs. Toward the above goal, the Ministry
of Finance approved amendments to strengthen the already existing Partial Credit Guarantee facility by (i)
including new eligible funding instruments such as bonds and commercial papers issued by NBFCs in the
guarantee facility; (ii) increasing the risk coverage for Public Sector Banks (PSBs) to up to 20 percent; and (iii)
including lower-rated NBFCs in the scheme. These measures were specific and credible because they were
enabled by the national institutions (Finance Ministry and Central Bank) responsible for financial oversight and
management to address a real national challenge. Moreover, the measures and actions under PA4 were
determined based on a large consensus including key stakeholders in the financial sector. The PA#4 had the
potential to strengthen the MSME financing ecosystem in the recovery phase and to contribute to achieving the
PDO#2 outcomes. However, while this action was relevant, the generation of results will take time. The
PA#4 relevance is rated as Satisfactory.

PA#5: This PA aimed to strengthen the ability of the RBI to safely support fintech innovations by the industry,
beginning with digital payments, and to support the emergence of alternative lending platforms through new
channels for smaller enterprises to gain much needed access to finance. Prior analytical underpinnings found
that the objective of the RS is to foster responsible innovation in financial services, promote efficiency and bring
benefit to consumers. The operationalization of the Regulatory Sandbox can result in collaborative innovation
leading to fintech solutions that could benefit MSMEs.

The key measure supported by the DPL and launched in the context of this PA was for the Reserve Bank of
India to issue guidelines to operationalize the RBI Fintech Regulatory Sandbox (RS) including the requisite
governance arrangements, eligibility criteria and exit strategies with appropriate risk mitigation
actions. This measure was specific and credible because it was enabled by the national institutions (Finance
Ministry and Central Bank) responsible for financial oversight and management and aiming to address a real
national challenge. Moreover, the measures and actions under PA#5 were determined based on a large
consensus including key stakeholders in the financial sector. The PA#5 had the potential to strengthen
the MSME financing ecosystem in the recovery phase and to contribute to achieving the
PDO#2 outcomes. However, while this action was relevant, the generation of results will take
time. PA#7 relevance is rated as Satisfactory.

PA#6: Prior analytical underpinnings include the following: (i) MSMEs account for more than 50 percent of
orders by value on GeM, further emphasizing the need for both Central Public Sector Enterprises (CPSEs) and
MSMEs to register on TReDS. Linking GeM with TReDS will allow seamless discounting of CPSE invoices.
Moreover, resolving the delayed payments issue of the MSMEs will help resolve a lot of working capital issues
for the sector. This PA aimed to address delayed payments from Public Sector Enterprises to MSMEs, and the
key measure supported by the DPL was to ascertain that the Central Public Sector Enterprises (CPSEs) have
their MSE vendors are onboarded on the Trade Receivables Discounting System (TReDS) platform. This action


                                                                                                     Page 7 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MSME Emergency Response (P174292)



 was specific and addressed a critical issue hampering the finances of the MSMEs. The PA#6 had the potential
 to strengthen the MSME financing ecosystem in the recovery phase and to contribute to achieving the
 PDO#2 outcomes. However, the envisioned mechanism to address the delayed payments of MSMEs invoices
 by the CPSEs was unclear, and it will take more work to make it operational, and the P#6 relevance is rated as
 Moderately Satisfactory.

 PA#7: This PA intended to support the integration of an E-government lending platform that accelerates the
 sanctioning of loans to MSMEs to less than one hour. Prior analytical studies found that the platform uses
 algorithms to analyze data points from various sources such as IT returns, GST data, Bank Statements, etc.
 Integrating the platform with CGTMSE and MUDRA would allow MSMEs to get a collateral free loan through an
 online platform. The measure supported by the DPL in the context of this PA#7 was for the Ministry of Finance
 to launch the Public Sector Bank (PSB) Loans in 59 Minutes (PSB59) platform by setting up the PSB59
 company to enable the fast processing and quick disbursal of MSME loans by select
 banks. This measure was specific, innovative and credible because it was enabled by the national institutions
 (Finance Ministry and Central Bank) responsible for financial oversight and management and aimed to address
 a real national challenge. Moreover, the measures and actions under P#4 were determined based on a large
 consensus including key stakeholders in the financial sector. The PA#7 had the potential to strengthen
 the MSME financing ecosystem in the recovery phase and to contribute to achieving the
 PDO#2 outcomes. However, while this action was relevant, the generation of results will take time, and the
 PA#7 relevance is rated as Satisfactory.



Rating

Satisfactory


4. Relevance of Results Indicators

Rationale

The table below is the matrix illustrating the results logic between the PDO, the PAs and the results
framework. The discussion and rating of the relevance of the indicators draws from the material presented
in pages 10-18 and the Annex of the ICR.

The results framework of this DPL was composed of 8 PDO results indicators, five of them aimed to
measure the performance under PDO-1, while six of them were to measure achievements under PDO-2
as detailed in the table below. It is noticeable that some of the RIs do a duplicate job.

                                                                               Actual
                       Associated RI                                           change in
 Results Indicators                         Baseline/ Target                               Achievement
                       Prior      Relevance                     Actual Value   RI relative
 (RI)                                       (Revised) (Revised)                            Rating
                       Action     Rating                                       to targeted
                                                                               change
 PDO-1: To support the Government of India (GoI) in preserving flows of finance to MSMEs through the
 COVID-19 crisis.


                                                                                                 Page 8 of 23
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    MSME Emergency Response (P174292)




RI#1: Number of
                                                     1.5 million
MSMEs reached                                                     11 million
                       PA#1/PA#7 HS                  (June                           More than    High
through incremental                        0 (June               (June 2021)
                                                     2021)                           1,000
credit facilities.                         2020)
                                                                                     percent
                                                                                     More than
                                                                  Rs.2.1 trillion
                                                                                     200 percent
                                                     Rs.1         (disbursed)
RI#2: Volume of                                                                      (disbursed)
                                                     trillion
incremental financing PA#1/PA#7 HS                                                                High
                                           0 (June   (June        Rs. 2.7 trillion
to MSMEs provided.                                                                   More than
                                           2020)     2021)        (sanctioned)
                                                                                     200 percent
                                                                  (June 2021)
                                                                                     (Sanctioned)
                                                                  11 million
                                                                  (ECLGS),
                                                     1 million
RI#3: Number of new                                               619,687
                                   HS                (June                           More than   High
guarantees provided.                       0 (June                (CGTMSE),
                       PA#1/PA#2                     2021)                           1,000
                                           2020)                  Total
                                                                                     percent
                                                                  11,619,687
                                                                  (June 2021)
                                                                  Rs.2.7 trillion
                                                                  (ECLGS),
                                                     Rs.350       Rs.313.50
RI#4: Volume of new
                                                     billions     billion
guarantee covers    PA#1/PA#2 HS                                                                 High
                                           0 (June   (June        (CGTMSE),          About 860
extended
                                           2020)     2021)        Total Rs.3.01      percent
                                                                  trillion (June
                                                                  2021)
RI#8: Awareness
campaign by
NCGTC/SIDBI for
                                           No       Campaign
women entrepreneurs
                                           campaign completed
on the schemes       PA#1       MU                            Not met          Zero percent Modest
                                           (June    (June
under the
                                           2020)    2021)
government’s
economic recovery
program
PDO-2: To lay the foundations for a stronger MSME financing ecosystem in the recovery phase.
RI#5: Volume of                 HS                            Rs.369.51                     High
incremental funding                                           billion
to NBFCs (through    PA#3/PA#4             0 (June Rs.500     (TLTROs),
SIDBI and PSB                              2020)    billion   Rs.277.94
purchases of MSME                                   (June     (PCG 2.0),
loan pools, RBI)                                    2021)     Rs.72.27 billion
                                                              (Special
                                                              Liquidity
                                                              Scheme),         184 percent


                                                                                                 Page 9 of 23
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    MSME Emergency Response (P174292)



                                                                    Rs.198.23
                                                                    billion
                                                                    (Refinance
                                                                    facility), Total
                                                                    Rs.917.95
                                                                    billion (June
                                                                    2021)
RI#6: A study
undertaken to review
lessons learned and                           0 (June    1 (June
                     PA#5         MU                                Fully met
outcomes from                                 2020)      2021)
                                                                                       100 percent Substantial
fintech regulatory
sandboxes.
RI#7: For better
monitoring of CPSEs
usage of TReDS, the
Samadhaan Portal to
be updated to track
                                              0 (June    1 (June
an additional data   PA#6         MU                                Not met            Zero percent Modest
                                              2020)      2021)
point with the
following details:
Number of CPSEs
vendors onboarded
on TReDS.
RI#8: Awareness
campaign by
NCGTC/SIDBI for
                                              No         Campaign
women entrepreneurs
                                              campaign   completed
on the schemes       PA#1         MU                               Not met             Zero percent Modest
                                              (June      (June
under the
                                              2020)      2021)
government’s
economic recovery
program

PDO-1: To support the Government of India (GoI) in preserving flows of finance to MSMEs through
the COVID-19 crisis.

Five indicators were identified to measure the DPL performance and its contribution to the PDO-1. The
assessment and rating of the relevance of the five indicators are discussed below.

      RI#1: The first PDO indicator was the number of MSMEs served through incremental credit
       facilities. The associated PA#1 was the setting up by the Government of India of a Guaranteed
       Emergency Credit Line (GECL) Facility, supported by a 100 percent guarantee scheme,
       Emergency Credit Line Guarantee Scheme (ECLGS). The indicator was an impact indicator to
       measure the contribution of the DPL on the outcome expected from the PDO-1. During a
       pandemic period, followed by a general economic recession, the financial sector is expected to be
       restrictive in approving credit lines, especially to MSMEs with limited collateral. In such an
       economic context, the normal trend is to see a stagnation or a fall in credit to MSMEs. The new

                                                                                                  Page 10 of 23
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
MSME Emergency Response (P174292)



  facility and guarantee scheme gave the financial sector the needed comfort to expand credit to
  MSMEs in period of economic recession. Increase in the number of MSMEs served through
  incremental credit facilities during the COVID period would be a reflection of the effectiveness of
  the PA#1. The indicator was simple, specific, and measurable, and a logic result chain can be
  established between the PA#1, the RI#1 and the PDO-1, and its relevance is rated Highly
  Satisfactory.

 RI#2: The second PDO indicator was the volume of incremental financing provided to
  MSMEs. The associated PA#2 was the initiation by the Government of various steps to
  strengthen the already existing Credit Guarantee Scheme (CGS) managed by the Credit
  Guarantee Fund Trust for Micro and Small Enterprises (CGTMSE) to incentivize MSME lending.
  Similarly, in a context of a pandemic period, followed by a general economic contraction, the
  financial sector is expected to be restrictive in approving credit lines, especially to MSMEs with
  limited collaterals. In such a business environment, the normal trend is a fall or a stagnation in
  credit guarantees to MSMEs. The strengthening of the already existing Credit Guarantee Scheme
  (CGS) managed by the Credit Guarantee Fund Trust for Micro and Small Enterprises (CGTMSE)
  to incentivize MSME lending aimed to give the financial sector more assurance that loans will be
  paid back so that they can expand credit to MSMEs in a period of economic recession.
  Strengthening the CGTMSE scheme was used to leverage MSME credit with limited fiscal
  resources, and removing the one-time cap on the guarantee amount helped improve usage of the
  scheme. Incremental financing provided to MSMEs during the COVID period reflected the
  effectiveness of the PA#2. The indicator was specific and quantitative, and a logic result chain can
  be established between the PA#2, this RI#2 and the PDO-1, and its relevance is rated Highly
  Satisfactory.

 RI#3: The third PDO indicator was the number of new guarantees provided to MSMEs. The
  associated PA#3 consisted in the Reserve Bank of India taking actions to: (i) launch a liquidity
  window that utilizes long-term repo operations (TLTROs) to channel liquidity through banks to
  investment-grade debt issuances by corporates, and a second liquidity window (TLTRO 2.0) of
  Rs.500 billion exclusively for NBFCs, with specific targets for issuances by small and medium
  NBFCs and (ii) approve a liquidity support facility of up to 1 year for NBFCs/Banks/ MFIs for on-
  lending to MSMEs during the crisis; and the Ministry of Finance, to approve a Special Liquidity
  Facility to guarantee the liabilities (short term investment grade debt securities) of Non-Banking
  Financial Companies/ Housing Finance Companies/ Microfinance
  institutions (NBFCs/HFCs/MFIs). In a gloomy economic environment, the normal expectation is to
  observe a fall or a stagnation in credit guarantees to MSMEs. If instead there is an increase in the
  number of new guarantees provided to MSMEs, it can be inferred that actions initiated by the
  Reserve Bank of India and the Ministry of Finance were the cause of the increased number of new
  guarantees provided to MSMEs. The indicator was specific and measurable, and a logic result
  chain can be established between the PA#3, the RI#3 and the PDO-1, and its relevance is rated
  Highly Satisfactory.

 RI#4: The fourth PDO indicator was the volume of new guarantee covers extended. The
  associated PA#4 was for the Government of India to approve amendments to strengthen the
  already existing Partial Credit Guarantee facility by (i) including new eligible funding instruments
  such as bonds and commercial papers issued by NBFCs in the guarantee facility; (ii) increasing
  the risk coverage for PSBs to up to 20 percent; and (iii) including lower-rated NBFCs in the
  scheme. In a business environment marked by a pandemic and economic concession, the

                                                                                               Page 11 of 23
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    MSME Emergency Response (P174292)



       financial sector has no incentive to expand new guarantee coverage. Instead, the financial sector
       will pause the extension of guarantees or may discontinue existing ones. If instead we observe an
       increase in the volume of new guarantee covers in a context of weak economic activity, we can
       conclude that the new guarantee covers are a reflection of the PA#4. The indicator was simple,
       specific and measurable, and a logic result chain can be established between the PA#1, the RI#4
       and the PDO-1, and its relevance is rated Highly Satisfactory.

      RI#8: The eighth indicator was the awareness campaign by National Credit Guarantee
       Trustee Company Ltd/ Small Industries Development Bank of India (NCGTC/SIDBI) for
       women entrepreneurs on the schemes under the government’s economic recovery
       program. This indicator was not associated to a specific PA but was susceptible to signal a
       contribution to the outcome expected both under PDO-1 and PDO-2. However, this indicator was
       rather an activity and was inappropriate to measure the performance of the DPL policies and
       reforms under the PDO-1, and its relevance is rated Moderately Unsatisfactory.

PDO-2: To lay the foundations for a stronger MSME financing ecosystem in the recovery phase.

Six indicators were identified to measure the performance of the DPL, and their contribution to the PDO-2.
It is noticeable that two of the indicators have already been analyzed under PDO-2. The assessment and
rating of the relevance of the five indicators are discussed below.

      The RI#3 and RI#4 discussed under PDO-1 were also identified as potential yardsticks to
       measure the impact of the PA#1 on the progress made toward the PDO-2. As discussed
       under PDO-1, the RI#3 and RI#4 were respectively to measure (i) the number of new guarantees
       provided to MSMEs, and (ii) the volume of new guarantee covers extended. In a context economic
       recession, the financial sector has no incentives to approve new guarantees and expand
       guarantee covers. If this occurs, it reflects the impact of countercyclical measures and actions
       initiated by the Government to boost economic recovery under the PA#3 and PA#4. These
       indicators were therefore credible, and appropriate to measure the performance of the PA#3 and
       PA#4 under the PDO-2 and are rated Highly Satisfactory.
      RI#5: The RI#5 was the volume of incremental funding to NBFCs (through SIDBI and PSB
       purchases of MSME loan pools, RBI). The associated PAs were the PA#3 and PA#4 as
       presented below:
             o The associated PA#3 consisted in the Reserve Bank of India to: (i) launch a liquidity
                window that utilizes long-term repo operations (TLTROs) to channel liquidity through banks
                to investment-grade debt issuances by corporates, and a second liquidity window (TLTRO
                2.0) of Rs.500 billion exclusively for NBFCs, with specific targets for issuances by small
                and medium NBFCs and (ii) approve a liquidity support facility of up to 1 year for
                NBFCs/Banks/ MFIs for on-lending to MSMEs during the crisis; and the Ministry of
                Finance, to approve a Special Liquidity Facility to guarantee the liabilities (short term
                investment grade debt securities) of NBFCs/HFCs/MFIs.
             o The associated PA#4 was for the Government of India to approve amendments to
                strengthen the already existing Partial Credit Guarantee facility by (i) including new eligible
                funding instruments such as bonds and commercial papers issued by NBFCs in the
                guarantee facility; (ii) increasing the risk coverage for PSBs to up to 20 percent; and (iii)
                including lower-rated NBFCs in the scheme.
      As discussed previously, the financial sector had no incentive to expand credit supply in favor of
       MSMEs in a period of economic recession. To the contrary, NBFCs would tend to stabilize or

                                                                                                     Page 12 of 23
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  MSME Emergency Response (P174292)



                    reduce their exposure to the MSMEs which have limited collaterals. If there is an increase in the
                    volume of incremental funding to NBFCs (through SIDBI and PSB purchases of MSME loan pools,
                    RBI) during the period of pandemic crisis, one would conclude that the trend is reflective of the
                    impact of the measures and policies implemented in the context of PA#3 and PA#4. The indicator
                    was specific and quantitative, and a logical result chain can be established between this PA#3 and
                    PA#4, the RI#5 and the PDO-2, and its relevance is rated Highly Satisfactory.

                   RI#6: The sixth PDO indicator was a study undertaken to review lessons learned and
                    outcomes from fintech regulatory sandboxes. The associated PA#5 intended to ensure that
                    the Reserve Bank of India has issued guidelines to operationalize the RBI Fintech Regulatory
                    Sandbox (RS) including the requisite governance arrangements, eligibility criteria and exit
                    strategies with appropriate risk mitigation actions. The goal of the indicator was to prepare a study,
                    but this was not a credible indicator. This was an activity and was not an appropriate indicator to
                    measure good progress toward PDO-2. While the study could come up with lessons and
                    recommendations which are relevant to PDO-2, this indicator was inappropriate, and is rated as
                    Moderately Unsatisfactory.

                   RI#7: The seventh PDO indicator was the number of CPSEs vendors onboarded on
                    TReDS. The associated PA#7 was for the Ministry of Finance to launch the PSB Loans in 59
                    Minutes (PSB59) platform through the setting up of the PSB59 company to enable the fast
                    processing and quick disbursal of MSME loans by select banks. To better monitoring of CPSEs
                    usage of TreDS, the Samadhaan Portal was to be updated to track the number of CPSEs vendors
                    onboarded on TreDS. Timely payments by CPSEs to the vendors (MSMEs) were critical to the
                    financial health of the MSMEs. Having the CPSEs vendors onboarded on TreDS was an activity in
                    the right direction, but it was not a good outcome indicator to measure progress toward the PDO-2,
                    and is rated Moderately Unsatisfactory.

                   RI#8: The eighth indicator was the awareness campaign by NCGTC/SIDBI for women
                    entrepreneurs on the schemes under the government’s economic recovery program. This
                    indicator was not associated to a specific PA but was susceptible to improve the outcome
                    expected both under PDO-1 and PDO-2. This indicator was rather an activity and
                    was inappropriate to measure the performance of the DPL policies and reforms on the PDO-2, and
                    its relevance is rated Moderately Unsatisfactory.



   Rating

   Satisfactory

   5. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               PDO-1: To support the Government of India (GoI) in preserving flows of finance to MSMEs through the
               COVID-19 crisis.


                                                                                                                Page 13 of 23
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   MSME Emergency Response (P174292)




Rationale
Theory of change.

There was no explicit theory of change, neither in the PAD, nor in the ICR. The results chain was implicit
in the Program document and the ICR. It entailed 3 prior actions which were completed ahead of the DPL
approval (PA#1, PA#2 and PA#7). Other policy, measures and actions were expected to be implemented by
the Government and key stakeholders, building on completed PAs. Both the PAs and subsequent actions
and measures were expected to contribute to the outcome achievement. Finally, toward the PDO-1, five
results indicators were identified, which were to measure the DPL performance toward the outcome expected
under the PDO-1. The DPL performance toward the PDO-1 is assessed below against the results indicators
identified at appraisal. The PAs were underpinned by recommendations from studies and theories conducted
ahead of the DPL approval which indicated that these prior actions could expand or sustain MSMEs.

Efficacy

RI#1: The target for the number of MSMEs reached through incremental credit facilities was largely
exceeded, as the GECL scheme channeled credit to over 11 million MSMEs between June 2020-June 2021,
significantly higher than the target of 1.5 million MSMEs. Achievement measured by the RI#1 toward the
PDO-1 outcome is rated as High.

RI#2: The target for the volume of incremental financing to MSMEs provided was exceeded as the GECL
scheme leveraged additional credit to the tune of Rs. 2.7 trillion between June 2020-June 2021 as compared
to the target of Rs.1 trillion. The emergency credit line was successful in preserving credit flow to MSMEs
while also minimizing the risk of deterioration of asset quality. The scheme proved extremely significant in
maintaining credit flows to MSMEs and others, and disbursals under the scheme accounted for around 20
percent of total incremental credit by banks between June 2020 and November 2021. Also, more than 48%
of borrowers who accessed additional credit had utilization rates of 78 percent or higher, indicating that the
sanctioned credit was actually utilized for reopening their businesses.

An analysis on the impact of the GECL scheme found that at least 1.35 million MSMEs accounts were saved
from becoming NPLs due to this scheme, during the first wave and second wave of Covid-19 cases in 2020
and 2021, respectively, as this scheme helped to preserve firms for a much longer period than initially
anticipated. In absolute terms, MSME loan accounts worth Rs 1.8 trillion (including Rs 120 billions of
restructured) have improved during the period. Achievement measured by the RI#2 toward the PDO-1
outcome is rated as High.

RI#3: The target for the number of new guarantees provided was also exceeded, as a total of over 11.61
million guarantees were issued under both the Emergency Credit Line Guarantee Scheme (ECLGS) and
Credit Guarantee Trust Fund for Micro and Small Enterprises (CGTFMSE) guarantee schemes, much higher
than the target of 1 million. The government guaranteed 100% of the additional credit under the emergency
credit line mentioned above, through a state-owned guarantee fund. The number of guarantees under the
permanent MSME guarantee fund (CGTMSE) declined slightly in FY 2020-21 as compared to FY 2019-20 but
complemented the overall MSME funding strategy of the government as part of its Covid-19
response. Achievement measured by the RI#3 toward the PDO-1 outcome is rated as High.

RI#4: The target of the volume of new guarantee coverage was exceeded, as the total guarantee cover
amount under the ELCGS and CGTFMSE guarantee schemes reached Rs.3.01 trillion, as compared to the
target of Rs.350 billion. The scheme was well received by both lenders and borrowers and became more

                                                                                                Page 14 of 23
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   MSME Emergency Response (P174292)



inclusive and cover a wider set of borrowers and leveraged a total of around Rs.3.1 trillion for MSMEs and
other eligible borrowers by February 2022. The government allocated Rs.410 billion as additional capital for
the ECLGS and thus was able to leverage a much higher amount of existing liquidity for MSMEs utilizing
these guarantee schemes. Achievement measured by the RI#3 toward the PDO-1 outcome is rated as
High.

RI#8: The awareness campaign by the National Credit Guarantee Trustee Company Ltd (NCGTC/SIDBI) for
women entrepreneurs on the schemes under the government’s economic recovery program was not
implemented as a separate campaign, as originally planned. However, SIDBI also undertook outreach
activities which target women entrepreneurs, as part of its agenda to improve awareness of the liquidity
facilities available to borrowers. Achievement measured by the RI#8 toward the PDO-1 outcome is rated as
Modest.



Rating

Satisfactory

OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
PDO-2: To lay the foundations for a stronger MSME financing ecosystem in the recovery phase.

Rationale
Theory of change. There was no explicit theory of change, neither in the PAD, nor in the ICR. The results
chain was implicit in the Program document and the ICR. It entailed four prior actions which were completed
ahead of the DPL approval (PA#3, PA#4, PA#5, and PA#7). Other policy, measures and actions were
expected to be implemented by the Government and key stakeholders, building on completed four PAs. Both
the PAs and subsequent actions and measures were expected to contribute to the outcome achievement.
Finally, toward the PDO-2, five results indicators were identified (see Section 4), which were to measure the
DPL performance toward the outcome expected under the PDO-2.

The PAs were underpinned by recommendations from studies and theories elaborated ahead of the DPL
approval which indicated that these prior actions could expand or sustain MSMEs. The DPL performance
toward the PDO-2 is assessed against the PAs and the results indicators identified at appraisal was as
follows:

RI#3&RI#4: As presented under the PDO-1, newly created ECLGS and CGTFMSE guarantee schemes led
to an increased number of new guarantees, as well as a larger guarantee coverage. Achievement as
measured by the RI#3&RI#4 toward the PDO-1 outcome is rated as High.

RI#5: The target for the volume of incremental funding to NBFCs (through SIDBI and PSB purchases of
MSME loan pools, RBI) between June 2020-June 2021 was exceeded, reaching around Rs.917.95 billion,
higher than the target of Rs.500 billon. However, over 82 percent of the funding to NBFCs went to large,
systemically important NBFCs, while only 2 percent of funding from TLTROs was channeled to BBB rated
NBFCs. The extended partial credit guarantee scheme channeled around Rs.277.94 billion, while the special
liquidity scheme for NBFCs led to liquidity of around Rs.72.27 billion for NBFCs. The refinance facilities to
sector specific DFIs channeled around Rs.198.23 billion to NBFCs. While some of the dedicated facilities for

                                                                                                Page 15 of 23
                         Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                         MSME Emergency Response (P174292)



                      NBFCs were only partially utilized, they were nonetheless successful in improving funding to the NBFC
                      sector. Achievement measured by the RI#3&RI#4 toward the PDO-1 outcome is rated as High.

                      RI#6: A study undertaken to review lessons learned and outcomes from fintech regulatory sandboxes was
                      carried out. The study results will be used as inputs for the WBG’s ongoing engagement with the RBI on
                      implementation of the Regulatory Sandbox. The WBG’s engagement with the RBI has supported the
                      implementation of the various cohorts of the Regulatory Sandbox through TA inputs from the WBG on global
                      examples and best practices from other Regulators. Achievement measured by the RI#3&RI#4 toward the
                      PDO-1 outcome is rated as Substantial.

                      RI#7: For an improved monitoring of CPSEs usage of TReDS, the Ministry of MSMEs agreed to update the
                      MSME Samadhaan portal to reflect the status of onboarding of MSME vendors of CPSEs on TReDS
                      platforms. In order to facilitate data compilation, the World Bank team held consultations with the three
                      existing TReDS platforms and agreed on a format for data to be shared with the Ministry of MSME
                      periodically. The format was then shared with the Ministry of MSME, and while the portal has not been
                      updated yet, it is expected that the additional data point will be added to the portal after the Ministry
                      formalizes a data reporting mechanism for the TReDS platforms. Achievement measured by the RI#7 toward
                      the PDO-1 outcome is rated as Modest.

                      RI#8: The awareness campaign by the National Credit Guarantee Trustee Company Ltd (NCGTC/SIDBI) for
                      women entrepreneurs on the schemes under the government’s economic recovery program was not
                      implemented as a separate campaign, as originally planned. However, SIDBI also undertook outreach
                      activities which target women entrepreneurs, as part of its agenda to improve awareness of the liquidity
                      facilities available to borrowers. Achievement measured by the RI#8 toward the PDO-2 outcome is rated as
                      Modest.



                      Rating

                      Satisfactory


OVERALL EFF TBL OLD




Overall Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
Rationale

Toward the PDO-1, the program was satisfactory. Achieved results toward preserving flows of finance to MSMEs
during the COVID-19 period (PDO-1) included (i) a newly created GECL scheme which allowed an increased
number of MSMEs accessing a larger volume of incremental financing, (ii) a newly created ECLGS and
CGTFMSE guarantee schemes which led to an increased number of new guarantees, as well as a larger
guarantee coverage. However, the awareness campaign by NCGTC/SIDBI for women entrepreneurs on the
abovementioned schemes was not implemented as planned. Overall, efficacy toward the PDO-1 was
substantially achieved.

Toward the PDO-2, the program was also satisfactory. Achievements toward a stronger MSME financing
ecosystem (PDO-2) included the following: (i) the ECLGS and CGTFMSE guarantee schemes were created and
led to an increased number of new guarantees, as well as a larger guarantee coverage, (ii) a larger volume of

                                                                                                                   Page 16 of 23
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      MSME Emergency Response (P174292)



incremental funding was channeled to NBFCs (through SIDBI and PSB purchases of MSME loan pools), (iii) the
liquidity facilities supported by the DPL helped in reducing borrowing costs for the NBFC sector, (iv) there was
some progress toward improved monitoring of CPSEs usage of TReDS, and finally, (v) a study undertaken to
review lessons learned and outcomes from fintech regulatory sandboxes was carried out. In all, efficacy toward
the PDO-2 was substantially achieved.

Based on the above achievements, overall DPL efficacy is rated Satisfactory.



Overall Efficacy Rating
Satisfactory


6. Outcome

Rationale

Overall, the relevance of PAs, the relevance of the RIs, and the program efficacy were satisfactory, resulting in
a Satisfactory rating of the DPL outcome. Most prior actions were appropriate, all of them being rated between
High satisfactory and Satisfactory. PAs and program measures and actions toward the PDO were overall
effective and contributed to a satisfactory achievement of the PDO as summarized below.

Toward supporting the Government of India (GoI) in preserving flows of finance to MSMEs through the COVID-
19 crisis, a newly created GECL scheme and two newly created ECLGS and CGTFMSE guarantee
schemes led to an increased number of new guarantees, as well as a larger guarantee coverage. However, the
awareness campaign by NCGTC/SIDBI for women entrepreneurs on the abovementioned schemes was not
implemented as planned.

Toward laying the foundations for a stronger MSME financing ecosystem in the recovery phase, there was also
a good progress. Beyond the above-described ECLGS and CGTFMSE guarantee schemes which expanded
the guarantee coverage, and a larger volume of incremental funding, the liquidity facilities supported by the
DPL helped in reducing borrowing costs for the NBFC sector. However, progress was limited
toward improved monitoring of CPSEs usage of TReDS, and the use of lessons learned and outcomes from
fintech regulatory sandboxes.


a. Rating

Satisfactory

7. Risk to Development Outcome

While the DPL supported the MSMEs sector during the COVID-19 pandemic period, other risks might
develop afterwards (ICR, pages 21-22) which will have to be addressed by the Government supported by
external partners including the World Bank, and this review concurs with that conclusion.



                                                                                                    Page 17 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MSME Emergency Response (P174292)



The DPL was instrumental in cushioning the NPLs risks and in boosting funding to MSMEs. When the
COVID-19 hit, the RBI’s stress tests indicated that overall NPLs could rise from 6.9 percent in September
2021 to 9.5 percent in September 2022, and estimates indicated that non-performing loans (NPLs) in some
sectors could rise more sharply in the next two years. These risks were mitigated by strengthening and better
targeting of existing emergency schemes, as well as launching of dedicated schemes for underserved
borrowers, to support MSMEs impacted by successive waves of Covid-19 cases.

The government’s dependence on guarantees to leverage MSMEs funding has increased its
contingent liabilities risk. A large part of the government’s Covid-19 emergency response for MSMEs and
NBFCs was based on guarantee schemes for additional lending to these sectors. While these guarantee
schemes lowered the upfront fiscal costs and leveraged market funding, they also led to a large increase in
contingent liabilities for the government and state-owned guarantee funds. This could lead to additional
demands for fiscal resources to recapitalize these guarantee funds. These risks are mitigated through more
precise targeting of the latest expansions of credit guarantee schemes, as well as recapitalization and
strengthening of the permanent credit guarantee scheme for MSME.

 An increase in borrowing costs might reduce access to capital market funding for NBFCs after the
withdrawal of liquidity measures by RBI. The increase in capital market funding for NBFCs and others in
FY 2020-21 was incentivized mainly by low-cost liquidity facilities including TLTROs by RBI for banks, who in
turn invested funds from these facilities in investment grade securities issued by NBFCs and others. As a
result of these facilities, the borrowing costs declined from 7.57 percent in March 2020 to 5.93 percent in
August 202128. An increase in borrowing costs along with an expected deterioration in asset quality could
lead to NBFCs being unable to increase credit growth in the recovery phase.

The DPL paved the way for sustained support to MSMEs by the Bank. New instruments to address the
potential risks arising from this operation have to be in place, and the World Bank has been supporting the
GOI in this area with further DPLs and technical assistance. While this program was a single tranche
operation, the outcomes have provided a solid foundation for sustained engagement with the MSME sector
in the recovery phase. The Bank is already engaged in a US$ 500 million P4R operation on improving
MSME productivity.


8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Bank Performance – Design

Rationale


The Bank performance in designing this operation was discussed in the ICR (paragraphs 58-61) and key
takeaways are summarized below.

The design of the program was based on extensive Bank analytical work. Following its sustained
engagement with the government, the WBG was agile in supporting the government’s request for its
Covid-19 emergency response for MSMEs. The design of the program was based on extensive analytical
work, which had already identified the issues of asset quality deterioration and low credit growth for
MSMEs, as well as liquidity and other challenges for non-bank lenders. The World Bank relied on its strong


                                                                                                  Page 18 of 23
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      MSME Emergency Response (P174292)



partnerships and engagement within the MSME ecosystem to design a rapidly disbursing DPL as an
instrument that addressed the immediate liquidity needs of MSMEs and NBFCs.

The Bank team fully identified potential risks and mitigation measures. The operation faced
significant macroeconomic and fiscal risks due to the unprecedented nature of the COVID-19 pandemic
and the consequent downturn in economic activity, and to extremely high uncertainty about the outcomes
of the crisis and the shape of the economic recovery. There were also technical risks related to the design
of the emergency facilities that could have limited their effectiveness. In order to address these concerns,
the team limited support to facilities that had defined sunset clauses, as well as clear linkages to the
PDO. The program did not support the initiatives for which effectiveness and linkages to short- and
medium-term recovery of the MSME sector were unclear, while supporting facilities with clearly identified
beneficiaries and exposure limits to mitigate partially the technical risks of the program.

The operation team designed the program as a WBG team with the support of external partners.
The Bank team collaborated effectively with IFC in designing an effective intervention for the MSME sector
through this program. The policy areas and results framework were informed by collaboration with IFC on
joint TA programs and knowledge partnerships. The program was also designed as part of a broader
medium-term package of interventions supported by planned IFC investments in the MSME sector. The
team also held consultations with other development partners to coordinate emergency response
measures for the sector, including discussions with the Asian Development Bank (ADB) on strengthening
the CGTMSE scheme to provide guarantees for MSME lending as a complement to the WBG's
interventions.



Rating

Satisfactory

b. Bank Performance – Implementation

Rationale

The ICR assessment of Bank supervision of the DPL was insufficient, but upon request, the operation team
provided additional material which is summarized below.

The Bank team conducted in-depth monitoring of the implementation of the program. The Bank team
organized a series of virtual consultations in October and November 2020 given the Covid-19 situation at the
time, to review the effectiveness of the various emergency liquidity facilities and other programs supported by
the DPL. The team also discussed any potential stability concerns in the financial sector, due to the increase in
credit to a large number of firms stressed by Covid-19, but these concerns were mitigated to a large extent by
the design of these facilities. Consultations were also held with implementing agencies and industry
associations in order to be better informed about any constraints facing project beneficiaries (MSMEs and
NBFCs). In particular, the team discussed the performance of the liquidity schemes for NBFCs, which were
seen by industry associations as excluding lower rated NBFCs which needed funding the most.

The Bank team worked together with IFC staff to monitor the impact of the DPL various facilities on
key beneficiaries. The Bank team utilized the results of the IFC Business Pulse Survey on the impact of Covid-

                                                                                                    Page 19 of 23
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      MSME Emergency Response (P174292)



19 on MSMEs, which was answered by around 1000 MSMEs and had several questions on the challenges
around access to finance and liquidity. The survey revealed that some of the most accessed relief measures
were the access to additional credit, and the loans at subsidized rates and loan moratorium, which were
supported by the DPL. At the same time, there was a lack of awareness of these facilities among micro firms,
as compared to small and medium firms, which the team highlighted in consultations with implementing
agencies such as SIDBI. The concerns highlighted by the team informed the further strengthening of the
emergency liquidity facility in the following federal budget in February 2021, and the team continued to monitor
the impact of the modified schemes throughout the implementation of the DPL.

The Bank team continued to engage the RBI on its Fintech regulatory sandbox initiative and
other Credit Guarantee Schemes supported by the DPL. The WBG continued to provide TA to the RBI as
the initial cohorts of the Regulatory Sandbox were being prepared for implementation and engaged with
relevant stakeholders on the CGTMSE and TReDS related PA, where the team emphasized the need for
effective and innovative reforms to the respective frameworks. The team’s focus on these structural
reforms helped in ensuring that MSMEs could transition to benefitting from sustainable support from these long-
term facilities, as the emergency measures were gradually withdrawn.

Overall, the Bank performance in supervising the DPL implementation is rated as satisfactory, despite the travel
challenges which constrained the Bank team to relying on resident staff and virtual interaction with the Borrower
representatives.



Rating

Satisfactory

c. Overall Bank Performance

Rationale

At appraisal, the program design was underpinned by extensive Bank analytical work, collaboration with key
stakeholders as well as mitigation measures to address potential risks. During implementation, supervision
and oversight were done through virtual sessions which allowed the Bank team to stay in contact with key
stakeholders on the ground. The ICR did not raise any significant incident at appraisal and during
implemnation, and the Overall Bank performance is rated as Satisfactory.


Overall Bank Performance Rating

Satisfactory

9. Other Impacts

a. Social and Poverty



                                                                                                   Page 20 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MSME Emergency Response (P174292)



This DPL focus was on micro, small and medium enterprises (MSMEs), and not directly to the poor categories of
the society. However, the COVID-19 pandemic had a significant impact of the MSMEs, and some of its
workers and beneficiaries run the risk of falling into poverty with the lockdown that hit the Indian economy during
the period 2019-2022. The DPL support to ensuring continuous financing to the MSMEs indirectly kept some
households members employed, alleviating the risk of increase in poverty and social unrest. Firms that received
credit as a result of an emergency credit guarantee scheme during the Government’s first Emergency Response
were less likely to lay off employees or cut their wages.



b. Environmental

The ICR did not discuss environmental issues as no environmental safeguards policies were triggered. The policy
and institutional reforms under the DPL had no significant positive or negative environmental effects. The DPL
reforms and actions were directed towards channeling financing to the MSMEs either through the NBFCs or banks
and improving fintech solutions that will enable efficiencies in loan processing and in availing/receiving funds.



c. Gender

The ICR discussed gender issues on page 19, and below is the summary of the main takeaways.

Women entrepreneurs owned around 10 percent of MSMEs, and past studies suggest that the lack of access to
credit finance was one of the biggest constraints for women-owned MSMEs in India. The general improvement in
credit availability through the DPF operation was expected to positively contribute to addressing women
entrepreneurship issues. Increased availability of credit for the MSMEs within the overall program aimed
to complement other GoI initiatives to address the issue.

Moreover, past studies showed that women entrepreneurs had limited understanding and confidence towards
accessing the schemes promoted by the DPL. The NCGTC/SIDBI intended to conduct awareness and knowledge
programs on new schemes and initiatives. Finally, the DPL had measures aimed at de-risking lending by banks
and NBFCs, while leveraging fintech/DFS to incentivize payments and faster lending processes will be also critical
in bringing women entrepreneurs under the coverage of formal financing channels. Finally, a gender analysis that
will be conducted as part of the PSIA study aimed to help study gender issues in the MSME sector and
formulate recommendations to effectively operationalize the necessary prior actions.



d. Other

The liquidity facilities also helped in reducing borrowing costs for the NBFC sector. An increase in yields
for NBFC issuances in April-June 2020 led to a sharp decline in issuance of bonds and commercial paper (CPs)
by NBFCs. The volume of CPs issued by NBFCs in April-June 2020 was three time lower than the volume in
April-June 2019. The liquidity facilities by the government and RBI helped reduce the short- and medium-term
funding costs for NBFCs. The average yields for CPs issued by NBFCs declined from 6.50 percent in April 2020
to 3.98 percent in August 2020.


                                                                                                    Page 21 of 23
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      MSME Emergency Response (P174292)




10. Quality of ICR

Rationale

The ICR is comprehensive, well written, and consistent with the Bank guidelines. It provides a detailed
narrative of the program context and the achieved results and is generally evidence-based and internally
consistent. The results orientation and quality of analysis were supported by the latest data, tables and annexes
that cover key areas of the program interventions. The ICR had minor analytical weaknesses as follows: (i)
there was room for streamlining the articulation among the PDO/PAs and the results framework, (ii) the ICR
used indistinctly the pillars and the PDO, especially under the efficacy section. In principle, the efficacy section
analysis should have focused on the achievement of the specific program development objectives, and
(iii) the coverage of the program supervision was insufficient, but additional material was provided by the Bank
team upon request. Overall, the quality of ICR is rated Substantial.




a. Rating

Substantial

11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                    IEG
                                                                                  Disagreement/Comments
Outcome                          Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Bank Performance                 Satisfactory          Satisfactory
Relevance of Results
                                 ---                   Satisfactory
Indicators
Quality of ICR                   ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR identified a number of lessons learned (pages 23-24), but this review has endorsed two of them which
are summarized and paraphrased below:




                                                                                                     Page 22 of 23
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      MSME Emergency Response (P174292)



DPL addressing emergency situations need to exert caution and ensure that actions, measures and
reforms adopted do not create potential distortions to credit and risk management. The government and
the RBI implemented a series of emergency credit and liquidity facilities on a significant scale to address the
needs of the MSME and NBFC sector. These facilities avoided potential distortions to credit allocation by having
clearly defined eligibility criteria that served only those firms which were stressed due to Covid-19 but were
otherwise viable. All the liquidity facilities had clearly defined sunset clauses which were adhered to during
implementation. The guarantees by the government and state-owned guarantee funds were also funded
separately with no funding from the permanent guarantee facility for MSMEs, and the temporary guarantee
schemes will expire as funds under emergency facilities are repaid.

Emergency government schemes have to be designed carefully to ensure equity among
potential beneficiaries. in the context of this operation, the emergency credit line used its eligibility criteria of
funding existing borrowers who were not in default to prevent the proliferation of “zombie” firms. But at the same
time, there was no support for MSMEs which did not already have borrowings from the formal financial sector.
These firms typically have low levels of formality and were severely affected by the impact of Covid-19. Lending
to firms which had no prior linkages with the banking sector dropped sharply during April-June 2020, and the
emergency response by the government did not address this issue. Similarly, for the NBFC sector, most of the
liquidity from the government’s emergency measures was channeled to a small number of highly rated NBFCs
which already had access to funding from capital markets, while hundreds of smaller NBFCs which could not
access capital markets were ineligible for support from the government’s liquidity facilities due to rating
requirements and other issues.




13. Project Performance Assessment Report (PPAR) Recommended?

No




                                                                                                      Page 23 of 23
