     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Madagascar Covid-19 Response DPO (P174388)



                                                                                Report Number: ICRR0023324

1. Operation Information



 Operation ID                              Operation Name
 P174388                                   Madagascar Covid-19 Response DPO

 Country                                   Practice Area (Lead)
 Madagascar                                Urban, Resilience and Land



 Non-Programmatic DPF

 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)                  Total Financing (USD)
 IDA-67690                                 31-Mar-2021                                          78,016,302.00

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 27-Aug-2020                               30-Jun-2021

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                              Co-financing (USD)

 Original Commitment                          75,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                           75,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Actual                                       78,016,302.00                                               0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Ranga Rajan                Chikako Miwa                 Kavita Mathur                  IEGSD
 Krishnamani



2. Program Objectives and Pillars/Policy Areas
DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives

The development objective of this Development Policy Financing (DPF) operation as stated in the Program
Document (PD, page 3) is "to assist the Government of Madagascar in its response to the COVID-19




                                                                                                 Page 1 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Madagascar Covid-19 Response DPO (P174388)



crisis: (i) by mitigating the impact on lives and livelihoods, and (ii) supporting the sustainable
recovery of the country".

For the purpose of this Implementation Completion Report Review (ICRR), the objectives of this operation are
taken to be:

PDO 1. To assist the Government in its response to the COVID-19 crisis by mitigating the impact on lives.

PDO 2. To assist the Government in its response to the COVID - 19 crisis by mitigating the impact on
livelihoods. PDO 3. To assist the Government in its response to the COVID - 19 crisis by supporting the
sustainable recovery of the country.


b. Pillars/Policy Areas
There were three pillars/policy areas (PD, para 43).

Pillar # 1. Saving lives and protecting vulnerable populations.

Pillar # 2. Ensuring sustainable business growth and job creation.

Pillar # 3. Strengthening policies and institutions for rebuilding stronger.


c. Comments on Program Cost, Financing and Dates

Financing. This operation was financed by an IDA Credit of US$75.0 million. The amount disbursed was
US$78.01 million. Neither the ICR nor the team provided the reasons for the discrepancy between the amount
approved and the amount disbursed.

Dates and other factors during implementation. The operation was approved on August 27, 2020, only
became effective on June 15, 2021, and was scheduled to close on March 31, 2021. The operation became
effective after the originally scheduled closing date. The delay between approval and effectiveness was due to a
combination of factors including: (i) delay in the ratification of the financing agreement by parliament; and (ii)
reversal of policy reform pertaining to optimizing electricity tariffs (Prior Action # 6) (discussed below). The
closing date was extended by three months as the government eventually reinstated the new electricity tariff
reform in June 1, 2021. The operation closed three months behind schedule on June 30, 2021.

During implementation, Madagascar faced an additional wave of COVID - 19 pandemic (March - August 2021).
The state of emergency that was lifted in October 2020 was reinstated in April 2021 until September 2021. The
shock associated with the pandemic triggered a recession. The pandemic shock was compounded by an
unprecedented drought in the South during implementation, the worst in 40 years, after a poor 2020/2021
agriculture season, which exacerbated the poverty and vulnerability in the country.


3. Relevance of Design

a. Relevance of Objectives

                                                                                                      Page 2 of 17
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Madagascar Covid-19 Response DPO (P174388)




Country context. Madagascar's growth trajectory (3.5% average growth between 2013 - 2019) was quickly
reversed by the unprecedented COVID - 19 pandemic. Global trade and travel restrictions and domestic
containment measures triggered a recession. An estimated 2.4 million people fell below the poverty line in
2020, bringing the poverty ratio to an all-time high of 80.7%. The Bank prepared this operation as a swift
response to enable the Government to meet a sudden financing gap and help deliver timely response to the
COVID - 19 pandemic.

Government strategy. The Government's initial response to the pandemic was swift with separate health,
social and private sector mitigation measures. These measures were consolidated into a Multi Sectoral
Emergency Plan (PMDU) that was approved on July 1, 2020 and adopted by the Ministry of Economy and
Finance on July 2, 2020. The plan focused on controlling the viruses' spread, supporting vulnerable
populations, and facilitating recovery.

Bank strategy. The PDOs were well-aligned with all four pillars of the Bank's COVID - 19 Crisis Response
Approach Paper (June 2020): (i) saving lives; (ii) protecting the poor; (iii) ensuring business growth and jobs;
and (iv) strengthening institutions for rebuilding better. The policy reforms of this operation directly supported
four of the eight objectives of the Bank's Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for Madagascar for 2017 -
2021: (i) enhancing resiliency of vulnerable households; (ii) enhancing transparency and accountability; (iv)
improving business environment and access to finance; and (v) improving access to energy.

Bank experience. The Bank has financed several operations in Madagascar. For example, Investing in
Human Capital DPF supported reforms aimed to increase resources for frontline health services. The Fiscal
Sustainability and Energy DPF supported fiscal space reforms. The ongoing Madagascar Integrated Growth
Poles and Corridor Project was restructured to scale-up immediate support to the private sector during the
pandemic. When this operation was under preparation, the Bank had a Disaster Risk Management
Development with a Catastrophe Deferred Drawdown Option (2019) and several complementary investment
lending operations such as the Social Safety Net Project, Public Sector Performance Project, Madagascar
Financial Inclusion Project and the Least-Cost Electricity Access Project. The Bank assessed Madagascar's
macroeconomic policy to be sound prior to the crisis. When this operation was being prepared, Madagascar
had budget support from the International Monetary Fund's (IMF) Rapid Credit Facility.

This operation supported policy actions to respond to the immediate challenge posed by the COVID - 19
pandemic and setting the fundamentals for sustainable economic growth in the medium-term. The priors
actions of this operation were consistent with the Government's PMDU and the Bank's COVID - 19 Crisis
Response Approach Paper, and based on solid analytical underpinnings (discussed below).


b. Relevance of Prior Actions

Rationale

Pillar # 1. Saving lives and protecting vulnerable populations. This pillar supported measures aimed to
reinforce the government's response to save lives and protect vulnerable populations in the wake of the COVID
- 19 pandemic. There were three prior actions (PAs) in this pillar.

PA # 1. The Ministry of Economy and Finance (MEF) adopted the Multi Sectoral Emergency Plan (PMDU) on
July 2, 2020, as the guiding instrument to improve the Government's response to COVID - 19 through: (i)

                                                                                                      Page 3 of 17
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Madagascar Covid-19 Response DPO (P174388)



establishing a governance structure at the central and decentralized levels; and (ii) articulating a strategy to
scale up social protection policies.

The Government's initial response to the pandemic although swift, was fragmented, with separate health, social
and private sector mitigation measures. The response lacked coordination in terms of prioritization, financing
and monitoring. Both the Government and other development partners regarded a single consolidated PMDU
as a priority for streamlining, coordinating and deepening the government's response to the COVID- 19
pandemic.

Adopting the PMDU was a crucial step for coordinating the emergency response activities. The PMDU would
help in establishing operational centers in affected regions, increasing the testing capacity of accredited
laboratories and increasing the number of beneficiaries of cash transfer programs. The analytical underpinnings
of this prior action were sound and based on (i) World Health Organization (2020), "Critical preparedness,
readiness and response actions for COVID - 19; (ii) World Bank (2020). The Economic Policy Response to the
COVID-19 pandemic"; and (iii) Stefan Dercon (2020). " No regret policies for the COVID - 19 crisis for
developing countries". The relevance of this prior action is rated as Satisfactory.

PA # 2. The MEF established a dedicated COVID - 19 fund to improve the transparency and traceability of
emergency spending on July 2, 2020.

Evidence from previous pandemics showed that emergency situations can exacerbate financial management
challenges. Improving the transparency and traceability of COVID-19 related public spending was a key priority
of all stakeholders (including the IMF). To address these challenges, the Government adopted a decree
establishing a dedicated COVID - 19 Emergency Fund to channel budget allocations, grants and contributions
towards financing the PMDU. The Fund was to focus on transparency measures such as publishing a financial
report on how the COVID - 19 funds were utilized on the MEF website.

The analytical underpinning of this prior action came from the World Bank (2000) Madagascar Public Sector
Administration Project. This measure by tracking emergency spending, would help in increasing the
transparency and accountability of the Government's COVID - 10 response. This prior action is rated as
Satisfactory.

PA # 3. The Commission for the Supervision of Banking and Finance (CSBF) adopted for a period of six
months, exceptional simplified due diligence measures for opening individual electronic money accounts for
facilitating cash transfers for vulnerable populations on May 19, 2020.

The confinement measures implemented during the COVID - 19 pandemic highlighted the importance of e-
money accounts. About 25% of Madagascar's population lacked formal identifications required for opening e-
money accounts. As part of the response to the pandemic, the Government adopted exceptional simplified due
diligence measures for ensuring that vulnerable populations could open accounts and thereby have easy
access to government grants and other financial services.

The analytical underpinnings of this prior action came from the Financial Action Task Force (FATF), 2013 -
2017, Anti-Money Laundering and terrorist financing measures and financial inclusion, with a supplement on
customer due diligence. This prior action would enable the vulnerable segments of the population to receive
emergency cash transfers and help in mitigating the social impact of the crisis. This prior action is rated as
Satisfactory.



                                                                                                      Page 4 of 17
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Madagascar Covid-19 Response DPO (P174388)



Pillar # 2. Ensuring sustainable business growth and job creation. This pillar supported measures aimed at
preserving jobs and alleviating the financial pressures of viable companies. There were two PAs in this pillar.

PA # 4. The MEF adopted a consolidated strategy to safeguard jobs and alleviate the financing pressures of
viable companies through: (i) scaling up interventions to reinforce human capital; and (ii) enhancing access to
finance from domestic and international markets.

Within three months of the pandemic, total employment (especially of informal jobs) had contracted in large
urban areas of Madagascar affected by the lockdown. Private sector actors, particularly micro, small and
medium enterprises (MSMEs) experienced cash flow problems. This prior action supported measures to
support private sector activity and protect jobs through: (i) supporting a training program (such as on the COVID
-19 protocols) for workers affected by the crisis; and (ii) establishing concessional credit lines to allow banks
and microfinance institutions to lend to MSMEs at subsidized rates.

This prior action was based on solid analytical underpinnings such as: (i) World Bank (2020). "The Great
Leveraged Support: Public Credit Guarantee Schemes in the time of COVID - 19"; (ii) World Bank (2020). "
Supporting Firm Resilience "; (iii) World Bank (2020). "Assessing the impact and policy responses in support of
private-sector firms in the context of the COVID - 19 pandemic"; and (iv) World Bank (2020). " COVID - 19
Outbreak: Private Sector Development Implications: Overview of Trade, Investment and Competitiveness Team
Notes". This prior action would likely help the workers affected by the crisis preserve their jobs and improve the
access to finance of MSMEs. The prior action was appropriate and therefore this prior action is rated as
Satisfactory.

PA # 5. The Central Bank of Madagascar (CBM) implemented targeted measures to allow financial institutions
to extend debt repayment schedules and provide an additional credit line to reduce immediate financing
pressures of otherwise viable MSMEs on April 1, 2020.

Reducing immediate cash flow pressures for viable companies and improving access to finance was likely to
help the private sector cope with the current crisis. This prior action sought to achieve the intended outcomes
by allowing companies to reschedule debt payments to banks and microcredit institutions, and to facilitate the
supply of credit to viable companies through exceptional liquidity interventions by the CBM.

The analytical underpinnings of this prior action were sound and based on: (i) IMF (March 2020) " Policy
Response to COVID - 19: Policy Trackers; (ii) International Capital Markets Association (2020). "COVID - 19,
Market Update - Monetary Policy"; and (iii) World Bank (2020) "COVID - 19 Pandemic Policy Response Related
to the Financial Sector": This prior action would help in limiting the risk of a liquidity crunch and insolvency of
otherwise viable firms. This prior action is rated as Satisfactory.

Pillar # 3. Strengthening policies and institutions for rebuilding stronger. While the prior actions
described above were aimed at the immediate need of saving lives and livelihood, this pillar aimed to support
recovery measures for laying the foundations for sustained macroeconomic stability and fiscal strength. There
were two PAs.

PA # 6. The Board of Directors of the National Electricity Company (JIRAMA) adopted a new connection policy
on July 14, 2020, for providing affordable grid access to vulnerable populations in urban and peri-urban areas
and the Malagasy power sector regulator approved a new tariff structure to improve efficiency of electricity
pricing.



                                                                                                    Page 5 of 17
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Madagascar Covid-19 Response DPO (P174388)



Residential customers in Madagascar spend about four times the average monthly household income to get
access to the grid, which was among the highest connection charge in all of Sub-Saharan Africa. Also,
JIRAMA's residential tariffs were also at the very top of its African peers. Given the significant social impact of
the COVID - 19 pandemic coupled with the substantial weight of up-front connection charges and monthly
electricity expenses, additional connections and decreasing electricity tariffs were a priority for sustained
recovery. The analytical underpinning for this prior action came from: Macroeconomic Consulting (May
2020). "Politique de Raccordement and Politique Tarifaire pour la JIRAMA".

This prior action would help in giving access to customers who either had no access to the grid or purchased
electricity through costly, illegal and often unsafe connections. The new tariff structure would help the poor
households benefit from tariff reductions. The new connection policy was a critical step towards equitable
access to electricity. However, this prior action's link to the PDO of mitigating the effects of COVID - 19
pandemic was at best, indirect. Therefore, this prior action is rated as moderately unsatisfactory.

PA # 7. The MEF specified the content of the bulletin on reporting public debt statistics on July 7, 2020, to
include: (i) debts of public sector entities (including the majority-owned State-Owned Enterprises (SOEs); (ii) the
financial condition associated with each new external loan contracted by them; and (iii) the list of contingent
liabilities related to on-lending and public guarantees.

Debt transparency was critical to the Government's access concessional external financing to respond to the
COVID - 19 pandemic. Before this prior action, only the central government was required to publish its public
debt figures. Debt transparency was hampered due to the lack of information on the debts of major SOEs and
delays in publishing the debt statistics bulletin.

The analytical underpinnings of this prior action were sound and based on (i) World Bank and IMF (2020). "Joint
Bank - Fund Note on Public Sector Debt Definition and Reporting in Low-Income Developing Countries", and
World Bank (2019)." Promoting Debt Transparency: Because the Sustainable Development Goals Depend on
it". By improving debt transparency, this prior action would likely help in laying the foundations for sustained
macroeconomic stability and fiscal strength. Therefore, this prior action is rated as Satisfactory.

The PDOs were highly relevant to the Government's PMDU and the Bank's COVID - 19 Crisis Response
Approach Paper. The prior actions of this operation were based on solid analytical underpinnings.

The causal links between most of the prior actions under the pillars, the intended program results and
the long-term outcomes were clear, direct and logical. The prior actions under the first pillar (PAs 1 to 3) of
adopting the PMDU, setting a dedicated COVID- 19 Fund for improving traceability of the emergency response
and facilitating the vulnerable segments of the population to open bank accounts for receiving cash transfers,
were directly related to the PDO of mitigating the impact of the COVID - 19 pandemic on lives. The prior actions
under the second pillar (PAs 4 and 5), vocational training for workers impacted by the crisis and improving the
access of finance of MSMEs, were directly relevant to the PDO of mitigating the impact on livelihoods. The prior
actions under the third pillar (PAs 7) of improving the transparency of public debt figures were directly relevant
to the PDO of sustainable recovery of the country. Of the seven PAs, with the exception of PA # 6 (providing
electricity connections to new customers), the other PAs were directly relevant to the PDO. Hence, the overall
relevance of the prior actions and relevance of design is rated as Satisfactory.



Rating


                                                                                                      Page 6 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Madagascar Covid-19 Response DPO (P174388)



Satisfactory


4. Relevance of Results Indicators

Rationale

Pillar # 1. Saving lives and protecting vulnerable populations. The three prior actions in this pillar
supported the Government's response to the COVID - 19 crisis in mitigating the impact of lives. There
were five results indicators.

RI # 1. The number of Regional command and Control Operational Centers established in Madagascar to
address the adverse impact of COVID - 19 pandemic following the adoption of PMDU.

RI # 2. Increase in the testing capacities of accredited laboratories.

RI # 3. The number of beneficiaries of the cash transfer programs.

RI # 4. The number of financial statements published within 15 days from the end of the reporting month
for the duration of the dedicated COVID - 19 fund regarding how funds for COVID-19 were utilized. The
data report was to be cumulative and updated starting in November 2020 until December 2021 on an
online platform published on the website of the Ministry of Finance. It was however difficult to ascertain
the frequency of publication, as the Fund only became operational in April 2021, and only a small share of
the COVID - 19 pandemic expenditures were executed through the COVID - 19 fund.

RI # 5. Increase in the number of e-money account openings.

The indicators mentioned above measured progress towards the PDO of supporting the Government's
response to the COVID - 19 crisis in mitigating the impact on lives. RIs # 1, 2, 3 and 5 were appropriate
for measuring the development outcomes and are rated as Satisfactory. However, the definition and
calculation of the RI # 4 were not appropriate and there was no credible data for measuring progress.
Therefore, this indicator is rated as moderately Unsatisfactory.

Pillar # 2. Ensuring sustainable business growth and job creation. The two prior actions in this pillar
aimed to support the Government's response to the COVID - 19 crisis by mitigating the impact on
livelihoods. There were three results indicators.

RI # 6. The number of workers benefitting from training disaggregated by gender.

RI # 7. The number of MSMEs benefitting from subsidized loan programs.

RI # 8. The loan amounts that were rescheduled and deducted from bank reserve requirements.

The indicators mentioned above measured progress towards the PDO of supporting the Government's
response to the COVID - 19 crisis in mitigating the impact of livelihoods were appropriate for measuring
the development outcome and were verifiable. However, the targets of two of the indicators (RI # 6 and RI




                                                                                                       Page 7 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Madagascar Covid-19 Response DPO (P174388)



# 7) were ambitious relative to the operation's timeline. Therefore, these indicators are rated as
moderately satisfactory.

Pillar # 3. Strengthening policies and institutions for rebuilding stronger. The two prior actions in
this pillar aimed to support the Government's in its response to the COVID - 19 crisis by supporting the
sustainable recovery of the country. There were two results indicators.

RI # 9. The number of new customers having access to the grid.

RI # 10. Increase in the coverage of debt statistics in the Debt statistics bulletin.

RIs # 9 and 10 measured progress towards the PDO of supporting the Government's response to the
COVID - 19 pandemic by supporting the sustainable recovery of the country. Therefore, these indicators
are rated as satisfactory. However, there were no relevant indicator for monitoring assessment of
reducing tariffs of low-income households.

The indicators were for the most part directly attributable to the prior actions and appropriate for assessing
the project's outcomes. Of the ten indicators, one was rated as moderately unsatisfactory and three were
rated as moderately satisfactory. There was no relevant indicator for monitoring assessment of reducing
tariffs of low- income customers. Therefore, the overall relevance of results indicators is rated as
moderately satisfactory.

Table: Results framework indicating prior actions, targets, results and the status of achievement
of results

                                                                                    Actual
                                             Baseline    Target                  change in
                                                                                                  RI
                Associated                  (including (including Actual value of target
       RIs                  RI Relevance                                                     achievement
                    PAs                     units and units and       target     relative to
                                                                                                rating
                                              dates)     dates)                   targeted
                                                                                   change
Pillar # 1. Saving lives and protecting vulnerable populations
 RI 1. Number
  of regional                                Baseline    Target
                                                                   Status:(June    Target
  operational     PA # 1     Satisfactory (June 2020):    (Dec                                Substantial
                                                                    2022): 22     realized.
    centers                                    None    2020): 22
    created.
 RI 2. Testing                                           Target
                                             Baseline
  capacity of                                             (Dec     Status (June 234% of
                  PA # 1     Satisfactory (June 2020):                                           High
  accredited                                             2020): 2022): 468,491 the target
                                               None
 laboratories                                           200,000
 RI 3. Number
       of                                    Baseline    Target
                                                                   Status (June
 beneficiaries                            (May 2020):     (Dec                     90% of
                  PA # 1     Satisfactory                          2022): 448,                Substantial
    of cash                                              2020):                  the target
                                                                       450
    transfer                                 250,000    500,000
   programs


                                                                                                     Page 8 of 17
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Madagascar Covid-19 Response DPO (P174388)



                                                                                  Target
                                                                                envisaged
                                                          Target
                                                                                    at
                                                           (Dec    Status: Data
RI 4. Monthly                                                                   appraisal
                                                          2020):    published
  financial                                                                       was not
                                            Baseline     Reports       since
 statements                 Moderately                                           achieved
                 PA # 2                   (June 2020): published    November                   Modest
published by               Unsatisfactory                                       and there
                                             None        until the 2020 on the
the COVID –                                                                       was no
                                                        closure of    online
  19 Fund                                                                        credible
                                                       the COVID     platform.
                                                                                  data to
                                                       - 19 Fund.
                                                                                 measure
                                                                                progress.
RI 5. Increase
                                                          Target
 in the number                              Baseline
                                                            (Dec    Status: (June 251% of
   of e money     PA # 3    Satisfactory (May 2020):                                              High
                                                          2020): 2022): 377,023 the target
      account                                  None
                                                         150,000
    openings.
Pillar # 2. Ensuring sustainable business growth and job creation
                                                          Target
                                                       (December
                                                          2020):
 RI 6. Number                                            200,000.
    of workers                                          There was Status (June
                                            Baseline                               11% of
    benefitting              Moderately                  no target      2022):
                  PA # 4                  (May 2020):                                  the     Negligible
  from training             Satisfactory                  for the 22,863(11,641
                                               None.                                target.
disaggregated                                           number of      women)
    by gender                                             women
                                                        benefitting
                                                            from
                                                         training.
 RI 7. Number                                                           Status
    of MSMEs                                              Target
                                            Baseline
    benefitting              Moderately                     (Dec    (June 2022): 26% of
                  PA # 4                  (May 2020):                                           Modest
         from               Satisfactory                  2020):     5,185 (39% the target
                                               None
   subsidized                                             20,000     women-led
loan programs                                                        enterprises)
    RI 8. Loan
     amounts                                              Target
  rescheduled                               Baseline (December Status (June
                             Moderately                                            46% of
 and deducted     PA # 5                      (March      2020):     2022) MGA                  Modest
                            Satisfactory                                          the target
    from bank                                2020): 0    MGA 500 230.92 billion
      reserve                                              billion
 requirements.
Pillar # 3. Strengthening policies and institutions for rebuilding stronger
    RI 9. New     PA # 6    Satisfactory    Baseline      Target    Status (June The actual    Negligible
       lifeline                             (Jan-Dec       (June     2022): 837      figure
    customers                                                                     showed a

                                                                                                Page 9 of 17
                   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                   Madagascar Covid-19 Response DPO (P174388)



               having access                               2019):       2021):                    negative
                 to the grid                               17,000       50,000                    change
                                                                                                 compared
                                                                                                   to the
                                                                                                 baseline.
                                                                       Target
                                                                        (Dec
                   RI 10.                                              2020):     Status (June
                                                          Baseline
                Coverage of                                            Public     2022): Public
                                                        (June 2020):
               debt statistics                                        sector,        sector,    56.5% of
                                 PA # 7    Satisfactory Only Central                                            Modest
                in the Debt                                          including      including   the target
                                                        Government
                 Statistics                                           90% of        56.5% of
                                                            only
                  Bulletin                                            majority        SOEs
                                                                       owned
                                                                       SOEs

   Rating

   Moderately Satisfactory

   5. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               To assist the Government of Madagascar in its response to the COVID-19 crisis by mitigating the impact on
               lives.

               Rationale
               Pillar # 1. Saving lives and protecting vulnerable populations.

               Outcomes. (ICR, pages 21 - 24 and pages 37 - 38).

                      The PMDU that was set up on July 1, 2020, was adopted by the MEF on July 2, 2020. The PMDU laid
                       out a consolidated multi-sectoral plan with 12 sectors and decentralized coordination structures. 22
                       Regional Operational Coordination Centers (RCCOs) were created in all the regions of Madagascar
                       as targeted to provide critical medical and non-medical services and operational support to local
                       governments for carrying out COVID - 19 response. Of these, six RCCOs were most active in the ten
                       regions most affected by COVID - 19.
                      The testing capacity of accredited laboratories increased to 214,887 when the operation closed on
                       June 30, 2021, exceeding the target of 200,000. By June 2022, the testing capacity had increased
                       468,491.
                      360,000 beneficiaries (mainly households in poor urban areas with high concentration of vulnerable
                       informal sector workers) benefitted from the cash transfer programs by June 30, 2021. The number of
                       beneficiaries increased to 448,450 by June 2022, slightly short of the specified target of 500,000.
                       Each beneficiary received about US$26 per household per month for two months.



                                                                                                              Page 10 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Madagascar Covid-19 Response DPO (P174388)




      The number of e-money account openings increased to 306,850 by June 2021. This far exceeded the
       specified target of 150,000. By June 2022, the number of e-money account openings increased to
       377,023.
      The monthly financial statements were published starting November 2020 until December 2021 in the
       online platform of the Ministry of Finance on how the funds of the dedicated COVID - 19 were utilized.
       It was however difficult to ascertain the frequency of publication. The Fund only became operational in
       April 2020, and only a small portion of the COVID - 19 related spending were executed through the
       COVID - 19 Fund.

With the exception of one outcome (publication of the monthly financial statements of the COVID - 19 Fund),
the expected outcomes were realized or exceeded in all other cases. Therefore, the efficacy of this PDO is
rated as Satisfactory.



Rating

Satisfactory

OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To assist the Government of Madagascar in its response to the COVID-19 crisis by mitigating the impact on
livelihoods.

Rationale
Pillar # 2. Ensuring sustainable business growth and job creation.

Outcomes (ICR, pages 26 - 29 and 39 - 41).

      4,816 workers were trained on activities such as COVID - 19 protocols, well short of the target of
       200,000 by June 2021. This shortfall was due to a combination of factors including: (i) difficulties
       associated with training people across the regions of Madagascar in a poor connectivity environment;
       (ii) uncertainties related to additional COVID - 19 waves and restrictions; and (iii) limited resources.
       However, by 2022, the number of people trained had risen to 22,863 (11,641 women).
      5,185 MSMEs (including 39% women-led enterprises) workers benefitted from subsidized loan
       programs, well short of the target of 20,000. This represented 26% of the target.
      Two new temporary and special windows were created to support the recovery of firms: (i)
       Restructured Credit Window - a risk sharing facility to assume part of the risks of the restructured
       loans granted to MSMEs who were unable to service their debt due to COVID - 19; and (ii) Emergency
       Assistance to Micro Finance Institutions (MFIs) and MSMEs that provided guarantees to new loans
       made by the Banks to MFIs and MSMEs. The number of MSMEs benefitting from subsidized loan
       programs in Ariary (MGA) was 230.92 billion, representing 46% of the target of 20,000 billion MGA.

Of the three outcomes, none of the three results indicators were realized. Therefore, efficacy of this PDO is
rated as moderately unsatisfactory.




                                                                                                 Page 11 of 17
                         Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                         Madagascar Covid-19 Response DPO (P174388)




                      Rating

                      Moderately Unsatisfactory

                      OBJECTIVE 3
                      Objective
                      To assist the Government in its response to the COVID - 19 crisis by supporting the sustainable recovery of
                      the country.

                      Rationale
                      Pillar # 3. Strengthening policies and institutions for rebuilding stronger.

                      Outcomes. (ICR pages 29 - 30 and page 41).

                            The new connection policy was adopted in July 2020 and the new residential tariffs became effective
                             only in June 2021. Only 78 connections were added to the low-income consumers relative to the
                             baseline (17,000) and as compared to the target of 50,000. By July 2022, 837 connections were
                             added to the low-income consumers. No indicators were specified relating to the reduced tariff policy.
                            Between June 2020 and July 2021, nine bulletins on debt statistics were published. The Government's
                             publication was comprehensive, reporting the totality of its debts on a regular basis. The ICR (para 65)
                             noted that the coverage progressively improved during implementation. From no coverage of State-
                             Owned Enterprises (SOEs) debts in July 2020. By July 2022, the coverage for FY2019 had increased
                             to 86.4 percent and for FY2020, the bulletin covered 13 out of the 22 SOEs (59 percent coverage) as
                             all FY2020 financial data was not yet available. Madagascar's debt transparency ranking improved
                             considerably according to the World Bank's Debt Transparency Heat Map (The World Bank developed
                             a debt report tool "Heatmap" which presents an assessment based on the availability, completeness
                             and timelines of public debt statistics). In 2020, Madagascar ranked high on only five of the nine
                             parameters. In 2021, Madagascar ranked high on all but one parameter as per the transparency
                             reports.

                      The outcome pertaining to debt statistics was only partially realized. Given that the indicator pertaining to new
                      customers having access to the grid was not realized, efficacy of this objective is rated as Moderately
                      Unsatisfactory.



                      Rating

                      Moderately Unsatisfactory


OVERALL EFF TBL OLD




Overall Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
Rationale



                                                                                                                        Page 12 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Madagascar Covid-19 Response DPO (P174388)



Overall efficacy is rated as moderately satisfactory. The efficacy rating of objective 1 is satisfactory, while the
efficacy ratings of objective 2 and objective 3 are moderately unsatisfactory. Thus, the overall efficacy rating is
moderately satisfactory, based on the harmonized guideline between OPCS and IEG.



Overall Efficacy Rating
Moderately Satisfactory


6. Outcome

Rationale

The PDO was highly relevant to the Government's Multi Sectoral Emergency Plan (PMDU) and the World
Bank's COVID - 19 Crisis Response Approach Paper (June 2020). There was an explicit, comprehensive and
convincing results chain linking the prior actions to the achievement of the PDO for the most part. The link
between one prior action and the PDO was however indirect. The prior actions were grounded in credible
analytical work. The results indicators were for the most part appropriate (although some of them were
ambitious, relative to the operation's timeline). The overall outcome is Moderately Satisfactory.


a. Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

7. Risk to Development Outcome

Economic risk. The ICR (para 81) notes that the risk to the sustainability of development outcomes is
more likely to be related to the medium-long term structural reforms, than the short-term measures
undertaken as emergency response to the crisis. These risks relate to further outbreaks of COVID - 19
pandemic that could risk recovery of livelihoods and businesses or exogenous risks such as due to adverse
commodity prices and higher inflation due to shocks such as global slowdown that could compel additional
government transfers in an environment of limited fiscal space. Likewise, there is the risk that reforms aimed
at debt transparency promoted through this operation might not be maintained in the face of fiscal risks.


 8. Assessment of Bank Performance

 a. Bank Performance – Design

 Rationale


The Bank prepared this operation based on the experiences from previous Bank-financed operations
(discussed in section three). This operation, aimed to address an unanticipated fiscal financing gap, was

                                                                                                    Page 13 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Madagascar Covid-19 Response DPO (P174388)



prepared in close collaboration with the IMF and other development partners financing complementary
emergency operations in the wake of the COVID - 19 pandemic. Even before the first COVID - 19 cases
were reported, the Bank had helped the Government prepare the Emergency Contingency Plan in
February 2020. The prior actions of the operation were based on solid analytical foundations. The baseline
and targets for the results indicators were specified at appraisal.

The Bank identified several risks including substantial risks with governance, macroeconomic risk. risks
with sector strategies and policies, technical design fiduciary and environmental and social risks. The
operation had several mitigation measures. Even with mitigation measures, the overall operation risk was
rated as substantial at appraisal (PAD, para 92). The planned mitigation measures were implemented
during the execution period.

There were moderate shortcomings. The Bank underestimated the political economy risk associated with
energy sector reforms (discussed below). The link of one prior action (electricity sector reform) was at best,
indirect and the targets for some results indicators were ambitious relative to the operation's timeline.



Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

b. Bank Performance – Implementation

Rationale

The Bank conducted supervision missions regularly and these missions helped in resolving problems. After six
months of technical and high-level discussions between the Bank and the Government of Madagascar, the
government reinstated the new electricity tariff reform on June 1, 2021. The Bank's monitoring of reforms was
largely limited to prior actions that were implemented through ongoing Bank projects. The supervision team
focused on capacity building issues, given the weak implementation capacity. The ICR however does not
provide information on the specific measures that were done to build implementation capacity. The ICR notes
that the Bank continues to work with the Government to achieve the targets under the reforms that could not be
achieved during the operation.



Rating

Satisfactory

c. Overall Bank Performance

Rationale




                                                                                                    Page 14 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Madagascar Covid-19 Response DPO (P174388)



Overall Bank performance is rated as moderately satisfactory due to the moderate shortcomings during
preparation.


Overall Bank Performance Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

9. Other Impacts

a. Social and Poverty

The operation contributed significantly to mitigating the impact of COVID - 19 on the poor and women (ICR, para
70). The rapid and effective delivery of social safety net programs (PA # 1) supported over 360,000 poor
households through direct cash transfers. PA # 6 helped households save up to 94% of the upfront cost of
electricity connections and reduced up to 90% in monthly tariffs for rural households.



b. Environmental

The ICR (para 72) observed that the reforms supported by this operation were unlikely to have significant negative
impacts on Madagascar's natural assets, as the operation did not include direct investments in environmental
projects.



c. Gender

Women-headed households were a key target of the social safety net program. Credits to MSME's (PA # 4) played
an important role in safeguarding jobs and improving human capital particularly of women (around 30,000 women
benefitted training in languages, COVID - 19 protocols and cash for work interventions).



d. Other

There were no unintended impacts (ICR, para 73).




10. Quality of ICR

Rationale



                                                                                                 Page 15 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Madagascar Covid-19 Response DPO (P174388)



The ICR is well-written. The results framework articulated in the text is clear showing the causal links between
most of the prior actions under the pillars and the intended program results. The evidence provided in the text is
adequate to assess the operation's performance. The ICR candidly acknowledges the limitations of some of the
results indicators and the ICR draws good lessons from the experience of implementing this operation.

However, the theory of change presented in table 5, page 20 is not comprehensive and the ICR reports the
achievement of results indicator number four in two ways (one in table 4, page 13 and another in annex 1, page
38). The ICR does not clearly state the assumptions underlying the theory of change.



a. Rating

Substantial

11. Ratings
                                                                                   Reason for
 Ratings                         ICR                     IEG
                                                                                   Disagreement/Comments
                                 Moderately
 Outcome                                                Moderately Satisfactory
                                 Satisfactory
                                 Moderately
 Bank Performance                                       Moderately Satisfactory
                                 Satisfactory
 Relevance of Results
                                 ---                    Moderately Satisfactory
 Indicators
 Quality of ICR                  ---                    Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR draws the following three lessons from the experience of implementing this operation, with some
adaptation of language.

1. A strong ongoing portfolio and sectoral dialogue help the Bank in backing the reform package. Most
critical activities of this operation supporting sectoral reforms were covered by the Bank's ongoing operations in
Madagascar such as the Social Safety Net Project, Improving Nutrition Outcomes Project, and Madagascar
Financial Inclusion Project. Other operations, such as the Human Capital DPO and Madagascar Catastrophe
DPO with a Deferred Drawdown Operation provided the necessary backing to support the effectiveness of
measures under this DPO operation aimed at responding to the COVID - 19 pandemic.

2. A proper assessment of the time is required for implementing politically complex structural
reforms. This operation mostly achieved the prior actions aimed at responding to the immediate need posed by
the COVID - 19 pandemic, as they were directly in line with the Government's priority to mitigate the impact of
the crisis on lives and livelihoods. In contrast, the prior action aimed at ensuring the affordability of grid access
to electricity for vulnerable population in urban and semi-urban required more time to get buy-ins from the
highest levels of government. The lesson is that it is critical to assess the political economy considerations and
to the extent possible, avoid politically complex structural reforms in DPOs that are responding to emergencies.


                                                                                                      Page 16 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Madagascar Covid-19 Response DPO (P174388)



3. Being conservative in designing DPOs during times of crisis can improve efficacy. In this COVID - 19
DPO, the evolution of the pandemic and the implementation challenges could not be foreseen at appraisal.
Given this, the design of operations in times of crisis needs be realistic by focusing on few achievable areas and
setting targets to remain relevant in spite of changing conditions. Since DPOs do not allow restructuring after
approval, it is important to remain conservative in expectations and to support the Government to advance
reforms incrementally at a pace that is consistent with the emergency context.


13. Project Performance Assessment Report (PPAR) Recommended?

No




                                                                                                   Page 17 of 17
