     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Guangxi Poverty Reduction PforR (P163138)



                                                                                 Report Number : ICRR0023270

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Program Name
 P163138                                    Guangxi Poverty Reduction PforR

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 China                                      Agriculture and Food


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)             Total Program Cost (USD)
 IBRD-88900                                 31-Dec-2021                                        399,999,999.99

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 22-Jun-2018                                31-Dec-2021

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                          400,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                           400,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Actual                                       399,999,999.99                                               0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Chikako Miwa               Vibecke Dixon                 Avjeet Singh                   IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Program Context and Development Objectives

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Program Development Objective (PDO) of the Program-for-Results (PforR) operation was "to enhance
   the impact and efficiency of the Guangxi Consolidated Poverty Reduction Program in the Targeted
   Counties" (Loan Agreement, schedule 1, page 5).




                                                                                                  Page 1 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Guangxi Poverty Reduction PforR (P163138)



   The PforR targeted 28 counties in Guanxi government’s Consolidated Poverty Reduction Program (CPRP),
   which covered 54 counties designated as “poverty‐stricken counties” among all 106 counties in the region
   (ICR, paras 11 and 23).

   The following two individual objectives are assessed in this ICR Review:

   Objective 1. To enhance the impact of the Guangxi Consolidated Poverty Reduction Program in the Targeted
   Counties.

   Objective 2. To enhance the efficiency of the Guangxi Consolidated Poverty Reduction Program in the
   Targeted Counties.



b. Were the program objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during
   implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Results Area 1. Improved Income Generation for the Rural Poor (Planned: US$ 260.00 million; Actual:
   US$ 260.00 million). Under this result area, the PforR set four disbursement linked indicators (DLIs) to
   encourage: (i) increased allocation of the Consolidated Poverty Reduction Fund (CPRF) toward the
   development of farmers’ cooperatives and Poverty Reduction Leading Enterprises (PRLEs); (ii) introduction
   of poverty reduction accreditation mechanisms for the enterprises and improved operational and
   governance standards and poverty targeting of farmer cooperatives; and (iii) skills training through the New
   Professional Farmer Development Program.

   Results Area 2. Improved Infrastructure for the Rural Poor (Planned: US$ 81.90 million; Actual: US$
   81.90 million). The PforR set two DLIs to: (i) support upgrading and/or renovation of village‐level drinking
   water supply infrastructure; (ii) incentivize the Guangxi government to prepare improved technical standards
   for rural road segments in high‐risk areas to mitigate climate‐related risk; and (iii) support improved project
   selection, preparation, and management processes to enhance the efficiency of infrastructure investment
   projects for sustained poverty reduction results.

   Results Area 3. Cross‐cutting Issues for Enhanced Program Implementation (Planned: US$ 54.90
   million; Actual: US$ 54.90 million). The PforR set two DLIs to strengthen the full cycle of program
   implementation monitoring by linking budget outlays, activities, and expenditures with the expected outputs
   and outcomes, through program‐based budgeting.



e. Comments on Program Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Program Cost. At appraisal, the total program cost estimate was US$5.530 billion (PAD, para 33). At
   program closing, the actual cost was US$ 5.529 billion (ICR, annex 3, page 44).


                                                                                                     Page 2 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Guangxi Poverty Reduction PforR (P163138)



   Financing. At appraisal, the operation was planned to be financed by an IBRD loan of US$ 400 million
   (PAD, para 33). The amount disbursed was the same as the estimate (ICR, annex 3, page 44).

   Borrower Contribution. The borrower contribution was estimated at US$ 5.130 billion at appraisal (PAD,
   para 33). The actual contribution at closing was US$ 5.129 billion (ICR, annex 3, page 44).

   Dates. The operation was approved on June 22, 2018, and became effective on December 14, 2018. The
   operation was closed on December 31, 2021, which was the same as the original closing date.




3. Relevance   TBL




a. Relevance of Objectives    New




  Rationale
  Country and Sector Context. Poverty levels in China had rapidly declined from 88.3 percent in 1981 to 6.5
  percent in 2012; however, there were still around 70 million registered poor individuals in 2014 (ICR, para 1).
  The country’s 13th Five‐Year Plan (FYP) (2016–2020) aimed at eliminating extreme poverty in rural areas by
  2020 through two institutional innovations: the National Poverty Registration System (NPRS) established in
  2013 to enable accurate targeting of poor households and villages; and the concept of decentralization of
  poverty reduction efforts introduced in 2016 to enable regional and local authorities to flexibly reallocate
  funds according to their poverty reduction priorities (ICR, para 1). The Central Government also significantly
  increased financial transfers for poverty reduction programs, especially to the lagging regions, including
  Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region. Guangxi was one of the ten provinces in China with rural poverty
  rates above 7 percent and one of the six provinces with more than 3 million rural poor as of 2016 (PAD, para
  6). Poverty reduction in Guanxi was closely linked to rural net incomes driven mainly by agricultural activities
  (PAD, para 7). The lack of income was the main cause of poverty mentioned more often during interviews for
  the NPRS (PAD, para 7). In some counties, other gaps, such as lack of access to roads or safe drinking
  water, could be the significant cause of poverty (PAD, para 7). In addition, Guangxi was also classified with
  high river flood risks and medium water scarcity risks, especially in karst mountain areas where most rural
  poor are located (PAD, para 8).

  Alignment with Sector Strategy. At the time of the PforR Program closing, the PDO aligned with the
  Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for FY2020–2025, which aimed to achieve more effective and
  sustainable subnational fiscal management and infrastructure financing (objective 1.2) and demonstrate
  sustainable agriculture practices and improving food system quality and safety (objective 2.3) (CPF, pages
  25 and 70). In closing, the PDO was also in line with the 14th FYP (2021–2025), especially its theme on the
  value chain development approach to agricultural modernization and rural infrastructure development by
  enhancing the impact of public investments in rural revitalization (ICR, para 22).

  World Bank Previous Sector and Country Experience. The World Bank had over 25 years of experience
  in supporting the country’s endeavor to reduce poverty prior to this PforR (PAD, para 10). Elevating the
  Bank’s engagement in rural poverty reduction to a PforR instrument was consistent with the Bank’s long-term
  strategy in the sector and the government’s increasing focus on improving public expenditure performance
  and results (PAD, para 11). In particular, the Guangxi Poverty Alleviation Project (P153892) facilitated a


                                                                                                     Page 3 of 17
                              Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                              Guangxi Poverty Reduction PforR (P163138)



                       dialogue to transition to the PforR instrument by engaging sub-national stakeholders and providing a good
                       practice on enhancing value chains through strengthening farmer cooperatives (ICR, para 10).

                       Country Capacity and Adequacy of PforR Instrument. This was one of China's first poverty reduction
                       PforRs implemented by a sub-national entity (PAD, para 87). The PforR’s design and scope were informed
                       by the NPRS data and high-quality poverty assessments, the assessments on the technical, fiduciary
                       system, and environmental and social system completed in May 2018 for preparation of this PforR, and the
                       lessons from the prior operations (ICR, para 10). The rationale for using the PforR instrument was: (i)
                       although the government sought to stimulate economic activities for poor rural households and their farmer
                       cooperatives by fostering partnerships with various stakeholders in the value chain, incentives to private
                       agricultural enterprises and support to farmer cooperatives did not come with explicit poverty targeting
                       requirements; and (ii) the agricultural industrialization activities seemed to be under‐funded in Guangxi’s
                       Consolidated Poverty Reduction Fund (CPRF) budgets, which allocated only about 2.6 percent of the
                       funding to cooperative and enterprise development support activities (ICR, para 3).

                       Regarding the risk associated with the institutional capacity to implement the PforR, the PAD (para 87) noted
                       that the main risk was identifying a qualified third-party verification agency. To address the risk, the World
                       Bank team planned and implemented risk mitigation measures, including helping the counterparts to improve
                       the quality of terms of reference, advising on the qualification of consulting agency and procurement
                       methodology, and reviewing the proposed bidding documents and work plans submitted by the bidders (The
                       TTLs’ response to IEG’s questionnaire on the PforR, hereafter, TTL response). As a result, although the
                       outbreak of the COVID‐19 pandemic in early 2020 was disruptive to the implementation, including the result
                       verification activities, the institutional capacity risk was mitigated as a competent third‐party verification
                       agency was already on board before the outbreak (ICR, para 47).

                       In sum, the PDO aligned with the CPF objectives at the time of the PforR Program closing and reflected the
                       lessons from the Bank’s previous sector experience. The PforR instrument aligned with the Bank’s long-term
                       strategy in the sector and the implementing capacity of the sub-national entity. The PDO formulation is
                       pitched at the impact level of the results chain and is adequately pitched to address the identified
                       development problem. Thus, the relevance of objectives is rated high.


       Rating Relevance TBL




                       Rating
                       High


b. Relevance of DLIs                           New




DLI RELEVANCE TBL




                DLI 1
                DLI
                Number of Enterprises accredited as Poverty Reduction Leading Enterprises (PRLEs)

                Rationale
                Increasing the number of accredited PRLEs directly supported increasing the purchases by PRLEs from
                farmers and farmer cooperatives (DLI 3) and contributed to increasing the income of poor households (PDO


                                                                                                                        Page 4 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Guangxi Poverty Reduction PforR (P163138)



indicator 1). The PAD (section II.D. and annex 2) provided a clear definition of PRLEs based on the
Borrower’s legal framework and the verification protocol. The first two DLIs and related actions in the Program
Action Plan (PAP), albeit located upstream the results chain, aimed to establish institutional mechanisms for
the selection and development of enterprises and farmer cooperatives to enhance poverty targeting and
encourage counties to allocate more budgets from the Consolidated Poverty Reduction Fund (CPRF) on
poverty reduction programs to broaden their coverage (PAD, para 35). The relevance of DLI 1, thus, is rated
high.



Rating
High

DLI 2
DLI
Number of Pro-poor Farmer Professional Cooperatives Meeting the Operational Standards

Rationale
Increasing the number of pro-poor farmer professional cooperatives with high performance standards directly
supported increasing the purchases by PRLEs from farmers and farmer cooperatives (DLI 3) and contributed
to increasing the income of poor households (PDO indicator 1). The PAD (section II.D. and annex 2) provided
a clear definition of pro-poor farmer professional cooperatives based on the Borrower’s legal framework and
the verification protocol. The pro-poor farmer professional cooperatives meant cooperatives where at least 30
percent of its members were registered poor households or 40 percent of all registered poor households in
each of the covered administrative villages were members of said cooperative (PAD, para 40). Given this
definition, this indicator was appropriate for the PDO outcome of the income of poor households increased.
The relevance of DLI 2, thus, is rated high.



Rating
High

DLI 3
DLI
Value of annual purchases of agricultural products by accredited PRLEs from farmers and farmer professional
cooperatives

Rationale
Increasing the annual purchases of agricultural products by accredited PRLEs from farmers and farmer
professional cooperatives contributed to increasing the income of poor households (PDO indicator 1). DLI 3
was expected to translate the institutional enhancements (incentivized under DLI 1 and DLI 2) into increased
procurement of agricultural produce from farmers and their cooperatives by accredited PRLEs (PAD, para
37). The PAD (section II.D. and annex 2) provided a clear definition of the indicator and the verification
protocol. The relevance of DLI 3, thus, is rated high.




                                                                                                  Page 5 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Guangxi Poverty Reduction PforR (P163138)




Rating
High

DLI 4
DLI
Number of farmers completing the New Professional Farmer Development Training Program

Rationale
Increasing the number of farmers completing the scaled-up training program supported the farmers to
increase their ability to benefit from agricultural industrialization activities (PAD, para 37). The PAD (section
II.D. and annex 2) provided a clear definition of the indicator and the verification protocol. The DLI supported
an enhancement of rural women’s participation in the farmer skills development program by organizing
training programs together with China Women Union and providing follow-up technical support to rural
women who completed training programs (PAD, para 45). The training program aimed to enhance the quality
and quantity of their produce and adopt climate‐smart technologies by including modules for enhancing the
capacity to manage livestock waste (ICR, para 30). The relevance of DLI 4, thus, is rated high.



Rating
High

DLI 5
DLI
Number of Registered Poor Persons with New Piped Drinking Water Connections

Rationale
Increasing access to piped drinking water connections contributed to enhancing the quantity of water supply
services provided to the poor households. The PAD (section II.D. and annex 2) provided a clear definition of
the indicator and the verification protocol. The random sampling methodology used in the verification protocol
ensured that the poor households were connected to the pipelines that were newly built or rehabilitated under
the PforR. The relevance of DLI 5, thus, is rated high.



Rating
High

DLI 6
DLI
Number of Targeted Counties with an IT-based infrastructure project management system

Rationale
Increasing the counties with an IT-based infrastructure project management system contributed to objective
2. The PAD (section II.D. and annex 2) provided a clear definition of the indicator and the verification protocol.
The system integrated systems to manage infrastructure projects (i.e., budget, asset, performance, and

                                                                                                    Page 6 of 17
                            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                            Guangxi Poverty Reduction PforR (P163138)



            M&E), which contributed to accelerate initiation of projects (i.e., the percentage of projects starting within 3
            months of scheduled time increased from 90.53 percent in 2019 to 97.78 percent in 2020) (ICR, para 34). The
            relevance of DLI 6, thus, is rated high.



            Rating
            High

            DLI 7
            DLI
            Number of Targeted Counties with Annual Program-based Budgeting Plans and Annual Program-based
            Expenditure Reports

            Rationale
            Increasing the countries with annual plans and reports on program-based budgeting and expenditure
            contributed to the second objective in the PDO. With the consolidation of funds reform, effective resource
            allocation and implementation hinged largely on the counties, as reflected in their annual budget prioritization
            processes. The PAD (section II.D. and annex 2) provided a clear definition of the indicator and the verification
            protocol. The relevance of DLI 7, thus, is rated high.



            Rating
            High

            DLI 8
            DLI
            Establishment of poverty data platform for Monitoring and Evaluation of poverty reduction programs in Guangxi

            Rationale
            Establishing the poverty data platform for M&E of poverty reduction programs contributed to objective 2. The
            platform started to provide M&E data for poverty reduction programs from 2019 to inform budget
            management, poverty monitoring, infrastructure monitoring, and project performance monitoring (ICR, para
            34). The platform enabled the Regional Rural Revitalization Bureau (former Rural Poverty Reduction Office)
            to access the data managed by other government departments (ICR, para 34). The PAD (section II.D. and
            annex 2) provided a clear definition of the indicator and the verification protocol. The relevance of DLI 8, thus,
            is rated high.



            Rating
            High


OVERALL RELEVANCE DLI TBL




            OVERALL RELEVANCE RATING
                                                                                                                 Page 7 of 17
                   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                   Guangxi Poverty Reduction PforR (P163138)




               Rationale
               The DLIs were clearly defined with verification protocols specified in the PAD. While all eight DLIs were
               intermediate indicators in the results framework, the DLIs were consistent with the Theory of Change and
               able to capture milestones towards the Program’s aspired longer-term outcome (ICR, para 25). The DLIs
               were selected in a way that provided the necessary flow of funds to move implementation forward. There was
               a mixture of fast‐disbursing (e.g., DLIs 4-5 that were largely delivered by government agencies) and
               slow‐disbursing DLIs (e.g., DLIs 1-3, which required engaging multiple stakeholders, such as farmer
               cooperatives and enterprises; and establishment of enterprise vetting and access to the business
               development services), along with scalable disbursement features, which smoothed out disbursements and
               maintained client enthusiasm (ICR, para 43). The amounts allocated to the achievement of each DLI provided
               the incentive needed for achieving the Program objectives. In specific, the PforR allocated 70 percent of the
               total financing amount to DLIs 1-5 that strengthened poverty targeting of the Guangxi Consolidated Poverty
               Reduction Program and contributed to enhancing its impact (objective 1). The overall relevance of DLIs is
               rated high given that all the eight DLIs was highly relevant to the PDO.

               Therefore, the overall relevance is rated high, based on the highly relevant objectives and DLIs.



               Rating
               High



   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               To enhance the impact of the Guangxi Consolidated Poverty Reduction Program in the Targeted Counties

               Rationale
               Theory of Change (ToC): The ToC of objective 1 postulated that the inputs including providing training and
               accreditation to become Poverty Reduction Leading Enterprises (PRLEs), strengthening cooperatives’
               performance standards, and providing training on skills and climate-smart agriculture to farmers would result
               in the outputs including the increases in accredited PRLEs (DLI 1), pro-poor farmer professional cooperatives
               with operational standards meeting national law (DLI 2), and the farmers (especially female and poor farmers)
               completing training program (DLI 4). These outputs were postulated to contribute to the intermediate outcome
               of the increased purchases by PRLEs from farmers and farmer cooperatives (DLI 3) and the outcome of the
               increased income of poor households (PDO indicator 1). The ToC also postulated that the inputs including
               increasing water supply facilities with improved quality standards and improving rural road standards would
               result in the outputs including the construction and rehabilitation of drinking water supply facilities and the
               improvements on standards for water supply facilities and rural roads. These outputs were postulated to
               contribute to the intermediate outcomes of the increased access of registered poor persons to new piped
               drinking water connections (DLI 5) and to rural roads and the outcomes of the percentage of registered poor



                                                                                                                   Page 8 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Guangxi Poverty Reduction PforR (P163138)



households having access to drinking water and rural roads (PDO indicator 2). In the long-term, the above
outcomes were postulated to contribute to the improved well‐being of Guangxi residents.

Some of the critical assumptions included: (i) adequate willingness and capacity of enterprises to be
accredited as PRLEs; (ii) adequate capacity of pro‐poor cooperatives to meet requisite operating standards;
(iii) adequate participation by farmers in the skills development program; and (iv) successful implementation
of the water and roads program activities.

Outputs/Intermediate Outcomes (ICR, paras 28-37 and annex 1):

      DLI 1: 104 enterprises were accredited as Poverty Reduction Leading Enterprises (PRLEs),
         exceeding the target of 100 enterprises.
        28 targeted counties had newly accredited poverty countries with PRLEs, meeting the target of 28
         counties.
        DLI 2: 515 pro‐poor farmer professional cooperatives met operational standards, achieving the target
         of 500 cooperatives.
        30 percent and 33.63 percent of the members of pro‐poor farmer professional cooperatives were
         registered poor persons and women, respectively, meeting the target of 30 percent each.
        101,286 farmers were reached with agricultural assets or services, meeting the target of 100,000
         farmers. Of the total, 30,386 farmers were women, meeting the target of 30,000 female farmers.
        DLI 3: Annual purchases of agricultural products by PRLEs from farmers and farmer cooperatives
         reached 2.352 billion RMB, exceeding the target of 2 billion RMB.
        DLI 4: 41,745 farmers completed training program, increasing from the baseline of 4,291 farmers and
         exceeding the target of 40,000 farmers. Of the farmers who completed the training program, 60.51
         percent of them were women, increasing from the baseline of 25 percent and doubling the target of 30
         percent. Moreover, 42.73 percent of the farmers who completed the training program were registered
         poor persons, increasing from the baseline of 10 percent and more than doubling the targets of 18
         percent.
        95 percent of survey respondents were satisfied with the services provided by the New Professional
         Farmer Development training program, exceeding the target of 70 percent. The data was collected by
         a beneficiary satisfaction survey covering a sample of 256 farmer training participants. Additionally,
         the sampling results (June–August 2020) of the survey indicated that trainees utilized the climate-
         smart agricultural techniques taught at the training program. The overall livestock waste utilization and
         disposal rate was 98.24 percent; and about 91.48 percent of surveyed livestock farms were equipped
         with waste treatment facilities. Furthermore, all the surveyed counties had put in place mechanisms
         for environmental impact assessment, pollution control and management, accountability, and
         performance assessment of its livestock waste facilities.
        DLI 5: 261,198 registered poor persons had new piped drinking water connections, increasing from
         the baseline of 95,400 persons and exceeding the target of 210,000 persons.
        94.85 percent of survey respondents were satisfied with the drinking water supply services,
         exceeding the target of 70 percent. The data was collected by a beneficiary satisfaction survey
         covering a sample of 415 poor rural families.
        Paved road connectivity rate of natural villages with at least 20 households reached 100 percent,
         increasing from the baseline of 81.30 percent and exceeding the target of 85 percent. The Guangxi




                                                                                                    Page 9 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Guangxi Poverty Reduction PforR (P163138)



         Rural Revitalization Bureau prepared guidelines on the operation and maintenance of these roads to
         ensure their sustainability.

Outcomes (ICR, paras 28-37 and annex 1):

        PDO indicator 1: Production income of registered poor households in targeted counties (in RMB)
         increased from the baseline of 11,041 RMB to the actual of 15,101 RMB, meeting the target of 15,000
         RMB.
        PDO indicator 2: Percentage of registered poor households with access to selected infrastructure
         assets according to 8+1 poverty criteria in targeted counties increased, as described in the following.
         On the other hand, the combination of indicators on access to basic infrastructure assets and services
         was not adequate to measure to what extent the quality and the utilization of basic infrastructure
         assets and services improved.
              o 100 percent of registered poor households had access to rural roads, increasing from the
                baseline of 96 percent and meeting the target of 98 percent.
              o 100 percent of registered poor households had access to safe drinking water, increasing from
                the baseline of 78.60 percent and exceeding the target of 85.40 percent.

The registered poor households in 28 poverty-stricken counties increased their production incomes and
obtained access to safe drinking water and rural roads. The customers of the water supply services were
mostly satisfied with the services. Moreover, the PforR’s methodologies and approaches were scaled up from
the 28 PforR counties to all 106 counties in the Guangxi using the province’s own program resources (ICR,
para 23). The two PDO indicators met or exceeded the targets. Nevertheless, it is yet to be observed whether
the increased access to basic infrastructure assets and services would be sustained to contribute to the
reduction of multi-dimensional poverty and the improvement of well-being of the Guangxi residents in the
long-term. Overall, the achievement of objective 1 is rated high.



Rating
High


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To enhance the efficiency of the Guangxi Consolidated Poverty Reduction Program in the Targeted Counties

Rationale
Theory of Change (ToC): The ToC of objective 2 postulated that the inputs including developing software for
infrastructure projects management (DLI 6), program‐based budgeting, and poverty‐related data integration
would result in the outputs including the increase in counties with annual program‐based budgeting plans and
expenditure reports (DLI 7) and the establishment of a poverty data platform for M&E of poverty reduction
(DLI 8). The outputs were postulated to contribute to the intermediate outcome of the establishment and
operationalization of the management information system (MIS) integrating the data from the above three IT
systems and the outcome of the enhanced efficiency in data management and analysis which would result in
publishing the Integrated Consolidated Fund Program-based Performance Monitoring Reports (PDO indicator



                                                                                                  Page 10 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Guangxi Poverty Reduction PforR (P163138)



3). In the long-term, the above outcomes were postulated to contribute to the improved well‐being of Guangxi
residents.

Some of the critical assumptions included: (i) adequate capacity of the government agencies to operate and
maintain the IT systems and analyze the integrated data; and (ii) successful implementation of activities to
enhance the IT systems.

Outputs (ICR, paras 28-37 and annex 1):

      DLI 6: 28 targeted counties had an IT‐based infrastructure project management system in their
       counties, meeting the target of 28 counties. It improved the efficiency of project management. For
       instance, timely starting of projects (within 3 months of scheduled time) increased from 90.53 percent
       in 2019 to 97.78 percent in 2020.
      DLI 7: 28 targeted counties had annual program‐based budgeting plans and annual program‐based
       expenditure reports, meeting the target of 28 counties. The Guangxi Department of Finance (DOF)
       used the expenditure reports to monitor and support the county governments to execute budgets. It
       contributed to the increase in the overall budget execution among poverty‐stricken counties from
       95.86 percent in 2019 to 98.14 percent in 2020. The Guangxi DOF received an award of excellence
       and a financial reward of RMB 560 million from the central Ministry of Finance for developing an
       innovative system for annual program‐based budget‐planning and expenditure reporting (ICR, para
       23).
      DLI 8: The poverty data platform for M&E of poverty reduction was established, meeting the target.
       The national poverty data platform was operationalized in 2019 by integrating four datasets on budget
       management, poverty monitoring, infrastructure monitoring, and project performance monitoring. The
       platform was upgraded after 2020 to cover not only extremely poor households but also households
       with the risk of falling back into extreme poverty and to cover rural infrastructure and public services
       under the rural revitalization program (ICR, para 23). This upgrade enabled the Regional Rural
       Revitalization Bureau (former Rural Poverty Reduction Office) to track down households vulnerable to
       natural and economic shocks and at the border of the poverty line.

Outcome (ICR, paras 28-37 and annex 1):

      PDO indicator 3: Three Integrated Consolidated Fund Program-based Performance Monitoring
       Reports were published, meeting the target of 3 reports. The Guangxi DOF prepared annual reports
       with inputs from line agencies and 28 targeted counties through the MIS that integrated data from the
       above three IT-systems for infrastructure project management (DLI 6), program-based budgeting and
       expenditure reporting (DLI 7), and results monitoring (DLI 8). The government was enabled to analyze
       the correlation between budget allocation, fund expenditure, project management and the results, and
       identify the areas for improvement (TTL response).

The operation fully achieved the intended outcome of the enhanced efficiency in consolidating data from a
wide range of stakeholders and analyzing comprehensive data to improve the implementation efficiency of
the Guangxi Consolidated Poverty Reduction Program. The relevant PDO indicator met the target.
Nevertheless, it is yet to be observed to what extent the management information system (MIS) will be
continuously maintained (ICR, para 61) to contribute to the reduction of multi-dimensional poverty and the




                                                                                                 Page 11 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Guangxi Poverty Reduction PforR (P163138)



  improvement of well-being of the Guangxi residents in the long-term. Overall, the achievement of objective 2
  is rated high.



  Rating
  High




 OVERALL EFFICACY
 Rationale
 The two objectives in the PDO were highly achieved. Thus, the overall efficacy is rated high.



 Rating
 High


5. Outcome

The overall relevance is rated high, based on the highly relevant objectives and DLIs. The overall efficacy is
rated high, as the achievements of both two objectives under the PDO are rated high. Therefore, the outcome is
rated highly satisfactory.


    Outcome Rating
    Highly Satisfactory


6. Risk to Development Outcome

Stakeholder ownership risk. There was a potential risk that pro-poor cooperatives might not fulfill all
operating standards if the oversight was discontinued (ICR, para 61). To mitigate the risk, the Ministry of
Agriculture and Rural Affairs and 11 associated ministries adopted a policy in September 2019 to emphasize
the need to upgrade the standards of farmer cooperatives as sustainable and effective rural economic
institutions (ICR, para 61). Moreover, the management information system (MIS) integrated the information
of the pro-poor cooperatives as one of the actions in the Program Action Plan to facilitate oversight and
tailored support (ICR, para 61).

Technical risk. There were potential risks that the established MIS and the rural infrastructure might not be
adequately maintained to continue providing quality services. To mitigate the latter risk, the Guangxi
Department of Transport published the Technical Standards of Low Volume Rural Highway Engineering in
June 2019, aiming to improve the quality of rural roads (ICR, para 62). Additionally, the government prepared
a design manual for rural water supply and provided training to technicians of the county design teams based

                                                                                                  Page 12 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Guangxi Poverty Reduction PforR (P163138)



on the manual (ICR, para 62). Furthermore, the government integrated operations and maintenance
requirements into general infrastructure plans and included modules for assets management and M&E in the
IT‐based system.




7. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The strategic relevance and the choice of the PforR instrument were adequate, as described in section 3.
  The technical, financial, and economic aspects were adequately assessed during preparation. The
  program was technically simple, financially feasible, and with unit costs consistent with similar activities
  elsewhere in the province and the country (ICR, para 57). Poverty, gender, and social development
  aspects were thoroughly integrated into the design. The PforR encouraged women’s access to training
  under the New Professional Farmer Development Program, promoted climate‐smart technologies in crop
  and livestock production systems, and established a grievance redress mechanism to receive any
  concerns from society (ICR, para 57). The fiduciary aspects were adequately designed in general, as
  described in section 9.b. The M&E arrangements were adequate, as described in section 8.a. The World
  Bank’s multidisciplinary team provided detailed assessments on technical and poverty aspects, which
  ensured client engagement and contributed to accelerating the preparation process to be completed in 8
  months (ICR, para 57). Thus, the quality at entry is rated as Highly satisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Highly Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The focus on development impact was adequate, as the PforR focused on rural poverty reduction and
 sufficiently monitored the outcome indicators regarding the registered poor households’ income and access
 to key infrastructure assets. The World Bank team members were mostly country-based, which enabled
 them to provide support in a timely manner and conduct missions regularly (i.e., eight missions over the
 implementation period of three and a half years) even after the COVID-19 pandemic broke out (ICR, para
 58). The PforR closed on the originally planned date. When one of the co-task team leaders was changed,
 the handover was smoothly conducted (ICR, para 58). The transition arrangements were adequate, as the
 innovative measures used in the PforR was spread widely outside the operation, including the rolling out of
 the PforR’s methodologies and approaches to all counties in the Guangxi province using its own resources
 ICR (para 23). Thus, the quality of supervision is rated as Highly satisfactory.

 Overall, the World Bank’s performance is rated Highly satisfactory, based on the highly satisfactory
 performance at entry and during supervision.




                                                                                                   Page 13 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Guangxi Poverty Reduction PforR (P163138)



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Highly Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Highly Satisfactory


8. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The PDO formulation was appropriately pitched at the impact level of the results chain and clearly
 formulated to address the identified development problem. The theory of change was logical and well-
 reflected in the results framework. The results chains for income generation and improved infrastructure in
 the Technical Assessment (figure 7 on pages 56-57 and Figure 8 on pages 62-63, respectively) were
 comprehensive, contributing to the soundness of the results framework for objective 1. The adequate
 indicators in the results framework supplemented the PDO statement well to clarify the intended outcomes
 for objective 2. The DLIs were highly relevant to the PDO and verifiable by the planned protocol, as
 described in section 3. b. The actions in the Program Action Plan (PAP) were well‐linked to the DLIs, with
 five of the nine actions directly driving their corresponding DLIs. In comparison, the remaining four actions
 helped the PforR in critical aspects (e.g., pushing reforms on infrastructure standards, supporting manure
 handling, and promoting community participation) (ICR, para 57). The M&E design and arrangements were
 well-embedded institutionally, as the results area 3 of the PforR strengthened the M&E system to monitor
 not only the final outcomes but also the full cycle of program implementation by linking budget outlays,
 activities, and expenditures with the expected outputs and outcomes (ICR, para 48).



b. M&E Implementation
  The baseline data was collected as planned. The indicators in the results framework including DLIs were
  measured and reported in line with the verification protocol. The M&E system was adequately staffed and
  implemented (ICR, para 49). The PAP and DLIs were fully implemented (ICR, para 44). The M&E data
  was found to be reliable and used in monitoring the program implementation progress and complying with
  policy requirements and supporting the decision-making process (ICR, para 49). The M&E functions and
  processes were likely to be sustained after Program closing given that the poverty monitoring system
  were expanded to cover rural infrastructure and public services under the rural revitalization program in
  the current 14th FYP (2021–2025) (ICR, paras 22-23). The beneficiary survey conducted at the time of
  the PforR closing supplemented the output-level indicators in the results framework to measure
  achievements towards achievement of objective 1.



c. M&E Utilization
  The M&E findings were communicated to a wide range of stakeholders in national, regional, and county
  levels to inform the program direction. The M&E data provided evidence of achievement of outcomes
  and tested the links in the results chain.




                                                                                                   Page 14 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Guangxi Poverty Reduction PforR (P163138)



  The M&E was logically and thoroughly designed based on the technical assessment, which enabled the
  adequate implementation and use of the M&E. Thus, the overall quality of M&E is rated high.



  M&E Quality Rating
  High

9. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Environmental. At appraisal, OP 7.50 on International Waterways was triggered as the Program activities
   could potentially involve water extraction for rural water supply systems and irrigation from the Pearl River
   Basin (PAD, para 83). The ESSA concluded that the PforR fell within the riparian notification exception
   under paragraphs 7(a) and 7(c) of OP 7.50, thus the Regional Vice President approved the riparian
   notification exception in line with the OP (PAD, para 84). Furthermore, at appraisal, the PAD (para 81)
   noted that pest management and livestock waste management activities supported under the PforR might
   have potential negative impacts or risks. To mitigate the risk, the Environment and Social Systems
   Assessment (ESSA) recommended strengthening the technical capacity of staff in county livestock bureau
   to enhance technical training and support to farmers through one of actions under the Program Action Plan
   (PAP) (PAD, para 81). At the PforR closing, a survey conducted in June–August 2020 indicated that the
   overall livestock waste utilization and disposal rate was 98.24 percent; and about 91.48 percent of surveyed
   livestock farms were equipped with waste treatment facilities (ICR, para 53). In addition, all the surveyed
   counties had put in place mechanisms for environmental impact assessment, pollution control and
   management, accountability, and performance assessment of its livestock waste facilities (ICR, para 53).

   Social. At appraisal, the assessment of social risks of the activities to be supported under the PforR
   concluded that there could be limited social risks in terms of land acquisition or voluntary land donations
   and land transfers, effective participation and consultation, and grievance redress mechanism. To mitigate
   the risk, the ESSA recommended developing a community participation and consultation manual by a PAP
   action (PAD, para 82). Additionally, consultations with key stakeholders and the public were conducted to
   discuss and share information on policies and procedures on land acquisition and resettlement, land use
   right transfer, ethnic minority development (PAD, para 85). As a result, throughout implementation, no social
   conflicts or adverse social outcomes were reported to the grievance redress mechanism of the government
   program (ICR, para 54).




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management. At appraisal, the financial system assessment identified two risks that: (i) the
   potential delay in receiving higher level earmarked grants late in the fiscal year might jeopardize the
   implementation quality; and (ii) the content of PforR’s monthly report might be unreliable to support value
   for money decision making (PAD, para 78). These risks were mitigated by the strong pipeline of projects
   that were small and ready to be implemented in a short period, policy allowing the budget and
   implementation to be rolled over into the following year, and the agreed refinement to the design of the
   monthly report together with instructions for counties to prepare the monthly report (PAD, para 78). At

                                                                                                   Page 15 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Guangxi Poverty Reduction PforR (P163138)



   closing, the overall financial management system surrounding the Annual Fund Use Plan (AFUP) was
   found to be adequately implemented by the capable financial staff in the regional Department of Finance
   (DOF) and county finance bureaus (ICR, para 55). In addition to monthly reporting and reconciliation,
   on‐site inspection was conducted by the regional DOF and the Guangxi Audit Office in program counties to
   ensure proper usage of the AFUP (ICR, para 55). Fiduciary risks identified during the PforR appraisal were
   further mitigated by establishing an IT‐based project management system (DLI 6) and adopting
   program‐based reporting (DLI 7) (ICR, para 55). For all the program years (2018‐2021), the external
   auditors issued unqualified opinions (ICR, para 55). The Guangxi Finance Department received an award
   of excellence and a monetary reward from the Ministry of Finance in 2020 for developing and using an
   innovative program‐based expenditure reporting system under the program (ICR, para 55).

   Procurement. At appraisal, the World Bank team identified three potential procurement risks: (i) the limited
   interest of contractors to participate in the bidding process, (ii) the contracting agencies’ unawareness of
   the requirements in the World Bank’s Anticorruption Guidelines (ACGs), and (iii) the delay in payment to
   contractors due to the prolonged process to conduct final completion settlement audit (PAD, para 76). To
   mitigate these risks, the World Bank team suggested to adopt community participation for the procurement
   of small works, require the auditors to check the contracts’ compliance with the ACGs on a random basis,
   issue instructions from the Guangxi regional government to all agencies to comply with the ACGs, and
   accelerate the final completion settlement audit or proceed with the final payment upon successful
   completion of the contract (PAD, para 76). At closing, community participation in procurement was heavily
   promoted and practiced, as the pioneer communities shared their experiences with other communities
   through program‐facilitated workshops and events and the Community Participation and Consultation
   Manual that combined practical experience of poverty‐alleviation projects in China and Guangxi (ICR, para
   56). No malfeasance in the procurement processes was reported throughout implementation (ICR, para
   56).




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   No unintended impact was reported.



d. Other
   N/A



10. Ratings
                                                                               Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                    IEG
                                                                               Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                        Highly Satisfactory   Highly Satisfactory
                                                                               No evident shortcomings were
Bank Performance               Satisfactory          Highly Satisfactory       observed during design and
                                                                               supervision


                                                                                                  Page 16 of 17
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Guangxi Poverty Reduction PforR (P163138)



Quality of M&E                   High                  High

Quality of ICR                   ---                   High


11. Lessons

The ICR (paras 63-67) provided five lessons. Two of them are presented below with rephrasing as
they may be able to inform the future PforR operations aiming for poverty reduction.

A judicious blend of fast‐ and slow‐disbursing DLIs can smooth out disbursements and
maintain client enthusiasm. In this case, straight‐forward, fast‐disbursing DLIs (as was the case
for infrastructure and farmer training) were combined with those requiring multi‐stakeholder
engagement and systems enhancement to ensure smooth disbursements. This ensured a steady
flow of disbursements and client enthusiasm. In addition, the scalability of the disbursements added
to the continuous flow of funds.

The PforR instrument has the potentials to better support the client in championing multi-
sectoral development than an investment project financing instrument. This PforR dealt with
the most impactful interventions, regardless of sector, thereby creating synergies and maximizing
impact. Nevertheless, the PforR instrument requires continuous education of clients at all levels on
its principles and modalities, in addition to the PforR preconditions, including the existence of a
credible government program, the solid associated expenditure framework, and the credible country
systems on fiduciary and safeguards (ICR, footnote 21, page 19).



12. Assessment Recommended?

  No

13. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is clear and provides a clear rationale for a PforR instrument. The theory of change articulated in the
ICR is clear and provides clear linkages between the project activities, the output indicators and intended
outcomes that were measurable. The disbursement linked indicators were based on scientifically supported
data. The ICR draws good lessons from the experience of this project. The ICR adheres to the guidelines and
provides a clear rationale for using the PforR as the lending instrument for this operation. The project task team
swiftly provided additional information on the PforR and the ICR in response to IEG's inquiries. The quality of
ICR, therefore, is rated high.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       High



                                                                                                    Page 17 of 17
