     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     National Targeted Programs Support (P159737)



                                                                                Report Number : ICRR0023273

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Program Name
 P159737                                   National Targeted Programs Support

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Vietnam                                   Agriculture and Food


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)              Total Program Cost (USD)
 IDA-61130                                 31-Dec-2021                                          76,787,201.06

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 28-Jun-2017                               31-Dec-2021

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                          153,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                           112,096,982.25                                               0.00

 Actual                                        76,787,201.06                                               0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Cynthia Nunez-Ollero       Chikako Miwa                 Avjeet Singh                    IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Program Context and Development Objectives

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Financing Agreement (FA, p.5) and the Program Appraisal Document (PAD, paragraph 44),
   the Program Development Objective was "to improve the delivery of, and access to, investments for
   increasing agricultural production and enhancing livelihood opportunities within the Program area."

   The government implemented National Targeted Programs (NTPs) to raise rural incomes and productivity,
   and to reduce socio-economic disparities between rural and urban areas. The overarching objective of the
   NTP was to increase agricultural production and enhance the livelihood opportunities in the country. In 2015,

                                                                                                  Page 1 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     National Targeted Programs Support (P159737)



   the National Assembly adopted Resolution No. 100 to refocus its 16 NTPs into two - the NTP for Rural
   Development (NTP-NRD) and the NTP for Sustainable Poverty Reduction (NTP-SPR) (See Section 3
   Relevance of Objectives below). This operation was a Program for Results (PforR) in 18 targeted provinces
   under the NTP-NRD and the NTP-SPR-P135.

   This review will assess the program performance against the following objectives:

         to improve the delivery of investments for increasing agricultural production and enhancing livelihood
          opportunities within the Program area.
         to improve access to investments for increasing agricultural production and enhancing livelihood
          opportunities within the Program area.



b. Were the program objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during
   implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   1. Improved Program Planning and Governance (delivery attribute of the PDO) (US$35.0 million at
   appraisal, US$35.0 million disbursed for DLIs by closing, [ICR, Annex 1B]). This result area was to
   finance activities that supported the reforms of the NTP in the following areas: policy and implementation
   guidelines, oversight, and accountability through the development of a Management Information System,
   and provincial level institutional reforms that would integrate the two NTPs planning processes with those at
   the provincial, district, and commune levels. Two Disbursement Linked Indicators (DLIs 1 and 2) were to
   support this result area:

         DLI 1 – Issuance of the Policy and Guidance Instruments for the NRD and SPR-P135.
         DLI 2 – Number of Participating Provinces with an NTP-SEDP integrated planning process (PDO
          Indicator 1).

   2. Improved Quality of Program Investments (delivery attribute of the PDO) (US$60.0 million at
   appraisal, US$22.3 million disbursed for DLIs by closing [ICR, Annez1B]). This result area was to finance
   activities under the NTP-NRD and SPR-P135 that harmonized designs, specifications, and implementation
   arrangements/approaches for climate-resilient small-scale infrastructure subprojects. This result area was to
   also finance the streamlining of procedures and specify guidance to communes to ensure quality income
   generating activities, especially for women and ethnic minority women. Two DLIs (3 and 5) were to
   support this result area:

         DLI 3 – Percentage of Infrastructure Investment Sub-projects implemented in compliance with the
          Enhanced Operations Manual.
         DLI 5 – Percentage of Livelihood Support Sub-projects implemented in compliance with the
          Enhanced Operations Manual.



                                                                                                   Page 2 of 24
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    National Targeted Programs Support (P159737)



  3. Increased Access to Program Investments (access attribute of the PDO) (US$20.0 million at
  appraisal, US$0.00 million disbursed for DLIs by closing [ICR, Annex 1B]) This result area was to finance
  productivity-raising activities in communes and villages, promote the adoption of climate-resilient
  technologies, and introduce value chain analyses as the technical underpinning for such investments. This
  result area was to finance activities on income and livelihood support to households, especially for women
  and ethnic minority women. Two DLIs (4 and 6) were to support this result area:

        DLI 4 – Percentage points increase in the share of ethnic minorities and women satisfied with
         access and quality of community assets or services for increasing agricultural production and
         livelihoods (PDO Indicator 3).
        DLI 6 – Percentage points increase in the share of households with additional diversified income
         sources (PDO Indicator 2).

  4. Improved Program Monitoring and Management (delivery attribute of the PDO) (US$38.0 million at
  appraisal, US$17.5 million disbursed for DLIs by closing [ICR, Annex 1B]). This result area was to finance
  capacity building activities to strengthen the monitoring of this operation and the government’s overall
  program. This result area was to finance the establishment of baseline data, collecting, and making these
  data available to the public to monitor the program results. Three DLIs were to support this result area:

        DLI 7 – Number of officers at the provincial-, district- commune- and village-level trained in the use
           of the Enhanced Operations Manual.
          DLI 8.1 – Number of monitoring and evaluation frameworks developed for NRD and SPR-P135.
          DLI 8.2 – Number of Participating Provinces with an operational NRD-MIS web-based platform
           including semi-annual reports with physical outputs and financial information.
          DLI 8.3 – Number of publicly accessible websites publishing semi-annual reports on physical
           progress and financial information on NRD and SPR-P135.
          DLI 9 - Baseline and end-line tracking survey for NRD and SPR-P135.



e. Comments on Program Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Program Cost: The original program cost was US$153.0 million. The amount was reduced to US$112.1
  million when US$40.9 million (or 26.7 percent of the original cost) was cancelled at restructuring (see Dates
  below). The amount disbursed was US$76.8 million or 68.5 percent of planned disbursement. Note that the
  disbursements against the DLIs was US$74.8 million (ICR, Annex 1B).

  Financing: The International Development Association (IDA) financed this program.

  Borrower Contribution: The borrower contribution was estimated at US$1.6 billion at appraisal. The actual
  contribution at closing was US$1.0 billion.

  Dates: The program was approved on June 28, 2017 and made effective on May 15, 2019, almost two
  years later. This delay was due to three factors: (i) the lengthy government process to sign the FA; (ii) the
  late approval of the Enhanced Operations Manual for the PforR, an effectiveness condition; and (iii) delay in
  the government's issuing its legal opinion for the signed FA. The Mid Term Review (MTR) was conducted
  on May 24, 2021, seven months before closing. The program closed on December 31, 2021, as planned.
  On December 30, 2021, a level 2 restructuring (RES44243) cancelled US$40.9 million (SDR29.2 million).

                                                                                                    Page 3 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     National Targeted Programs Support (P159737)



   The government acknowledged that the funds would not be disbursed in the remaining program period. The
   delayed start led to late approvals of verification budgets, which was needed to conduct the verification of
   results to disburse funds, according to the PforR policy (see the following Sections: 3 on Relevance of DLIs,
   4 on Efficacy, and 7 on Assessment of Bank Performance).

   Split Rating. No split rating of the outcome will be undertaken. The PDO remained the same and US$40.9
   million was cancelled just before closing without reducing the scope of the program. The ICR did not
   undertake a split rating of the outcome because the cancelled funds did not have an impact on the original
   Theory of Change (TOC). The PforR activities remained unchanged (ICR, paragraph 18).




3. Relevance   TBL




a. Relevance of Objectives   New




  Rationale
  Alignment with Sector Strategy: The PforR operation was aligned with the Government of Vietnam's
  Socio-Economic Development Strategy (SEDS) for 2020–2025, its accompanying National Target Program
  on Social Economic Development for Ethnic Minority and Mountainous Areas (SEDEMA) for 2021–2030 and
  National Green Growth Strategy for 2021-2030. All these plans prioritized equitable growth framed
  by resilient infrastructure and livelihood. These two strategic documents stated that: (i) sustaining rapid
  growth was possible with growth based on increased labor productivity, addressed the costs of
  environmental degradation and promoted green growth; (ii) maintaining equitable growth and social inclusion
  required assisting and delivering services to marginalized groups, especially the ethnic minorities and; (iii)
  fulfilling Vietnam's aspirations for green growth required transparent governing institutions, economic
  restructuring, environmental sustainability, and social justice.

  On November 12, 2015, the National Assembly Resolution 100 created two overarching programs from the
  16 NTPs - (i) the NTP for New Rural Development (NTP-NRD), designed to upgrade services and
  infrastructure for 8,921 rural communities across all 63 Provinces of Vietnam, and (ii) the Sustainable
  Poverty Reduction Program (NTP-SPR), designed to support infrastructure, livelihoods, basic services and
  capacity building in the country’s 94 poorest districts and 310 communes in coastal areas through five sub-
  programs or projects (please see ICR, footnote 4 for a description of all five sub-programs). or projects under
  the SPR please see ICR, footnote 4. Project 2 or SPR-Program-135 (SPR-P135) led by the Committee for
  Ethnic Minority Affairs (CEMA) was to support 2,240 poorest communes and 33,723 poorest villages in
  ethnic minority and mountainous areas. with five sub-programs (or projects). This Program for Results
  (PforR) carved a segment of the target area (18 provinces of the 63) and was to improve delivery and
  improve access to achieve the NTP's overall objective.

  This PforR operation was to address the inefficiencies and ineffective results orientation of the prior
  NTPs, bridge the urban and rural poverty divide among the disadvantaged Ethnic Minorities (EMs) and
  women by providing equal access to services and increasing agricultural productivity. This PforR program
  would address the NTP aim for shared prosperity and equal access by providing incentives
  in implementing how NTP deliver services and access to livelihood opportunities for the poorer segments of
  the communities in 157 districts and 2,236 communes under the NTS-NRD and 157 districts and 1,044


                                                                                                    Page 4 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   National Targeted Programs Support (P159737)



communes under SRP-P135 in the 18 target provinces of: Cao Bằng, Hà Giang, Lào Cai, Bắc Kạn, Điện
Biên, Lai Châu, Hà Tĩnh, Quảng Bình, Quảng Trị, Thừa Thiên Huế, Quảng Ngãi, Ninh Thuận, Bình Thuận,
Bình Định, Kon Tum, Đắk Lắk, Sóc Trăng, and Trà Vinh.

World Bank Previous Sector and Country Experience: The Bank supported the NTPs over the last 15
years. Among these were Development Policy Lending Operations (DPOs) for the SPR-P135 phase 2 (2006-
2011). Eight development partners financed a complementary operation resulting in a program of policy
reform areas in poverty targeting, participation and decentralization, fiduciary transparency and
accountability, and monitoring and evaluation (M&E). The Bank also financed two community-driven
development (CDD) investment operations in the two poorest regions in the country's Northwest (2010 –
2018) and the Central Highlands (2014 – 2019). The NTPs supported two objectives of the Bank's Country
Partnership Framework (CPF) for FY2018 to FY2022 embodied in two focus areas: (i) Focus Area 1: Enable
Inclusive Growth and Private Sector Participation and Objective 7: Broaden economic participation of ethnic
minorities and vulnerable groups; and (ii) Focus Area 2: Invest in People and Knowledge and Objective 13:
Strengthen capacity to address emerging challenges to gender equality. In addition, some overlap with
Focus Area 3: Ensure Environmental Sustainability and Resilience was expected because the Enhanced
Operations Manual (EOM) would include screening infrastructure investment and livelihood choices against
sustainable practices. The next CPF was under preparation at program closing.

Country Capacity and Adequacy of PforR Instrument: The NTP was the country's principal vehicle to
implement its 2010-2020 Socio-Economic Development Plan (SEDP). The government has
implemented several substantial NTP programs (over US$7 billion annually over a five-year period). The
NTPs were acknowledged to have inefficiencies and ineffective elements that could be improved under a
PforR instrument. The PforR instrument would support the budget for the two NTPs, strengthen program,
implementation, management, and oversight using government systems. This instrument had a comparative
advantage of using incentives such as technical improvements, improving government systems related to
fiduciary, governance, and environmental and social aspects, and strengthen M&E, to facilitate institutional
improvements and help boost NTP's results orientation.

The Bank has assisted the government in its efforts to address limited livelihood options and capacity
enhancements in the poorer regions of the country using various instruments such as IPFs and DPOs
directed at the agriculture sector. The limitations of these instruments to increase agricultural productivity
while building governance capacity provided the lessons for the incentive mechanism under this PforR
operation. The PforR instrument would optimize Bank financing to support Vietnam achieve its rural
development and poverty reduction efforts through the two NTPs. The findings of the assessments
(technical, fiduciary, social and environmental) were used to define the scope of this PforR operation, for
example, the focus on building the capacity at the commune and district level. The four results areas
addressed the development challenges identified by the program, particularly in reaching EMs and women in
the poorer provinces.

The PforR Program Objectives - improved delivery and increased access to investments for increasing
agricultural production and enhancing livelihood opportunities - were in line with the inclusive growth
objective of the FY18-FY22 World Bank CPF for Vietnam and the CPF’s focus areas, objectives, and cross-
cutting themes. This PforR operation was to improve the efficiency, effectiveness, and impact of the NTP-
NRD and SPR-P135 in the target 18 provinces to benefit EMs and women and boost agricultural
productivity. The PDOs were only slightly outcome-oriented ("improved delivery and access") and pitched to
the target area's rural development status and capacity level. For example, one outcome indicator for
Objective 1 (improved delivery), was the number of provinces with integrated plans, which was more at an

                                                                                                 Page 5 of 24
                              Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                     Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                              National Targeted Programs Support (P159737)



                       intermediate rather than an outcome level. In the case of Objective 2, the ICR acknowledged that the
                       outcome of improved access would have been served by providing an indicator to measure the impact of the
                       added infrastructure assets on agricultural productivity (ICR, paragraph 41).


       Rating Relevance TBL




                       Rating
                       Substantial


b. Relevance of DLIs                           New




DLI RELEVANCE TBL




                DLI 1
                DLI
                DLI 1 – Issuance of the Policy and Guidance Instruments for the NRD and SPR-P135.


                Rationale
                The government agreed to use this DLI 1 as a prior action. This DLI was not scalable. The DLI target was
                strategic clearly defined, simple, and straightforward. This DLI was allocated US$20 million or 13 percent of
                the PforR financing, well within the 25 percent threshold of a PforR operation. The DLI was measurable, with
                a clear protocol and methodology for monitoring the achievement of results that contributed to the operation’s
                outcomes. The verification protocol followed the Bank Policy and Directive on Program-for-Results
                Financing. The DLI was integrated into the results framework and the Program Action Plan (PAP) to
                contribute to institutional change in implementing the NRD and SPR-P135 to achieve the PDO.

                Overall, the relevance of this DLI to the objective is rated Substantial. As a prior action, this DLI served as a
                foundation of the other DLIs and was an effective incentive that contributed to the program performance and
                results.



                Rating
                Substantial

                DLI 2
                DLI
                DLI 2 – Number of Participating Provinces with an NTP-SEDP integrated planning process (PDO Indicator 1).

                Rationale
                This DLI was clear, simple, and specific. Its contribution to the operation’s outcomes was measurable and
                integrated to the results framework and the PAP. This DLI was also an outcome indicator and justified the
                achievement of the PDOs. The State Audit Vietnam (SAV) was to implement the clear protocol and
                methodology for monitoring the achievement of results. The SAV would examine the documents relating to
                the integration of the two NTPs into the SEDP of all 18 provinces. SAV would select a random sample of 16
                (of 157) districts to examine how well the two plans were integrated in the SEDP plan of each district. The

                                                                                                                     Page 6 of 24
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      National Targeted Programs Support (P159737)



DLI was feasible, and scalable and allowed disbursements of its US$15 million allocation against the
achievement of graduated results. This DLI was to respond to the government priorities of addressing
persistent inequalities and inclusion by providing the trigger for improving the relevance of sub-projects and
their delivery through participatory integration of NTP into the SEDP. This DLI provided the incentive to
improve institutional performance and results by integrating the NTP-SEDP planning process to
improve program delivery. This DLI also reflected the inclusiveness and diversification aspects of increased
access to investments for boosting agricultural production and enhancing livelihood opportunities. The
integration of the SEDP into the NTP was evidence of the institutional change that addressed the variable
quality of participatory planning identified in the previous NTPs.

Overall, the relevance of this DLI to the PDOs is rated Substantial. This DLI was aligned to the PDO and
served as an outcome indicator (see Section 4 Efficacy below).



Rating
Substantial

DLI 3
DLI
DLI 3 – Percentage of infrastructure investment sub-projects implemented in compliance with the Enhanced
Operations Manual.

Rationale
This DLI was simple and clearly defined as an investment DLI. its contribution to the operation’s outcomes
was measurable. This DLI was aligned with the results framework and the PAP and contributed to the
achievement of the results area 2, supporting the improved quality of program investments. The SAV had a
clear protocol and methodology for monitoring the achievement of results. SAV was to monitor the
compliance of the completed investments with the standards, designs, and requirements contained in the
Enhanced Operations Manual (EOM). The DLI was feasible, strategic, and scalable to allow for the
disbursement of its US$30 million allocation against the achievement of graduated results. This DLI was
allocated the amount that would sufficiently address two major constraints faced by the poor and most
disadvantaged groups: low profitability and productivity in agriculture due to poor integration of farmers to
value-chains or markets. This DLI, in combination with the other DLIs would spur institutional change by
targeting the disadvantaged groups and help achieve the PDOs.

Overall, the relevance of this DLI to the PDOs is rated Substantial. This DLI was aligned to the PDO
as evidence of increased access and supported the second outcome indicator by completing quality
infrastructure according to the requirements of the EOM, a PAP action that specified technical standards for
infrastructure investments.



Rating
Substantial

DLI 4

                                                                                                   Page 7 of 24
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      National Targeted Programs Support (P159737)




DLI
DLI 4 – Percentage points increase in the share of ethnic minorities and women satisfied with access and
quality of community assets or services for increasing agricultural production and livelihoods (PDO Indicator
3).

Rationale
This DLI was clearly defined, simple and straightforward. This DLI was integrated into the results framework
and the PAP. Its contributions to the operation’s outcomes were feasible, measurable, and scalable and
allowed for disbursement of its US$10 million allocation against the achievement of gradual results. This DLI
was an outcome indicator (outcome 2). This DLI was to contribute to achieving the objective of improving
access. This DLI reflected the inclusiveness and diversification aspects of increased access to investments
for boosting agricultural production and enhancing livelihood opportunities. The EOM simplified the
procedures and provided specific guidance to communes on ways in which they could ensure quality income
generating activities, especially for women and ethnic minority women. As part of the PAP, community gender
sensitive guidelines were issued with the EOM in both languages and in an accessible format understood by
target beneficiaries. The Institute for Policy and Strategy for Agriculture and Rural Development (IPSARD), an
independent but government sponsored think tank, linked to the MARD, applied a clear methodology and
protocols to monitor the achievement of results under this DLI. This DLI was scalable. This DLI responded to
the constraints faced by these target population - low profitability and low labor productivity of their livelihood
endeavors. This DLI was to increase productivity and diversify livelihood opportunities.

Overall, the relevance of this DLI to the PDOs is rated Substantial. This DLI was aligned to the PDO and
served as an outcome indicator to contribute to enhancing the impact of the NTPs in raising rural incomes
and access to services, among women and men in the poorest (SPR-P135) areas of the country where ethnic
minorities were concentrated.



Rating
Substantial

DLI 5
DLI
DLI 5 – Percentage of Livelihood Support Sub-projects implemented in compliance with the Enhanced
Operations Manual.

Rationale
This DLI was clearly defined, simple and straightforward. Its achievement measured its contributions to the
operation’s outcomes. This DLI was integrated into the results framework and the PAP. This DLI contributed
to the results area 2, improved quality of program investments. SAV implemented a clear protocol and
methodology for monitoring the achievement of results. The DLI was feasible, scalable, and allowed for
disbursement of its US$30 million as targets were achieved. This DLI supported the outcome under results
area 2 improved quality of program investments and referred to the intermediate results to achieve the
operation’s second outcome. To increase access, livelihood support sub-projects relevant to the
communities were implemented in compliance with an EOM (a PAP action) that specified the use of value
chain analysis in selecting livelihood support activities.



                                                                                                     Page 8 of 24
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      National Targeted Programs Support (P159737)



Overall, the relevance of this DLI to the PDOs is rated Substantial. The significant allocation for investments
provided to DLI 5 addressed two major constraints faced by the poor and most disadvantaged groups: low
profitability and productivity in agriculture due to poor integration of farmers to value-chains or markets. This
DLI was aligned to the PDO and contributed to the overall performance and results of the program.



Rating
Substantial

DLI 6
DLI
DLI 6 – Percentage points increase in the share of households with additional diversified income sources (PDO
Indicator 2).

Rationale
This DLI was clearly defined, simple and straightforward. Its contribution to the operation’s outcomes were
measurable and feasible. This DLI was integrated into the results framework and the PAP. This DLI was an
outcome indicator to achieve the second objective of improving access (see Section 4 Efficacy
below). IPSARD implemented a clear protocol and methodology for monitoring the achievement of results
under this DLI. This was scalable and allowed for disbursement of its US$10 million against the achievement
of gradual results.

Overall, the relevance of this DLI to the PDOs is rated Substantial. This DLI was aligned with the PDO and
served as an outcome indicator to enhancing the impact of the NTPs in raising rural incomes and access to
services, among women and men in the poorest (SPR-P135) areas of the country where ethnic minorities are
concentrated.



Rating
Substantial

DLI 7
DLI
DLI 7 – Number of officers at the provincial-, district-, commune-, and village-level trained in the use of the
Enhanced Operations Manual.

Rationale
This DLI was clearly defined, simple and straightforward. The DLI was integrated with the results framework
and with the PAP. Its contributions to the operation’s outcomes were measurable based on its contribution to
the use of the EOM to achieve the other DLIs. The DLI had a clear protocol and methodology for monitoring
the achievement of results. The SAV verified the actions against this DLI to trigger disbursements. The
DLI was feasible, scalable, and disbursed its US$10 million allocation against the achievement of graduated
targets.




                                                                                                     Page 9 of 24
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      National Targeted Programs Support (P159737)



This DLI on training of officials (DLI 7), and a PAP action on recruiting a Capacity Building Officer (CBO) were
to provide incentives for financing of capacity building. Capacity building was crucial for adopting the
EOM, to improve NTP implementation, and monitor the DLIs at the outcome level. These were weak points of
the earlier NTPs because of low recurrent capacity building budget allocation. In addition, commune officials
monitored program results using subjective or self-reported outcome data.

Overall, the relevance of this DLI to help achieve the PDOs is rated Substantial This DLI was aligned with the
PDO and would address capacity needs to contribute to the achievement of program results and enhance
performance.



Rating
Substantial

DLI 8
DLI
DLI 8 - Development of an M&E framework for NTP-NRD and SPR-P135 and roll out of an MIS for NRD with
financial information from the Treasury and Budget Management Information System (TABMIS) with program
information published online via public disclosure portal

Rationale
DLI 8.1 – Number of monitoring and evaluation frameworks developed for NRD and SPR-P135.
DLI 8.2 – Number of Participating Provinces with an operational NRD-MIS web-based platform
including semi-annual reports with physical outputs and financial information.
DLI 8.3 – Number of publicly accessible websites publishing semi-annual reports on physical progress and
financial information on NRD and SPR-P135.

The three DLIs above were clearly defined, simple, straightforward, and measured their contributions to the
operation’s outcomes. The DLIs were integrated with the results framework and with the PAP. SAV applied
clear protocol and methodology for monitoring the achievement of actions against this DLI to trigger
disbursements. The DLIs were feasible, scalable, and was allocated US$19 million that was disbursed as
graduated results were achieved. The monitoring of the operation’s results required a credible baseline
crucial for the improved implementation of the program and monitoring of the DLIs at the outcome level.
These areas addressed by the DLIs were weak points of the earlier NTPs due to low recurrent budgets
allocated for capacity building and use of subjective or self-reported outcome data by commune officials to
monitor program results. The program also achieved the target of all 18 participating provinces having an
operational MIS web-based platform. Semi-annual reports with physical outputs and financial information from
the Treasury and Budget Management Information System (TABMIS) were reflected in these reports. All 18
provinces achieved the target of publicly accessible websites that published semi-annual reports on physical
progress and financial information on NRD and SPR-P135 exceeding the target of 2.

The relevance of this DLI to achieve the PDOs is rated Substantial. The achievement of these DLIs would
provide credible data to reflect the impact of the NTPs, unlike those of the previous NTPs whose impact on
poverty and welfare was unknown. This DLI was aligned with the PDO and enhanced program performance
and contributed to its overall results.



                                                                                                  Page 10 of 24
                            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                            National Targeted Programs Support (P159737)




            Rating
            Substantial

            DLI 9
            DLI
            DLI 9 - Baseline and end-line tracking survey for NRD and SPR-P135.

            Rationale
            This DLI was clearly defined, simple and straightforward, and its contribution to the operation’s outcomes was
            measurable. The DLI was integrated with the results framework and with the PAP. This DLI was verified by
            the Bank based on the review of baseline and end line surveys produced by IPSARD. The DLI was feasible,
            scalable, and allowed for the disbursement of its US$9 million allocation against the achievement of targets.
            The baseline provided for the improvements reported in achieving the DLI indicators and program outcomes.
            The results of the end-line surveys supported the evidence of the program outcomes, i.e., to the DLI 4 and 6.

            Overall, the relevance of this DLI to achieve the PDOs is rated Substantial. This DLI was to address a lack
            of significant baseline and impact studies to guide policy and program direction and gauge access of the
            poor, women, and ethnic minorities to the NTPs. This DLI was aligned with the PDO and contributed to the
            overall results and performance of the program.



            Rating
            Substantial


OVERALL RELEVANCE DLI TBL




            OVERALL RELEVANCE RATING
            Rationale
            Overall Relevance is rated substantial. The PforR PDO remained relevant and consistent with the
            Government of Vietnam’s and the World Bank’s strategic objectives for promoting sustainable and inclusive
            growth in Vietnam, and its participatory approach served to incentivize improvements in ownership, Program
            planning, implementation efficiency, effectiveness, and institutional capacity building. The DLIs were relevant
            to the achievement of the PforR’s key outcomes and results areas. All DLIs were instrumental to improving
            institutional performance and results. The DLIs were structured to respond to government priorities of
            addressing persistent inequalities and inclusion. DLIs 1 and 2, provided the right triggers for improving the
            relevance of sub-projects and their delivery through participatory integration of NTP into the SEDP. All nine
            DLIs were substantially relevant to the achievement of the program outcomes.



            Rating
            Substantial




                                                                                                              Page 11 of 24
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  National Targeted Programs Support (P159737)



   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               To improve the delivery of investments for increasing agricultural production and enhancing livelihood
               opportunities within the Program area.

               Rationale
               Context: The government implemented a National Targeted Program (NTP) beginning in 2011 aimed to
               address the challenges surrounding agricultural productivity, the inequalities in access to basic services, and
               the limited livelihood options in rural areas. The government aimed to raise rural incomes and productivity
               while reducing the socio-economic disparities between urban and rural areas by implementing the NTPs for
               the New Rural Development (NTP-NRD) and Sustainable Poverty Reduction (NTP-SPR). Both the NTP-NRD
               and NTP-SPR finance infrastructure, production and livelihood activities and some capacity building. The
               programs differ in target groups, implementation mechanisms, reporting requirements and institutional
               responsibilities. This PforR was to help strengthen the efficiency, effectiveness, and impact of the NTP-NRD
               and SPR-P135 by targeting the program that benefit the Ethnic Minority (EM) population and women under
               both programs. They included four of the eleven (11) components (main activities) of the NTP-NRD, namely:
               (i) institutional capacity for new rural development master planning; (ii) socio-economic infrastructure
               investments to enhance agriculture productivity and resilience; (iii) production development, through value
               chain integration, extension services, training of rural workers and agricultural production reforms and (iv)
               capacity building, monitoring and evaluation and communication. All three components of NTP-SPR-P135
               were selected and included (i) infrastructure investment, (ii) production development, livelihood diversification
               and replication of poverty reduction models, and (iii) capacity building for community and grassroot level
               officers (ICR, paragraph 12). The TOC at closing was a simplified version of the more comprehensive one
               prepared at appraisal.

               Theory of Change (TOC): This PforR was to help strengthen the efficiency, effectiveness, and impact of the
               NTP-NRD and SPR-P135 by targeting the program that benefit the Ethnic Minority (EM) population and
               women under both programs. This objective was to address the lack of credible data to support the
               magnitude of impact of the NTPs on poverty and welfare by providing the following inputs: the measures and
               actions contained in the Program Action Plan (PAP) to catalyze the institutional changes and scale up the
               innovations introduced by the program that would improve the efficiency in delivering the government
               program. The “delivery” attribute of the PDO referred to the planning, governance, implementation, and
               monitoring aspects of the program. The outputs were to be those specified under components 1 and 11 of the
               NTP-NRD and component 3 of SPR-P135. These inputs were to represent the activities in the following
               Results Areas of the program: 1, Improved Planning and Governance; 2, Improved Quality of program
               Investments; and 4, Improved Program Monitoring and Management. Outputs were to be the policy and
               guidance instruments; officials trained on the Enhanced Operations Manual (EOM), integrated participatory
               plans of the participating provinces, M&E frameworks, operational MIS web-based platforms and baseline
               and end-line surveys. These intermediate results were attributed to Results Areas 1,3, and 4 and were to
               signal the achievement of five Disbursement Linked Indicators (DLIs - 1, 3, 7, 8.1, 8.2, and 9). Outcome was
               to be the improved processes to deliver investments. These would contribute to achieve the NTP's objective
               of increasing agricultural production and enhanced livelihood of target beneficiaries. DLI 2 was to represent
               this outcome, expressed as the number of targeted provinces that have adopted an NTP-SDP integrated
               planning process. This outcome was more at an intermediate rather than outcome level. The outcome of the

                                                                                                                 Page 12 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   National Targeted Programs Support (P159737)



improved planning and governance did not include the benefits to the lives and livelihoods of the target
beneficiaries in the participating 18 provinces. The ICR provided data under the section Other Outcomes
(ICR, paragraph 46) of other relevant results, but these were not part of the results framework and had no
targets.

The TOC made the following critical assumptions, which if actualized, would increase the likelihood that the
outcomes would be achieved: (i) stakeholders would be open to institutional change; (ii) adequate
implementation capacity existed at all levels; and (iii) institutional changes would be sustained. These
assumptions to a certain degree did occur and affected the outcomes achieved below.

OUTPUTS: Improved program delivery was evident in the achievement of the targets for the intermediate
results under Results Area 1, Improved Program Planning and Governance:

      IR 1 - Issuance of Policy and Guidance Instruments for the NTP- NRD and SPR-P135 that include
       PforR agreed planning, technical and implementation improvements/reforms. The Bank team
       assessed this result as a prior action and this achievement triggered the disbursement under DLI 1.
      IR 2 - the Issuance of Policy and Guidance instruments for the NRD and SPR-P135 achieved the
       target.
      IR 3 - 18 targeted Program provinces with plans prepared in a participatory manner (bottom-up) with
       community involvement with effective consultations of ethnic minorities and women. This achieved the
       target.

Improved program delivery was evident in the achievement of the targets for the intermediate results under
Results Area 2, Improved Program Planning and Governance:

      IR 4 - The Enhanced Operation Manual (EOM) for socio economic infrastructure for both NTP-NRD
         and SPR-P135 was finalized and cleared by the government, achieving the target. IR 2 (DLI 1) laid the
         foundation for the achievement of IR 4. The EOM also included the issuance of standardized
         procedures for scaling up climate-resilient livelihood and enterprise support informed by value chain
         analysis for both the NTP-NRD and SPR-P135. This issuance achieved the target.
        IR 5 - 94.7 percent of infrastructure investment subprojects were implemented in compliance with the
         enhanced operations manual, according to the State Audit Vietnam (SAV), the independent
         verification agency. This achievement exceeded the DLI 3 target of 90 percent.
        IR 6 - There was no report on the percentage of socio-economic infrastructure supported by operation
         and maintenance (O&M) for NRD and for SRP-P135 separately because this was inadvertently
         omitted from the results framework and was not tracked during implementation.
        IR 7 - The EOM also included the issuance of standardized procedures and requirements for scaling
         up climate-resilient livelihood and enterprise support established for both the NTP-NRD and SPR-
         P135 informed by value-chain analysis. This target was achieved.
        IR 8 - 94.7 percent of livelihood support sub-projects were implemented in compliance with the EOM,
         exceeding the DLI 5 target of 90 percent.

Improved program delivery was evident in the achievement of the targets for the intermediate results under
Results Area 4, Improved Program Monitoring and Management:

      IR 10 - 39,949 officials from the provincial-, district-, commune, and village-level were trained in the
         use of the EOM. This was to trigger DLI 7. The target of 50,000 officials was not met because of the

                                                                                                   Page 13 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   National Targeted Programs Support (P159737)



         government's response restricted mobility of the population to limit the spread of COVID-19.
         Nevertheless, the trained officials contributed to achieving the targets that triggered DLIs 3 and 5.
        IR 11 - Two monitoring reports were submitted to the NTP steering committee with updated
         information on end of year implementation status and reporting of Program impacts at completion. The
         target of 6 reports was not achieved.
        IR 12.1 - Two monitoring and evaluation (M&E) frameworks were developed for NTP-NRD and SPR-
         P135, meeting the target. This achievement triggered DLI 8.1.
        IR 12.2 - (reflected as 12 in the ICR): All 18 participating provinces had installed operational NRD-MIS
         web-based platforms including semi-annual reports and physical outputs and financial information
         from the Treasury and Budget Management Information System (TABMIS). This achievement
         triggered DLI 8.2. The web portal at central and provincial levels, was generally accessible and met
         the requirements of DLI 8.2. Updating of resource mobilization and financial information from TABMIS
         was variable with resource mobilization data published for 10 of 18 provinces in the first half of 2020
         and for two of 18 in the second half of the year. The National Coordination Office (NCO) published
         seven of 18 provinces semi-annual financial information from TABMIS in the first half of that year. This
         increased to 11 (from 7) in the second half of the year. NCO maintained a hotline to receive and
         resolve complaints but updating the data was variable.
        IR 13 - All 18 provinces had operational NRD-MIS websites. 2 were publicly accessible websites with
         published semi-annual reports on physical progress and financial information on NRD and SPR-P135,
         achieving the target. The web portal at central and provincial levels, was generally accessible and
         achieved the requirements under DLI 8.3. However, only one of the 18 provincial websites was
         regularly updated accessible websites publishing semi-annual reports on physical progress and
         financial information on NRD and SPR-P135.
        IR 14 - Baseline and end-line tracking survey for NRD and SPR-P135. This result was achieved by (i)
         the budget allocations to the two surveys - baseline and end-line - of NRD and SPR-P135; and (ii)
         administration of the two surveys, meeting the target to achieve the requirements of DLI 9.

OUTCOMES: The outcome indicator, DLI 2, the number of participating provinces with an NTP SEDP
integrated planning process, was achieved. The SAV verification report indicated that all 18 participating
provinces Improved their program delivery because they followed the NTP-SEDP integrated planning
process, meeting the original target of 18. The integration of the SEDP into the NTP was a major institutional
shift that addressed the variable quality of participatory planning in the previous 16 NTPs. The operation
substantially achieved the targets under Results Area 1, 2, and 4. The only targets that were unmet were the
number of officials trained on EOM and the number of reports for the steering committee. The
underachievement of these output targets was not critical to the outcome achieved under this objective.

Overall, the efficacy of the program to achieve this objective is rated Substantial. The program fully achieved
the PDO outcome indicator supported by DLI 2.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective

                                                                                                  Page 14 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   National Targeted Programs Support (P159737)



To improve access to investments for increasing agricultural production and enhancing livelihood
opportunities within the Program area.

Rationale
Theory of Change: Operating under the same context as Objective 1, this TOC provided the inputs, outputs
and outcomes associated with improving "access" to the investments. This improved access was to
mean that the completed investments delivered concrete benefits to targeted households (ICR, paragraph 8).
The following inputs were associated with the activities under Results Area 3, Increased Access to Program
Investments. The inputs were to be the financing of the investments in the target communities of the
participating provinces. Outputs were to be the EOMs for social-economic infrastructure investments
(within component 2 of the NTP-NRD and component 1 NTP-SPR-P135) and EOM for sustainable and
climate resilient rural livelihoods in the communities of the target provinces They included four of the eleven
(11) components (main activities) of the NTP-NRD, namely: (i) institutional capacity for new rural
development master planning; (ii) socio-economic infrastructure investments to enhance agriculture
productivity and resilience; (iii) production development, through value chain integration, extension services,
training of rural workers and agricultural production reforms and (iv) capacity building, monitoring and
evaluation and communication. With respect to NTP-SPR-P135, all three components were selected and
included (i) infrastructure investment, (ii) production development, livelihood diversification and replication of
poverty reduction models and (iii) capacity building for community and grassroot level officers. Outputs were
also to include the increased value chain based livelihood investments that would increase agricultural
productivity and livelihood opportunities. Outcome to show increased access to investments were to be
represented by achieving the conditions under DLIs 4, Percentage points increase in the share of ethnic
minorities and women satisfied with access and quality of community assets or services for increasing
agricultural production and livelihoods, and 6, Percentage points increase in the share of households with
additional diversified sources. was the increase in agricultural production and enhanced livelihood
opportunities. These outcomes were to be expressed as a share of households with additional diversified
income sources and the share of EMs and women satisfied with the access and quality of community assets
or services designed for increasing agricultural production and livelihoods. The outcomes did not include the
value of the increase in diversified income sources, or the nature of the services associated with the increase
in agricultural productivity, for example. Increase in incomes was provided as part of the end-line surveys but
not tracked as part of the outcome indicators.

The TOC's critical assumptions under Objective 1 also applied here. However, Objective 1 focused on
institutional strengthening and process improvements of government agencies. Objective 2 focused on
improving access to investments and agricultural production. Other assumptions would have been useful for
this TOC, such as the availability of adequate resources for operations and maintenance (O&M) of the
completed socio-economic infrastructure assets to signal sustainability. The ICR acknowledged that an
intermediate results indicator (IR 6) on O&M spending was not tracked but O&M was embedded in the
government’s program and was a factor in the achievement of DLI 3 (ICR, paragraph 31).

OUTPUTS: increased access to program investments and improved quality of program investments
achieved the following targets:

      IR 9 - 68 percent of spending was linked to value chain based and climate resilient livelihood
       investments. The target of 30 percent was exceeded
      IR 8 - 94.7 percent of livelihood support subprojects were implemented in compliance with the EOM.
       The target of 90 percent was exceeded.


                                                                                                   Page 15 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   National Targeted Programs Support (P159737)




      IR 5 - 94.7 percent of infrastructure subprojects were implemented in compliance with the EOM. The
       target of 90 percent was exceeded.

OUTCOMES: The targets to increase access to investments that would in turn increase agricultural
production:

      DLI 4 - 19.9 percent of Ethnic Minorities (EMs) and women expressed satisfaction with access and
       quality of community assets or services for increasing agricultural production and livelihoods. This
       share substantially achieved the target of 20 percent.
      DLI 6 - From a baseline of 60 percent of households, another 6.3 percent of households reported they
       have additional diversified income sources. This increase did not achieve the original target of 20
       percent. Most households that diversified their income sources went into non-farm employment
       activities such as processing, construction, and services (production and consumption). The national
       lockdowns, social distancing, and other measures to control COVID-19 led to this low level of
       achievement. The target is expected to be achieved after the project closing. The
       completed infrastructure were durable assets that households would benefit from after the project
       closed, once mobility restrictions from the pandemic was lifted. The end line surveys confirmed that
       beneficiaries considered their access to services reduced the physical and economic distance
       (transaction cost) to overcome subsistence agriculture and their limited market and non-farm
       enterprise participation.
      The following outcomes were not part of the results framework but reported from the end-line surveys
       and would have covered all program components of the NTPs, not just those financed under this
       program:
            o After two years of implementation, the average household income in the PforR provinces
                increased by VND 11.39 million (No target indicated). This is higher than in the non-PforR
                provinces (but no information in the ICR). The end line survey reported that the operation
                contributed to reducing the share of poor and near-poor households in the project provinces
                during the 2018-2020 periods by 4.4 percent a year, higher than the program target of 1.5
                percent. This increase in income was experienced by 70 percent of households in the
                provinces targeted by the PforR, 19.1 percent higher total income compared the non-PforR
                provinces. The Difference-in-Difference (DID) analysis showed that the PforR had, on average,
                helped people increase their total income by 16.4 percent (ICR, paragraph 46).
            o Households in the targeted provinces accessed basic services for agricultural production.
                There was a dramatic increase in the level of access for all types of services
                including electricity, water, and internet connectivity. About 86 percent of households accessed
                basic services provided by local agricultural extension officers to help farmers cope with risks
                and diseases affecting crops (plant protection services) and livestock (veterinary services) in
                2020. After the 2019 African swine fever outbreaks, disease control became a priority. The
                ethnic minority beneficiaries expressed higher than the average satisfaction
                with mechanization (for agricultural labor productivity growth) and small boats (ICR, paragraph
                37).

Overall, the efficacy of the program to achieve this objective is rated Substantial with moderate shortcomings.
One of the target values of the program outcomes was substantially achieved but the other was not because
of conditions that accompanied the response to COVID-19. The omitted indicator on O&M supported socio-
economic infrastructure would have been useful to signal sustainability of the completed assets. However,
O&M was reported to be a factor in the achievement of DLI 3. The ICR acknowledged a lack of indicator to

                                                                                                 Page 16 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     National Targeted Programs Support (P159737)



  better reflect how the improved access to the investments led to an increase in agricultural productivity. The
  program contributed to the green growth agenda of the government through the resilient infrastructure
  and livelihood sub-projects (ICR, paragraph 31).



  Rating
  Substantial




 OVERALL EFFICACY
 Rationale
 The overall efficacy of the program to achieve both objectives is rated Substantial with minor shortcomings.
 The program interventions resulted in improved planning and governance related to the NTPs in the target
 provinces with minor unmet targets. The infrastructure provided through the operation and accessed by ethnic
 minorities and women, was relevant to their priorities, was of high quality and served the daily and livelihood
 needs of the beneficiaries. The composition of the infrastructure especially those related to improving
 agricultural production, was an important contribution of the PforR to addressing the constraints affecting the
 poor (low profitability and low labor productivity).



 Rating
 Substantial


5. Outcome

The relevance of objective is rated Substantial. The PDOs were relevant to the Bank’s CPF, the government’s
Socio-Economic Development Plan (SEDP) and the National Green Growth agenda. The relevance of DLIs was
substantial. The efficacy of the program to achieve the first objective is rated Substantial with minor
shortcomings in achieving certain output targets. The efficacy of the program to achieve the second objective is
rated Substantial with moderate shortcomings in the achievement of an outcome target and lack of sufficient
indicators to address agricultural productivity increases. The efficacy of the program to achieve the overall
objectives is rated Substantial with moderate shortcomings. Outcome is rated Moderately Satisfactory because
of the minor shortcomings in the efficacy of the program to achieve the second objective. The delayed start and
the unsynchronized implementation of the PforR with the NTP were factors in downgrading this outcome from
Satisfactory.


    Outcome Rating
    Moderately Satisfactory


6. Risk to Development Outcome

                                                                                                   Page 17 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     National Targeted Programs Support (P159737)




The following pose risks to the development outcomes:

      Technical. This is a moderate risk. In this program, innovations were introduced in the use of
         websites, data gathering, and conduct of surveys, as well as in the use of data to make public the
         impact of the NTPs. These innovations would require frequent updating and continued training of
         capacity of both those who provide the data and those who use the data. Having a clear program of
         periodic roll out for updates would be useful to the provinces, districts, villages, and communes.
        Financial. This is a substantial risk. In this program, livelihood support sub-projects and infrastructure
         investments were completed. There is need to follow up on enjoining beneficiaries to maintain
         financial flows and viability of introduced sub-projects. Beneficiaries and their cohorts would benefit
         from continued support to maintain the infrastructure and livelihood subprojects. The incorporation of
         the key outcomes, such as improved program delivery and consideration of value chain integration in
         livelihoods subprojects under the new NRD and SEDEMA NTPs may help sustain program
         outcomes.
        Social. This is a moderate risk. In this program, the NTPs focused on supporting the EMs and
         women and the disadvantaged in rural areas. The impact on both nonparticipant and participant
         provinces in accessing the services provided under the NTPs were relatively high. The resulting
         increase in agricultural productivity was reported to have been significant (ICR, paragraph 42).
         Continued stakeholder support would be needed to encourage ethnic minorities and women to
         access these offered services.
        Governance. This is a low risk. In this program, outcomes informed the design of the new NTPs
         (NRD and SEDEMA), particularly on value-chain integration of ethnic minorities. This suggests that
         the NTPs (i.e., NRD and SEDEMA) would maintain the inclusive agricultural value chain models. The
         value chain contests supported under the PforR operation. Experience from the implementation of the
         PforR operation has influenced the design and the implementation plans for the new NTPs (i.e.,
         SEDEMA). Several analytical works financed under the program, such as “Improving Agricultural
         Interventions under the new NTPs” highlighted experiences and lessons from other countries on
         enhancing agricultural and other related value-chain development among the ethnic minorities.
        Government ownership/commitment. This is a moderate risk. In this program, the government
         showed its support for the improvements introduced by the DLIs. Minor shortcomings remained in
         achieving targets for some DLIs that indicate continued commitment would be needed. Budgetary
         support for capacity building is one area that needs constant support.
        Institutional support. This is a moderate risk. In this program, agencies and/or
         related legal/legislative framework may affect how NTPs and SEMA may introduce redesign features
         of future PforRs. This risk affects how PforR programs are implemented at the same time as NTPs to
         support the NTP implementation. Vietnam was also considering changes in public investment law and
         regulations related to Official Development Assistance (ODA). Government decisions would affect the
         design of future PforRs.
        Exposure to natural disasters. This is a substantial risk. The country is highly vulnerable to natural
         hazards. In this program, there was no mention of this vulnerability.




7. Assessment of Bank Performance


                                                                                                       Page 18 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     National Targeted Programs Support (P159737)




a. Quality-at-Entry
  The Bank’s performance in ensuring quality at entry is rated Moderately Satisfactory. The Bank team
  designed this PforR to help strengthen the efficiency, effectiveness, and impact of the government’s NTP-
  NRD and SPR-P135 programs. The team designed the program in line with the CPF priorities for
  Vietnam and the government's own SEDP priorities. The Bank team conducted sound assessments
  and concluded the need to strengthen capacity at the commune and district level because these were
  deemed to be the weak links in NTP implementation. Improvements and innovation to address issues
  surrounding poverty reduction and shared prosperity were to be accompanied by a mix of scalable and
  non-scalable DLIs, reflecting a strong focus on addressing poverty, gender, and social development
  aspects. The actions in the results area targeted EMs and women in the rural provinces because
  inequality in access to productive assets, decision making, and participation in economic activities were
  prevalent in these areas in Vietnam. The PforR was designed based on lessons learned from previous
  phases of the NTP and other predecessor projects. A broad-based stakeholder consultation was
  undertaken at preparation. Risks were identified, and mitigating measures were prepared. However,
  there were some shortcomings: (i) the design was overly optimistic about the scope of the operation and
  capacity of provincial officers to quickly internalize the training on the use of EOM; (ii) the design
  underestimated risks relating to government bureaucracy, especially those concerning lengthy approval
  processes; (iii) there was no indicator to measure increased agricultural production in the results
  framework even though the improvement in delivery and access to investments brought by the PforR
  operation were expected to lead to such outcome; (iv) O&M, critical to sustainable use of the socio-
  economic infrastructure, could have had separate DLIs or at least be included as a PAP action.

  Overall, the quality of Bank performance at entry is rated Moderately Satisfactory because of these
  shortcomings.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The Bank team satisfactorily supervised the program's implementation. The Bank team conducted
 7 implementation support missions over the 4-year implementation period. Key technical experts,
 consultants, and technical, fiduciary, and environmental and social development specialists formed part of
 the missions. A Mid Term Review was conducted on May 24, 2021. The program closed seven months
 later as originally planned. At the request of the government, a restructuring was undertaken just before
 closing to cancel the remaining funds that were not likely to be disbursed in the remaining period. The
 delays in effectiveness and the mismatch in implementation of the NTP supported by this PforR operation
 led to unmet targets. The team was candid about ratings and reported on issues faced by the project.

 Overall, the quality of Bank performance at supervision is rated Satisfactory.

 Overall, the quality of Bank performance is rated Moderately Satisfactory because of the
 shortcomings at design. The Bank team provided adequate implementation support for the operation and
 was candid in evaluating performance.


                                                                                                  Page 19 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     National Targeted Programs Support (P159737)




  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


8. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The M&E design of the program was to use the government's own system to be improved during
 implementation. The TOC showed the causal link between inputs and outputs and outcomes reflected in
 achieving the actions that trigger disbursements. The objective supported the overall objective of the NTP.
 It was clearly stated but in a compound manner that had to be disassembled along two outcomes -
 improved delivery and improved access. The outcome indicators were specific, measurable, and linked to
 the two outcomes in the PDOs but lacked some useful indicators to measure the outcomes of the improved
 planning and investments on the lives and livelihoods of the beneficiaries beyond expressing satisfaction.
 The ICR acknowledged a lack of indicator to measure the increase in agricultural productivity that would
 have measured the success to achieve a long-term outcome. Another indicator identified at appraisal (IR
 6 “percentage of socio-economic infrastructure supported by O&M”) was omitted in the system results
 framework and was not tracked. That indicator was to have measured sustainability and resilience of the
 program. The DLIs were clearly defined and measurable and aligned with the PDO. An annual audit of
 reported achievements, a full paper audit, followed by physical inspections of a sample of reporting
 communes formed the verification protocol. The M&E design also established a baseline and end line
 surveys were to be conducted at closing.



b. M&E Implementation
  The Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development implemented the M&E system as designed, together
  with Ministry of Labor Invalids and Social Affairs (MOLISA) and Committee for Ethnic Minority Affairs
  (CEMA) using the government's M&E system. The State Auditor of Vietnam and the Institute for Policy
  and Strategy for Agriculture and Rural Development (IPSARD) implemented the verification
  protocols. The PforR implemented a baseline survey and end line surveys as planned. The M&E
  system further developed the NRD-MIS system and web portal with published semiannual reporting on
  physical and financial. The M&E system piloted the use of geo-tagging for real time monitoring of
  implementation progress. There were challenges with the regular updates of the web portal due to
  variable capacity. There were also instances where the provinces provided inadequate information which
  delayed identifying the required sub-project sampling for verification.



c. M&E Utilization
  M&E data was used by the National Coordinating Office (NCO), the Bank team, MARD, and the
  government to monitor progress of the program with respect to the DLIs, PAP, individual investment,

                                                                                                 Page 20 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     National Targeted Programs Support (P159737)



  livelihood sub-projects and overall program progress. There were noted lags in applying the M&E
  framework. For example, the late EOM approval left the program provinces little time to familiarize
  themselves with the PforR-specific requirements. In addition, the centrally based M&E system did not
  include sub-project-specific information.

  Overall, the quality of M&E is rated substantial, with some minor shortcomings. The PforR designed and
  implemented a framework for data collection and verification of results. However, there were delays in
  verifying results and generating the needed data, and there was no outcome indicator to track the
  program's impact on agricultural productivity.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

9. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Environmental and Social. The Enhanced Operations Manual (EOM) provided clear guidelines and
   procedures for screening all activities, such as commune level infrastructure investments and livelihood
   support subprojects. The Environmental and Social Systems Assessment called for environmental
   screening at the planning stage to determine eligible subprojects. The program adhered to core
   environmental and social principles. The verification exercise identified some environmental and social
   criteria that needed adjustment or required alternative documentary evidence. Adverse impacts were
   identified, assessed, and considered minor, temporary, localized, and manageable. Mitigating measures
   were included in the Environmental Codes of Practice, Integrated Pest Management, and the “three
   reductions, three gains” campaign facilitated by agricultural institutions and associations supervised by
   National Coordinating Office (NCO), Committee for Ethnic Minority Affairs (CEMA) and local communities.

   Social: There was no displacement. Land acquisition was on a small scale in state-owned land. The
   voluntary land donation method of small pieces of farming land avoided conflicts. Implementation support
   missions confirmed that project information had been well communicated to people in the project areas and
   that ethnic minorities and women benefited from training on sustainable farming practices in coffee and rice
   production. No negative impacts on these groups were recorded. No occupational health and safety
   incidents were reported. No environmental complaints were reported. The program generated social
   benefits, such as increased livelihood activities, opportunities to increase income, social capital from
   participation in sub-project selection and consultations.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management: The PforR operation complied with covenants on financial reporting. The financial
   management action in the PAP was implemented.

   Procurement: No significant procurement issues were reported. All procurement activities were of small
   value and not complex. However, the program implementing agencies were slow in publishing the list of

                                                                                                  Page 21 of 24
        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
        National Targeted Programs Support (P159737)



   firms debarred or suspended from bidding in the World Bank-funded operations as required by the PAP.
   Procurement related activity#5 in the PAP was satisfactorily completed. There was no procurement related
   DLI. Procurement implementation contributed to the substantial achievement of DLIs 2, 3, and 8.3. At the
   provincial level there were some issues related to the use of public procurement method rather than the
   streamlined method agreed for the program.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   .



d. Other
       ---

10. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                           ICR                   IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
                                  Moderately
Outcome                                                 Moderately Satisfactory
                                  Satisfactory
                                  Moderately
Bank Performance                                        Moderately Satisfactory
                                  Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                    Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                    ---                   Substantial


11. Lessons

The ICR presented eight lessons from the operation (ICR, paragraphs 70-77), three to be
considered for designing and five for implementing similar programs. One for design
consideration and four for implementation are slightly paraphrased below:

          Scalable DLIs can enhance implementation. In this program, the scalable DLIs disbursed
           against targets met. This strategy allowed for rewarding partial progress. Government
           agencies and their learnings adjusted and adapted activities as implementation
           progressed. Scalable DLIs also offered some maneuverability with various agencies
           implementing different DLIs along varied delivery timelines.
          Implementing a multi-faceted PforR program may need one lead
           implementing agency. In this program, MARD coordinated the operation that applied to
           NTP-NRD actions while CEMA coordinated the operation of NTP-P135. Coordination
           affected the implementation in some program provinces. Cases of the two agencies taking a
           longer time to agree on implementation plans at that level led to overlapping of funding of
           sub-projects. Naming a single lead implementation agency may improve coordination and
           avoid delays.

                                                                                                   Page 22 of 24
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       National Targeted Programs Support (P159737)



        Synchronizing the implementation period for the PforR and the government programs
         may be useful. In this program, the effectiveness of the credit for the program was delayed
         by three years because of three factors: the lengthy process for signing the financing
         agreement, issuing a legal opinion by the government, and the late approval of the EOM.
         This late start meant the PforR program to support the NTP, which started its implementation
         in 2016-2020, had to catch up three years late. The unsynchronized implementation
         period was also evident in the delays experienced for verification for 2019 and 2020 due to a
         lack of budget allocation for 2021. These delays contributed to the cancellation of funds just
         prior to closing (see Dates above). This affected program performance in disbursement.
         Future programs need to closely synchronize program support with the government
         programs.
        Participating provinces can benefit from being informed of incentives to
         implement results-based financing. In this program, the government adopted a different
         incentive scheme in allocating program resources. The government previously implemented
         PforR programs using Bank resources as an incentive for participation by offering these as a
         top up to regular allocations. In this PforR program, all provinces (both participant and non-
         participant) were given the same budget allocation but only the target provinces were
         assured that resources were available after meeting the increased mandate, reporting
         responsibilities, and results that have been independently verified. The program
         implementing agencies drew on their previous experience to optimize the use of existing
         management systems (human resources, communication, and other approaches) to monitor,
         evaluate, and report on progress to overcome the reluctance of provinces to participate in the
         program. (ICR, paragraph 56). Future PforR operations would have to build in the need for
         periodically clarifying to target program provinces the incentives schemes designed to help
         them achieve program goals - from the time of appraisal to approval, to implementation,
         to monitoring and evaluation of results.
        Use of a government entity to verify results may be useful. In this program, the
         government used the SAV and IPSARD to verify that actions have been achieved to trigger
         disbursements. Other countries with PforR programs would hire an external agency (e.g., an
         international accounting firm, university, etc.) to conduct the verification protocol. The quality
         and rigor of SAV’s verification proved to be high. SAV was also used as a verification agent
         in the Results Based National Urban Development Program in the Northern Mountains
         Region of Vietnam (P143596). The verification process has also built the capacity of the
         government agency to conduct verification audits for the government’s own programs.



12. Assessment Recommended?

  No

13. Comments on Quality of ICR

The report followed the guidelines and provided a clear picture of the operation. Lessons were based on the
evidence provided by the operation. In particular, the benefit of having a government entity serve as verification
agency and continuing to build its capacity to be the verification agency not just for the PforR programs but also

                                                                                                       Page 23 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     National Targeted Programs Support (P159737)



for the government's own programs. The quality of analysis was sufficient and summarized salient points.
Analysis was clearly linked to the evidence provided by the improved monitoring and evaluation, baseline, and
end line surveys that were part of the DLIs. The evidence of outcomes was supported by the data gathered as
part of the program improvements. The report was results oriented. Various sections supported the outcomes.
The ratings were supported by the evidence, particularly an overall Moderately Satisfactory outcome because
of the implementation challenges - the delays in the initial years lessened the impact of what could have been a
highly successful operation (ICR, paragraph 44).



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                  Page 24 of 24
