     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CAR Rural Connectivity (P160500)



                                                                                   Report Number: ICRR0023434

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P160500                                     CAR Rural Connectivity

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Central African Republic                    Transport


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-D2230                                   30-Dec-2022                                          26,601,063.37

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 30-Jun-2017                                 29-Jul-2022

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            45,000,000.00                                                0.00

 Revised Commitment                             29,914,057.05                                                0.00

 Actual                                         26,601,063.37                                                0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Ihsan Kaler Hurcan          Vibecke Dixon                 Kavita Mathur                   IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the International Development Association (IDA) Financing Agreement (p.5) dated October 11,
   2017, and the Project Appraisal Document (p.14) dated June 19, 2017, the project objective is “to improve
   rural road connectivity to markets and social services, and in the event of an Eligible Crisis or Emergency, to
   provide an immediate and effective response.”




                                                                                                    Page 1 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CAR Rural Connectivity (P160500)



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project consisted of four components:

   A. Rural Roads Rehabilitation and Maintenance. (Appraisal cost: US$44.0 million; actual cost: US$27.8
   million). This component was to finance the rehabilitation and maintenance of rural roads in two selected
   areas in the North-West and North-East of the Central African Republic:

   A.1. North-West Road Rehabilitation. This sub-component was to finance the improvement of a network
   of 500 kilometers (km) of targeted rural roads in Ouham and Ouham-Pendé prefectures through labor
   intensive public works (LIPWs) and mechanized works, community-based road maintenance activities, and
   the implementation of road safety measures. The Public Works Implementation Agency of Central African
   Republic (AGETIP-CAR in French) was to organize the LIPWs on behalf of the project implementation unit
   (PIU). The National Office for Public Works and Equipment (ONM in French) and private contractors were to
   implement the mechanized works under performance-based arrangements.

   A.2. North-East Road Rehabilitation. This sub-component was to finance the ongoing emergency works
   on the 330 km Kaga Bandoro-Ndélé road that started under the State and Peacebuilding Fund-financed
   Local Connectivity Emergency Project (P157923 - LCEP), and the extension of the emergency works to the
   440 km Ndélé-Birao road through labor intensive public works and mechanized works. The sub-component
   was also to finance community-based road maintenance activities and the implementation of road safety
   measures on these roads. The United Nations Office for Project Services (UNOPS) was to implement the
   LWIPs, and the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
   Republic (MINUSCA) was to implement the mechanized works in this high conflict isolated area.

   B. Project Implementation, Management and Monitoring. (Appraisal cost: US$9.1 million; actual cost:
   US$1.63 million). This component was to finance technical assistance, training and operation costs,
   monitoring and evaluation costs, and hiring of supervising entity for the capacity building of the PIU in
   project implementation, management, and monitoring.

   C. Resettlement. (Appraisal cost: US$0.3 million; actual cost: US$0.18 million). This component was to
   finance the cost of resettlement compensations consisting of cash compensation for land, moving
   allowances, and compensation for temporary income losses.

   D. Contingency Emergency Response. (Appraisal cost: US$0.0 million; actual cost: US$0.0 million). This
   component was to provide funding for eligible expenditures in case of a crisis or emergency. The project did
   not use this component.

   Revised Components

   Because of continued adverse security situation and insufficient funds to finance underestimated project
   scope, the project could not complete some projects activities and transferred them to the Emergency



                                                                                                  Page 2 of 19
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    CAR Rural Connectivity (P160500)



  Infrastructure and Connectivity Recovery Project (P176540 - EICRP) resulting in a reduction in the original
  project scope and early closure of the project. These activities were as follows:

  A.1. North-West Road Rehabilitation. The project could not complete the mechanized rehabilitation of 500
  km of roads and transferred these incomplete activities to the EICRP (Labor-intensive Road maintenance
  works were completed along with rehabilitation of 33 bridges and 63 basic socio-economic infrastructures,
  such as schools, health centers, and drying areas).

  A.2. North-East Road Rehabilitation. The project cleaned, reprofiled, and graded all 333 km of the Kaga
  Bandoro-Ndélé road but graveled only 142 km of the road. The project could not implement spot
  improvement works for the 444 km Ndélé-Birao and open the road because technical studies and safeguard
  documents were not completed as scheduled. The project transferred all uncompleted works under this
  subcomponent to the EICRP.

  Upon the request of the residents in the project areas, the construction or rehabilitation of some
  socioeconomic infrastructure was added to the project scope. These additional works were expected to cost
  US$0.2 million, such as wells, drilling reparations, school rehabilitations, health center rehabilitations, and
  construction of markets. Project restructuring papers did not include these additions, but the Implementation
  Status and Results Report dated January 23, 2020, reported the addition of these activities to the project
  scope (ICR, p.10).



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost. The total project cost was originally estimated at US$53.40 million. On July 29, 2022, the
  project closed with a total cost of US$29.61 million. The actual cost was lower than the cost estimated at
  appraisal because some works could not be completed due to security concerns. The PIU could not
  complete the technical studies and works of the 333 km road section between Kaga and Bandoro-Ndélé,
  and the project funds were insufficient to rehabilitate the roads due to the further deterioration of the project
  roads because of road closures and adverse climate conditions. Rather than processing an additional
  financing to cover the cost of increased project scope, it was agreed to prepare a new project, close this
  project earlier than its original closing date and transfer all uncompleted works to the new project. The
  Emergency Infrastructure and Connectivity Recovery Project (P176540 - EICRP) was approved in June
  2021 and the uncompleted works and cancelled financing from the Rural Connectivity Project (RCP) were
  transferred to the EICRP.

  Financing. At appraisal, the IDA financing was estimated at US$37.30 million. By project closing in July
  2022, the project had disbursed US$29.61 million from IDA grants. The project refunded the undisbursed
  amount to the national IDA envelope of the Central African Republic.

  Co-financing. The French Development Agency (FDA) was to provide US$ US$8.40 million to project
  financing, but none materialized as the FDA did not complete their funding approval process (ICR, p.15).

  Borrower’s contribution. At appraisal, no borrower’s contribution was estimated, and none materialized at
  project closing.

  Restructurings: The project was restructured twice:



                                                                                                      Page 3 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CAR Rural Connectivity (P160500)



   First Restructuring (Level 2 – October 10, 2017). Because of the reorganization of the ministries in CAR,
   the agency responsible for the implementation of the project was changed from the Ministry of Equipment,
   Transport, Civil Aviation and Territorial Management to Ministry of Public Works and Road Maintenance.
   The project was restructured to reflect this change in the Financing Agreement that had not been signed
   yet. There were no other changes proposed in this restructuring.

   Second Restructuring (Level 2 – July 26, 2022). The project was restructured to reduce the project scope
   because of uncompleted works, revise the results framework in accordance with the reduced project scope,
   cancel the undisbursed US$17.24 million, and close the project on July 29, 2022, five months earlier than
   the original closing date of December 30, 2022. These changes were required because of the
   implementation challenges caused by the worsening security situation in the project area and the need for
   additional financing to rehabilitate further deteriorated project roads. Rather than processing an additional
   financing, the WB management decided to close this project and transfer its uncompleted works and
   unused funds to the EICRP that was active at the time of project restructuring (for changes in the project
   scope, please see Revised Components above).

   Dates. The project was approved on June 30, 2017. The Financing Agreement was signed on October 11,
   2017, and the grant became effective on April 10, 2018. The Mid-Term Review was conducted in December
   2020. The project closed on July 29, 2022, five months earlier than the original project closing date of
   December 30, 2022. The reasons for early project closing are given in the second restructuring entry above.

   Reason not to undertake a split assessment of project’s performance. The reduction in the project
   scope and the revision in the results framework would normally require a split assessment of the project’s
   performance but the project was restructured just before its closing and the disbursement after the
   restructuring was negligible (only one percent of the total disbursed amount). Additionally, the achievement
   of the only indicator that was revised was significantly lower than the decreased target. These low
   disbursement amount after restructuring and the lower achievement compared to original and revised
   targets of one of the indicators (the other indicators’ targets were not revised) would not have a material
   effect on the outcome rating; hence, this review does not undertake a split assessment of the project’s
   performance.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Alignment with Bank Strategy. The project objective is highly aligned with the World Bank’s current
strategy as defined in the Country Partnership Framework for FY2021-25 (CPF) for the Central African
Republic (CAR). The project sought to address the development problem of insufficient or non-existent
access to rural roads in the remote North-West and North-East regions of the country, which is a major
barrier to the development of the main economic activity of agriculture and residents’ access to social and
economic services—one of the main root causes of the conflict situation in the country, i.e., neglect of the
rural population. This development problem fits under the first focus area of the CPF, i.e., human capital
and connectivity to boos stabilization, inclusion, and resilience and contributes to the achievement of
“Objective 1.5: Build resilient infrastructure (power, mobility, water) for improved connectivity” (CPF, p.2).
The project was to support the achievement of this objective through the rehabilitation of long-neglected
rural roads in the remote project areas and maintenance of these roads by local communities. The project

                                                                                                      Page 4 of 19
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      CAR Rural Connectivity (P160500)



               was to finance labor intensive public works to create immediate employment opportunity to the residents in
               the project areas. The project’s expected outcome of improved connectivity in rural areas through access to
               all-weather roads is highly aligned with the objectives of the CPF.

               Alignment with Government Strategy. The project objectives are highly relevant to the country context.
               The project objectives support the government’s strategic objective to improve the socioeconomic welfare
               of the rural population thorough road connectivity as defined in the government’s Plan for Recovery and
               Peacebuilding (RCPCA—French acronym). The project objective is also aligned with the government’s
               transport strategy that aims at connecting the country to gateway ports in neighboring countries and the
               enhancing the rural transportation network and services in remote areas to strengthen national cohesion.
               Given the fragile and conflict-affected situation (FCS) in the Central African Republic, the project objectives
               are appropriately pitched for the development status in the country as described in the CPF. The insufficient
               capacity to implement the project was to be addressed by the technical support and the cooperation of the
               UNOPS and MINUSCA in project implementation.

               Previous World bank Experience. Before this project, the WB financed the US$ 4.9 million Local
               Connectivity Emergency Project (P157923 - LCEP), which was piloted “to reconnect the rural population of
               the Northeast part of the Central African Republic to urban centers and local markets by rehabilitating the
               Kaga-Bandoro-Mbrés-Bamingui-Ndélé road.” Based on the experience gained during the implementation of
               the LCEP and the recognition that more rehabilitation works were needed to close the infrastructure gap in
               the remote areas of the country, the Rural Connectivity Project was prepared to be implemented in a larger
               area. The project was designed to scale up the activities implemented under the pilot project. The results
               expected from the project’s intervention were realistically set in an FCS context, such as the number of
               months a road is accessible in a year, reduction in travel times, and the number of farmers with access to
               improved roads. The project was to be implemented in high security risk areas where the impact of the
               project on the socioeconomic welfare of the farmers and local communities could not be easily measured.
               Therefore, while the project objective was pitched at the output level, it was sufficiently challenging in an
               FCS country and appropriate with the WB’s experience in the country and the sector.

               Overall, the relevance of objectives is rated High.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To improve rural road connectivity to markets and social services.

                             Rationale


                                                                                                                                Page 5 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   CAR Rural Connectivity (P160500)



Theory of Change. The Government’s National Plan for Recovery and Peacebuilding (Plan National de
Relèvement et de Consolidation de la Paix en Centrafrique, RCPCA) identifies two main reasons as the root
causes of the security crisis in CAR: (a) the widening socioeconomic gap between the elite and the rest of the
population; and (b) the total neglect of large parts of the rural population whose primary economic activity is
agriculture (ICR, p.5). Poor or non-existent road access adversely affects agricultural productivity in rural
areas. Therefore, the project prioritized the North-West and North-East agriculture production regions where
“improvement in rural connectivity could unlock some of the unrealized agricultural capacity” (ICR, p.5) and
facilitate the rural residents’ better access to social and economic services; hence, improved socioeconomic
welfare of the long neglected rural populations. Therefore, the project was designed “to improve rural
accessibility in areas with high agricultural potential and reduce isolation of communities in remote areas of
CAR while promoting job creation through labor intensive community works” (ICR, p.6).

The project was to use the project’s inputs—IDA grants—to finance civil works for the rehabilitation and
community-based maintenance of rural roads in the North-West and North-East regions of the country. The
expected outputs were improved road conditions on about 1,800 km of rural roads including road safety
improvements and their sustained light maintenance by rural communities. These outputs were expected to
lead to all-weather road access by rural residents to access basic socioeconomic services (such as markets,
schools, and health centers), farmers to bring their produces to local markets, and humanitarian actors. The
long-term impact of the roads would have been expected to improve socioeconomic welfare of the rural
population in the project areas contributing to the improvement of security situation in the country. The project
was to finance labor intensive public works to create direct employment opportunities and income to residents
in the project areas contributing to the improvement of their economic welfare. If successfully implemented,
the project was to contribute to high level outcome of economic development in lagging regions related to the
country’s fragile, conflict, and violence (FCV) situation. Overall, the theory of change of the project was simple
and straightforward. The causal pathways from inputs to outcomes were valid and direct, and the
achievement of the outcomes and project objective could be attributed to the project’s intervention, but the
continued adverse armed conflict in the project areas posed a high risk for the completion of the project
activities, which materialized. The adverse security conditions also led to the underestimation of the project
scope as access to North-East region was restricted to complete a proper survey of to determine the status of
the roads, which were later found to be in worse conditions than estimated. Therefore, the project inputs—i.e.,
IDA grants—were insufficient to complete all project activities, which led to the transfer of uncompleted
project activities to the EICRP.

Outputs

      Roads rehabilitated in the Nort-West region. At appraisal, the project’s target was to rehabilitate
       500 km roads in the Nort-West region in two phases; first phase was the spot improvement of the
       roads through labor-intensive road works, and the second phase was the mechanized rehabilitation of
       the roads. The achievement under the first phase was 472 km. The project could not complete the
       second phase of the works because of delays in the preparation of technical studies.

      Roads rehabilitated in the Nort-East region. The project was to implement the works on two road
       sections in this region. The first section was the road between Kaga Banodor and Ndélé. It is 322 km
       long and was to be rehabilitated consisting of three layers. This section was already rehabilitated
       under the LCEP. The project applied the first layer to 288 km of the road (89 percent). Second layer
       was completed on 248 km of the road (77 percent) and full rehabilitation was completed on142 km of
       the road (44 percent). Additionally, 14 small bridges were constructed against the target of 114. The
       completion of the first and second layers on most of the road section resulted in the reopening of the

                                                                                                    Page 6 of 19
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  CAR Rural Connectivity (P160500)



      road and reducing the travel time between these two cities significantly. The second road section was
      the 440 km road between Ndélé and Birao, which crosses through the Manovo-Gounda Saint Floris
      National Park. Because of the delays in the completion of the technical studies and implementation of
      safeguards policies due to continued adverse security situation in the project area, the project could
      not start rehabilitation works on this road section.

    Roads with improved road safety measures. The road safety measures were implemented on the
      614 km roads the project rehabilitated in both regions. The original target was 1,250 km, which was
      revised to 600 km at the second restructuring.

    Community-based maintenance organizations that are operational. The target was to have 200
      community-based maintenance organizations operational. At project closing, no community-based
      maintenance organizations were operational.

Outcomes

    Improved passability of the road between Kaga Bandoro-Ndélé and Ndélé-Birao. Before the
      project, the number of months in a year the 773 km roads were passable was five months. The target
      was to improve the road quality so that the road would be passable 12 months. The achievement was
      seven months.

    Reduction in travel time between Ndélé-Birao. The travel time of the 440 km road before project
      was ten days. The target was to decrease the travel time to seven days. The achievement was nine
      days.

    Proportion of improved project roads under routine maintenance. The original target was to have
      all project roads under routine maintenance, which was revised to 50 percent of the roads at the
      second restructuring. At project evaluation, no project roads were under routine maintenance, which is
      a significant risk for the sustainability of the roads that were rehabilitated under the project.

    Improved access to basic social services (markets, schools and health centers) in the project
      area. The target was to increase the number of social services by 20 from a baseline value of zero.
      The achievement was 63 social services consisting of markets, schools, and health centers built under
      the project in the Nort-West region only.

    Farmers in the project area with improved access to markets. The target was 90,000 farmers to
      have improved access to markets. The baseline was zero and the achievement was 36,000 farmers—
      40 percent of the target.

    Reduction in travel time between Kaga-Bandoro and Ndélé. The results framework did not include
      an indicator to capture the reduction in the travel time between these two towns, but the ICR (p.30)
      reports that after the rehabilitation of the road by labor-intensive works the travel time dropped from
      one week to one day.

    Direct project beneficiaries. The project roads connected 105,000 rural residents to markets,
      schools, and health centers. The target was 115,000 residents.


                                                                                                  Page 7 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   CAR Rural Connectivity (P160500)




      Person-days of employment created through the labor-intensive public works. The project
       created 58,300 person-days of employment for the residents in the project areas through the labor-
       intensive road rehabilitation works. The share of women was 28 percent. The targets were 150,000
       and 33 percent, respectively. One of the goals of the project was to create employment for the local
       population through project works, to contribute to their economic welfare and address one of the root
       causes of fragility in the project regions.

The project was successful in continuing with the further rehabilitation of the Kaga Bandoro-Ndélé road
section that was partially improved under the WB-financed pilot LCEP. The connectivity between these two
towns improved significantly through the reduction of travel time from one week to one day. The project also
successfully completed the first phase rehabilitation of 472 km in the North-West region but there is no
evidence showing what the impact of this road rehabilitation was on the connectivity of rural residents and
farmers other than the 63 socioeconomic buildings constructed or rehabilitated under the project, such as
markets, schools, and health centers. Furthermore, the project could partly rehabilitate the roads where works
could start. The project could not start the road rehabilitation works between Ndélé and Birao, which is in the
most isolated region of the country. The main reason for under achievement of the project outputs and
outcomes was the continued adverse security situation in the project areas, which adversely affected project
implementation. Because of the security concerns consultants were not able to complete technical studies
and safeguards documents. The insufficient capacity of the consultants contributed to these delays. As it was
found out during implementation that the project funds would not have been sufficient to finance the
rehabilitation of all roads in the North-East region because of their extremely deteriorated conditions, the WB
management decided to initiate a more comprehensive project rather than processing an additional financing.
All uncompleted rehabilitation works under the project were transferred to the new project, i.e., the EICRP. As
the project could not deliver the establishment of community-based maintenance arrangements, there is a
high risk that the improvements achieved in road conditions may not be sustained. The EICRP is expected to
establish these community-based maintenance arrangements along with the completion of the works
transferred from the Rural Connectivity Project.

Overall, the project was partially successful in delivering the project outputs of improved road conditions that
would have been expected to improve the connectivity of the farmers to the markets and the rural residents’
access to socioeconomic services. Therefore, the project’s efficacy in achieving the project objective to
improve rural road connectivity to markets and social services is rated Modest.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To provide an immediate and effective response in the event of an Eligible Crisis or Emergency.

Rationale
The project did not implement any activity to address any eligible crises or emergencies. Therefore, the
project’s efficacy in achieving this objective is not rated.



                                                                                                    Page 8 of 19
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                CAR Rural Connectivity (P160500)




                            Rating
                            Not Rated/Not Applicable


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Because of continued adverse security situation in the project areas, lack of sufficient funds to rehabilitate the
                            roads that were in much worse condition than previously estimated, and the delays in the preparation of the
                            technical studies and safeguards documents, the project could partially deliver the project outputs and
                            outcomes. Therefore, the project’s efficacy in achieving the first objective to improve rural road connectivity to
                            markets and social services is rated Modest. Since the project did not trigger an emergency response, the
                            project’s efficacy in achieving the second objective to provide an immediate and effective response in the
                            event of an eligible crisis and emergency is not rated. Overall, the project’s efficacy in achieving the project
                            objectives is rated Modest.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating                                    Primary Reason
                            Modest                                                     Low achievement


   5. Efficiency
   Economic Analysis

   Because of the emergency to provide basic road infrastructure in the conflict-affected areas, lack of reliable
   data, and almost no traffic on project roads due to extremely poor road conditions, an economic analysis was
   not conducted at appraisal. Instead, a cost-effectiveness analysis was conducted to design the project to
   maximize its impact and minimize costs. Based on the theory, it was assessed that the project would have had a
   positive impact on the socioeconomic lives of the rural residents and farmers as the roads were not accessible
   before the project, and improvement in road conditions would allow the rural residents to access markets,
   schools, and health centers much more easily while connecting them to urban centers. A quantitative analysis
   was not conducted at appraisal.

   However, during project implementation in 2020, but before the start of rehabilitation works, an economic
   analysis was conducted for the road section between Kaga-Bandoro and Ndélé utilizing the WB’s Highway
   Development and Management Model (HDM-4) with a 20-year evaluation period and a discount rate of 12
   percent. The benefits were defined as the savings from vehicle travel costs and travel time as a result of road
   conditions that improved under the rehabilitation works. Costs were defined as rehabilitation costs and
   maintenance costs. The assumptions are conservative; they did not include quantifiable benefits from increased
   economic and social benefits stemming from the rural population’s improved road access. The analysis resulted
   in an economic internal rate of return (EIRR) of 20.3 percent and a net present value (NPV) of CFAF 22.2 billion
   for the road section between Kaga-Bandoro and Ndélé. At the time of the project completion, same methodology




                                                                                                                                 Page 9 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      CAR Rural Connectivity (P160500)



was used to conduct an economic analysis for the completed portion of the Kaga-Bandoro and Ndélé road—142
km from Kaga-Bandoro to Mbrés. The analysis resulted in an EIRR of 18.8 percent.

To assess the economic impact of the road rehabilitation in the North-West region, i.e., in Ouham and Ouham-
Pendé provinces, the project team conducted two economic analyses, one for before-project and the other after-
project, using the Roads Economic Decision Model (RED). The ICR (p.14) states that the RED is an appropriate
model for economic evaluation of low-volume roads such as those in the North-West region. The analyses
resulted in a before-project EIRR of 20 percent and an NPV of CFAF 3.0 billion and after-project EIRR of 21
percent and an NPV of CFAF 2.6 billion. An economic analysis was not conducted for the Ndélé-Birao section
where project could not implement any rehabilitation works.

Overall, the economic analyses confirm that the rehabilitation of the rural roads in the project areas is
economically justifiable, but around half of the project activities could not be completed and their economic
benefits did not materialize.

Administrative and Operational Efficiency

The project could not implement some project activities because of delays in the preparation of technical studies
and safeguard documents and insufficient project funds. A preliminary analysis revealed that funds allocated
were not sufficient for the rehabilitation of the road from Kaga-Bandoro to Birao passing through Ndélé because
of significant deterioration of the road and the 70 km extension of the road from Ndélé to Birao required to
bypass the Manovo Gounda Saint Floris National Park. The cost of the road rehabilitation works in the North-
West region was also insufficient. Financing gap was estimated at around US$48.5 million. As the ICR (p.20)
states “the financial and contractual estimates of rehabilitation works were no longer feasible even before project
effectiveness.” Therefore, the project focused on the rehabilitation of the Kaga-Bandoro and Ndélé section of the
road, which was already improved under the LCEP, and the remaining part from Ndélé to Birao was transferred
to the EICRP. The continued security situation in the project areas adversely affected the project implementation
and efficiency resulting in frequent project implementation interruptions. The onset of the COVID pandemic
significantly slowed down project implementation because of an eight-month hard stop during which the
consultants could not complete their works. At project closing, only 57 percent of the project funds were
disbursed. There were significant shortcomings in financial management and procurement mostly because of
the insufficient capacity of the PIU (see section 10.b Fiduciary Compliance).

Overall, the project’s efficiency in achieving the project objectives is rated Modest because of under
achievement of project benefits and significant shortcomings in administrative and operational efficiency that
adversely affected project implementation and delivery of project outputs and outcomes.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)


                                                                                                     Page 10 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      CAR Rural Connectivity (P160500)



                                                                                      0
Appraisal                                                    0
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      0
ICR Estimate                                                 0
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The project objectives were highly aligned with the WB strategy and relevant to the country context; the project
was designed to address the lack of sufficient road connectivity, which is a major barrier for socioeconomic
development of the rural areas, a root of fragility in the country. Following the achievements of the pilot LCEP,
the project was designed to improve road connectivity in a larger area. Overall, the relevance of objectives is
rated High. The project could partially deliver project outputs and outcomes because of continued adverse
security situation in the project areas and delays in the preparation of technical studies and safeguards
documents. Therefore, the project’s efficacy in achieving the project objective is rated Modest. The economic
analyses conducted at the project evaluation show that rehabilitation works are economically viable, but the
project was not successful delivering the expected outcomes. Additionally, there were significant shortcoming in
the administrative and operational efficiency of the project stemming from the under-estimation of rehabilitation
costs, PIU’s lack of financial management and procurement capacity, and consultants’ insufficient capacity to
complete the works. The efficiency of the project in achieving the project objective is rated Modest. Overall, the
project’s outcome is rated Moderately Unsatisfactory in accordance with the Bank Guidance (p.38).


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Unsatisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Ongoing armed conflict in the project areas poses a major risk for the sustainability of project
outcomes. The continued armed conflict in the project areas had an adverse impact on the implementation
of the road rehabilitation works. The adverse security situation could prevent the completion of the pending
road rehabilitation works under the follow-on EICRP or the start of the works on the Ndélé-Birao section. An
increased level of armed conflict could also result in poor maintenance of the roads or even cause direct
damage on the partially rehabilitated roads. Lastly, a continuation of the armed conflict could severely disturb
agricultural and other economic activities in the region diminishing the impact of improved road access on
the socioeconomic welfare of the rural population.

Even in the absence of an armed conflict, the risk of insufficient road maintenance is high. The project
could not establish community-based maintenance arrangements. Such maintenance arrangements could
be established under the EICRP, but the Road Maintenance Fund does not have sufficient funds to cover the
maintenance cost of roads in the country. The current budget of the fund would cover the maintenance of
only five percent of the roads. Therefore, it is highly likely that the roads rehabilitated under the project will
not be maintained adequately.



                                                                                                      Page 11 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CAR Rural Connectivity (P160500)




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The development of the roads connecting remote regions of the country to urban centers and markets
  was of high strategic importance for the government of CAR to improve the socioeconomic welfare of the
  rural population as outlined in the National Plan for Recovery and Peacebuilding (2017) and address the
  root causes of fragility—i.e., the widening socioeconomic gap between the elite and the rest of the
  population, and the total neglect of large parts of the rural population. The selection of the project areas
  was appropriate to address the root causes of fragility and based on the following reasons (ICR, p.5): (i)
  their extreme isolation, especially the North-East region; (ii) the population served; (iii) the agricultural
  potential; (iv) their role in the security crisis (North-West region), and (v) their strategic locations along the
  corridors connecting the capital Bangui to Cameroon and Chad (North-West region), and Sudan (North-
  East region). The project’s approach was simple and straightforward consisting of the rehabilitation of
  roads that were accessible for only a couple of months in a year.

  The project was designed based on the experience gained during the implementation of the pilot Local
  Connectivity Emergency Project to scale up road rehabilitations in isolated regions. The project’s
  technical aspect consisting of simple spot road improvements in critical points to restore basic
  connectivity followed by mechanized rehabilitation of all road sections was appropriate. The project
  design included labor intensive public works to create direct employment opportunities for the residents in
  the project area. This was an appropriate intervention method to provide income to residents and
  contribute to the addressing of the root causes of fragility.

  Project implementation and financial management arrangements benefited from the existing set-up under
  the WB-financed Central African Economic and Monetary Community Transport and Transit Facilities
  Project (P079736 - CEMAC TTFP). The PIU of the CEMAC TTFP was selected to oversee project
  implementation in both regions supported by supervision consultants to be hired under the project, but
  the project failed to hire supervision consultants. The safeguards aspects of the project were adequate;
  the project’s impact on environment and involuntary resettlement of people was assessed to be minimal
  as the rehabilitation works were to be implemented on the existing right-of-way. Project funds were
  allocated for the payment of compensations to project-affected people. The PIU and UNOPS had
  sufficient capacity and experience to implement the project activities.

  However, the project’s scope and budget were underestimated. The exact status of the roads in the
  North-West project area and between Ndélé and Birao could not be adequately assessed because of
  adverse security conditions that limited access to the project areas. Insufficient funding led to early
  closing of the project and transfer of most of the rehabilitation works to the EICRP. At appraisal, a cost-
  benefit analysis was not conducted because of the emergency nature of providing basic road
  infrastructure conflict-affected project areas, lack of data, and low traffic on project roads. Most of the
  risks were adequately identified mitigation measures were in place, but they were ineffective against the
  continued adverse security situation in the project areas.

  Overall, the quality-at-entry is rated Moderately Unsatisfactory because of the significant shortcomings
  in adequately assessing the project scope and funding.


                                                                                                         Page 12 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CAR Rural Connectivity (P160500)




  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 In-person missions were held twice a year until the onset of COVID, after which the project team
 supervised the project virtually. The presence of one of the Task Team Leaders in Bangui during the
 implementation of rehabilitation works facilitated close contact with the authorities during the COVID lock-
 down.

 Because of the under-estimation of the project scope and insufficient funds, the project team shifted its
 focus on the Kaga-Bardoro-Ndélé road section to achieve the project outcomes (this road section had
 already been partially rehabilitated under the LCEP). The project team was proactive in shifting the
 strategic course of the project based on the preliminary assessment of the then current road conditions and
 the M&E data. The decision to close the project five months earlier and transfer the uncompleted works to
 the active EICRP was an appropriate decision that would be expected to use limited IDA funds more
 efficiently and achieve the expected outcomes of improved road connectivity.

 The project team adequately supervised fiduciary and safeguards aspects of the project and intervened
 when needed, such as the road design change in the North-East region to bypass a national park and
 revision of the financial management arrangements to entrust the PIU with the fiduciary responsibility
 rather than the Road Fund being responsible for the payments. The project team’s supervision of the
 successful transfer of uncompleted activities to the EIRCP and the works that would continue the Kaga
 Bandoro-Ndélé road was also sufficient.

 It should be noted that continued adverse security situation in the project areas, which was beyond the
 control of the project team, had adversely affected project implementation and supervision. For example,
 insurgent groups had established 17 checkpoints on the road between Kaga Bandoro-Ndélé and there
 were incidents of altercations included arms. However, the project’s supervision and follow-up of UNOPS
 activities was insufficient that led to project implementation delays. Additionally, the project team did not
 take sufficient action to address the shortcomings in the results framework to better capture the project
 outputs and outcomes (see section 9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization below).

 Overall, the quality of supervision is rated Moderately Satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

                                                                                                     Page 13 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CAR Rural Connectivity (P160500)




a. M&E Design
 The project objectives were clearly specified and sufficiently challenging for an intervention in an FCS
 country. The theory of change was sound, and causal links from project activities to the achievement of
 project outputs and outcomes were direct and valid, but it was not adequately reflected in the results
 framework. The indicators did not capture the outcomes expected in each project area. They were
 designed to capture the impact of the project on road access in the North-East region, but not in the North-
 West region. Intermediate results indicator measured the achievement of the outputs at project level rather
 than road section level. There were no specific indicators capturing the achievement of socioeconomic
 infrastructure or their impact on rural residents. The M&E design did not cover the project’s impact on
 drivers of fragility. Although the indicators were measurable, time-bound, and relevant, they were not
 specific and some of them were not achievable as the project funds were not sufficient to implement all
 road rehabilitation works. The M&E arrangements were in place. The PIU was responsible for M&E, and
 the project was to hire an M&E specialist to support the PIU. The UNOPS in the North-East project area
 and contractors in the North-West project area were to provide data to the PIU for M&E implementation.



b. M&E Implementation
  Planned data collection could not be carried out adequately for approximately two years because of the
  delay in recruiting an M&E specialist. During that period, project implementation reporting was
  inconsistent and the PIU’s attention to effective M&E implementation was insufficient. The lack of close
  monitoring of rehabilitation works adversely affected the achievement and quality of the project outputs
  (ICR, p.21). Following the hiring of an M&E specialist in 2020, the quality of M&E implementation
  improved. The shortcomings in the M&E design were not addressed during project implementation. The
  M&E design was not modified to adequately incorporate the changes in the project scope, such as the
  extension of the road from Ndélé to Birao to bypass the national park, The M&E functions and processes
  are likely to be sustained as the WB-financed EICRP uses similar M&E arrangements.



c. M&E Utilization
  M&E findings were successfully used to process a major shift in the implementation direction that
  resulted in early closure of the project and preparation of a new project, which overtook the rehabilitation
  activities that could not be implemented because of security reasons and delays in the preparation of
  technical studies and safeguard documents. The M&E data were sufficiently used to provide evidence
  for the achievement of outputs and outcomes through rehabilitation works that were partially completed
  in a smaller section of the project roads.

  While the project successfully used M&E data to process a major shift in implementation direction, there
  were significant weaknesses in M&E design and implementation, and it was difficult to assess the
  achievement of the outcomes of all project activities and test the links in the results chain. The M&E
  system as designed and implemented did not capture how the project addressed the drivers of fragility in
  CAR. Overall, the M&E quality is rated Modest.




                                                                                                    Page 14 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CAR Rural Connectivity (P160500)




  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   At appraisal, the project was classified as Category B under Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) and
   triggered Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) and Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) safeguard
   policies.

   Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01). The project was classified as Category B because of the
   potential site specific and manageable impacts of road rehabilitation and maintenance activities on the
   environment. The preparation of the WB safeguard policies was deferred under the OP/BP 10.00,
   paragraph 12 because of the emergency situation in the country. In accordance with the provisions of
   OP/BP 10.00, paragraph 12, an Environmental and Social Safeguards Action Plan (ESSAP) was prepared
   at appraisal to guide the processing of this emergency operation. A French translation of the ESSAP was
   disclosed in country and on the WB’s InfoShop. Environmental and Social Impact Assessments (ESIA) and
   Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMP) were prepared after project approval but with
   significant delay for the North-East section from Ndélé to Birao—the preparation of ESIA and ESMP could
   only start towards the end of 2019, 21 months after the grant effectiveness, because of worsening security
   situation. The PIU hired social and environmental safeguard specialists to ensure compliance with the
   safeguard policies but the onset of COVID in March 2020 adversely affected the specialists’ works who had
   to cancel their missions to project sites. There were moderate shortcomings in enforcing the health and
   safety measures at project sites that resulted in minor accidents and injuries (ICR, p.23). A bypass was
   added to the road section in Ndélé-Birao to mitigate the environmental risk the projects posed to the
   Manovo-Gounda Saint Floris National Park. This bypass extended the road section by approximately 70
   km. Overall, the project complied with the requirements of the Environmental Assessment
   Safeguard policy with moderate shortcomings.

   Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11). The ICR does not provide information about the
   implementation of this safeguard policy. In their email dated May 11, 2023, the project team commented
   that the project was not expected to have an impact on physical cultural resources, but this policy was
   triggered because of the possibility that some physical cultural resources could have been found. This
   policy was not triggered during project implementation as the project did not find any physical
   cultural resource.

   Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12). Because of the emergency in the country, the project financed
   the cost of resettlement, which was expected to be low as road works were to be carried out within the
   existing right-of-way. The preparation of a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) was deferred under the OP/BP
   10.00, paragraph 12 (see Environmental Assessment above). The preparation of a RAP for Ndélé-Birao
   section in the North-East section was delayed because of worsening security situation. The project
   implemented the RAP for the Kanga Bandoro-Mbrés-Ndélé road sections through the United Nations Office
   for Project Services (UNOPS). The project-affected persons’ (PAPs) complaints were registered and
   addressed appropriately, and compensations were made to the satisfaction of the PAPs (ICR, p.22). The
   project provided compensation to 663 PAPs in this road section.



                                                                                                Page 15 of 19
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    CAR Rural Connectivity (P160500)




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management. The financial management of the project was under the Road Maintenance Fund
  (FER), which was not a part of the project implementation unit. The project did not hire an accountant and
  an external auditor within the first five months of project implementation as agreed during appraisal. There
  were gaps in financial management such as the use of Excel sheets for expenditure statements on a
  quarterly basis rather than the use of an accounting software, inconsistencies in bank statement
  reconciliations, incompliance in the implementation of national tax codes to expenditures. The ICR (p.20)
  states that “these gaps in financial management compromised the ability to provide reliable information in a
  timely manner for the project’s effective implementation.”

  The reorganization of financial managements arrangements improved the project’s compliance with the
  WB’s financial management requirements. It was transferred from FER to PIU. The PIU’s financial
  management capacity was strengthened. Following the reorganization of the financial arrangements,
  project’s financial reports, external audit reports, and annual work programs were finalized and submitted
  to the WB according to the schedule. The PIU adequately implemented the recommendations of the
  external auditor and the WB’s supervision missions, but with delay. The project team reported some issues
  flagged by the external auditor as follows: (a) insufficient verification of UNOPS project documents and
  determination of exchange rates; (b) absence of inventory of fixed assets; (c) inadequate attention in
  requesting quotations from affiliated entities; and (d) insufficient attention to contractual payment conditions
  when processing invoices. The PIU took sufficient measures to address these issues. However, the PIU
  could not implement some recommendations of the external auditor such as insufficient control of the
  UNOPS designated account and incompliance with the general and special conditions of the contracts.
  These shortcomings are expected to be addresses under the EICRP. There were no known issues of
  corruption or misuse of funds associated with the project. The project team confirmed that all project funds
  were accounted for at project closing.

  Procurement. The WB approved a procurement plan that was prepared during appraisal to cover the
  initial 18 months of project implementation. The project was to use the WB’s procurement guidelines, but
  use of national procurement arrangement was allowed in situation of urgent need of assistance or capacity
  constraints as described under OP/BP 10.00, paragraph 12. The project completed most of the
  procurement as defined in the procurement plan for activities to be implemented in the North-West region.
  However, the procurement of the contracts for the project activities in the North-East region was
  significantly delayed because of the worsening security situation in the region. Because of this delay
  project activities could not be completed. The PIU and UNOPS had signed a memorandum of
  understanding that included procurement activities, but the PIU did not have the capacity to manage the
  memorandum of understanding adequately. The PIU’s updating of procurement information in the
  Systematic Tracking of Exchanges in Procurement (STEP) system of the WB was not regular and
  communication with the WB on the concluded contracts was insufficient and non-existent at times. Overall,
  the project had significant shortcomings in complying with the WB’s procurement guidelines.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)


                                                                                                    Page 16 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CAR Rural Connectivity (P160500)



   None.



d. Other
   None.



11. Ratings
                                                                               Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                  IEG
                                                                               Disagreements/Comment
                               Moderately          Moderately
Outcome
                               Unsatisfactory      Unsatisfactory
                                                                               The Quality at Entry is rated
                                                                               Moderately Unsatisfactory
                                                                               because of significant
                                                                               shortcomings in adequately
                                                                               assessing the project scope and
                               Moderately          Moderately                  funding. The Quality of
Bank Performance
                               Satisfactory        Unsatisfactory              Supervision is rated Moderately
                                                                               Satisfactory. Per Bank guidance,
                                                                               the Bank Performance is rated
                                                                               Moderately Unsatisfactory as the
                                                                               project's Outcome is rated
                                                                               Moderately Unsatisfactory.
                                                                               There were significant
                                                                               weaknesses in M&E design and
                                                                               implementation, and it was
                                                                               difficult to assess the
                                                                               achievement of the outcomes of
Quality of M&E                 Substantial         Modest                      all project activities and test the
                                                                               links in the results chain. The
                                                                               M&E system as designed and
                                                                               implemented did not capture
                                                                               how the project addressed the
                                                                               drivers of fragility in CAR.
Quality of ICR                 ---                 Substantial


12. Lessons

This review has drawn three lessons based on the information in the ICR.

      Difficulties in estimating the project scope at appraisal in an FCV country can result in
       a mismatch between project funds and scope, and underachievement of project
       outcomes. Although the project benefited from the experience gained during the

                                                                                                  Page 17 of 19
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       CAR Rural Connectivity (P160500)



         implementation of the LCP as a pilot, the project scope could not be adequately estimated at
         appraisal. It was later found that the road conditions were much worse than they were
         estimated at appraisal. The financing gap was around US$48.5 million, which was close to
         the original project budget of US$53.4 million, which included the 70 km extension of the
         road between Ndélé and Birao to bypass a national park. This mismatch resulted in a
         reduction of the project scope; hence, some project activities could not be completed and
         were transferred to the EICRP.

        Weaknesses in the design and implementation of M&E system can be insufficient in
         capturing a project’s impact on fragility drivers in an FCV country. The fragility drivers
         were defined as the widening socioeconomic gap between the elite and the rest of the
         population; and the total neglect of large parts of the rural population whose primary
         economic activity is agriculture. The project was to address these fragility drivers through the
         improvement of road conditions for isolated rural populations to access social and economic
         services and farmers to bring their produces to markets. The indicators in the results
         framework broadly captured these project impacts in numbers of population with access to
         improved roads. The results framework did not capture how effective the project’s
         intervention was in addressing the fragility drivers. Similarly, results framework broadly
         captured the impact of the labor-intensive public works (LIPW) in person-day employment
         created. The M&E framework does not provide any data to assess the effectiveness of the
         LIPW on addressing the fragility drivers in the project areas. Sufficiently capturing project’s
         such impacts is critical in FCV countries to improve the efficacy and effectiveness of future
         interventions through lessons learned.

        Insufficient post-project road maintenance arrangements can jeopardize the
         sustainability of the improved conditions on project-rehabilitated roads and the
         project’s impact on the rural communities. The project was not successful in introducing
         community-based road maintenance organizations that were to implement day-to-day light
         road maintenance to maintain good road conditions. Even if such organizations were
         established, the government does not have sufficient funds to maintain all roads in the
         country. The current budget is sufficient to maintain only five percent of the roads in the
         country. The project did not design a maintenance strategy that would include “the
         government’s management and financing modalities and a clear definition of the roles and
         responsibilities of the local communities, with a strong emphasis on ownership and
         accountability” (ICR, p.28). Without proper maintenance, the risk is very high that the road
         conditions will deteriorate, and the limited outcomes achieved as a result of the project’s
         intervention will be lost.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR



                                                                                                      Page 18 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      CAR Rural Connectivity (P160500)



The ICR provides a detailed overview of the project. It is candid and concise and follows most of the Bank
Guidance and its Appendix L, Preparation of ICR in FCV Setting for IPF Operations. The report is internally
consistent; there is a logical linking and integration of various parts of the report. The report is results-oriented
to the extent possible given the limited availability of M&E data in an FCV context and the shortcomings in the
M&E design and implementation. The Fiduciary Compliance and Safeguards sections could have benefited
from a more detailed discussion. The ICR erroneously reports the Forests (OP/BP 4.36) as a triggered
safeguard policy although it was not triggered. Entries in the “Lessons and Recommendations” are based on
specific experiences of the project, but they are mostly in the form of findings rather than lessons or
recommendations. Overall, the quality of the ICR was Substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                        Page 19 of 19
