     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Vietnam Energy Efficiency Financing (P151086)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0023385

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P151086                                    Vietnam Energy Efficiency Financing

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Vietnam                                    Energy & Extractives


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-87390,IDA-60110                       31-Jul-2022                                        53,418,038.90

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 14-Apr-2017                                31-Jul-2022

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                    Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           101,700,000.00                                             0.00

 Revised Commitment                             53,379,113.01                                             0.00

 Actual                                         53,418,038.90                                             0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator        Group
 Maria Shkaratan             Dileep M. Wagle              Ramachandra Jammi             IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   As mentioned in the Project’s Loan Agreement (August 18, 2017, page 6), the Project Development Objective
   (PDO) is “to improve energy efficiency (EE) in Vietnam's industrial sector”. The PDO was stated the same
   way in the Project Appraisal Document (PAD). The Loan Agreement also states that the Project “would
   contribute to achieving the Borrower's energy efficiency and greenhouse gas reduction objectives”.

   The PDO was not revised.


                                                                                                 Page 1 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Vietnam Energy Efficiency Financing (P151086)



   For the purposes of this ICR review, the objective will not be parsed into sub-objectives but will be assessed
   as formulated in the PDO statement.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  16-Sep-2021

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   1. Original components

   The PAD states that this Project was “designed to help remove the principal barriers to investments in
   industrial EE projects”. The technical assistance (TA) was to “address the knowledge, institutional, and
   capacity-building needs of the banking and industrial sectors, mitigate risk concerns of enterprises, and
   strengthen government supervision of industrial EE and energy conservation. Those efforts” would “be
   accompanied by an EE financial intermediary lending program, which” would “demonstrate viable
   mechanisms for financing industrial EE investments, in direct support of the Government’s EE targets and
   green growth strategy”. (PAD, page 7) Most of the World Bank funding (US$100) was to support the
   creation of the demonstration financial intermediary for industrial EE, and a small part of the loan was to
   finance the TA (US$1.7 million).

   Component 1 EE Investment Lending (cost at appraisal: US$156.3 million; actual cost: US$140.5 million)
   was to invest in financially viable EE subprojects. The component was designed to mainstream EE
   financing business lines in PFIs through a learning by-doing process (PAD, page 11). The PFIs were
   expected to benefit from the creation (with the support from the Project) of new loan products for industrial
   EE, thereby building technical capacity for EE investment appraisal and monitoring, which would enable
   them to scale up EE lending to IEs. The IEs would benefit from adopting improved technologies and
   optimizing production, thus reducing energy consumption and production costs and increasing their overall
   competitiveness in the domestic and international markets. It was expected that the PFIs would build
   expertise in EE lending to specific industries and project types, based on their project portfolios and
   targeted markets.

   EE financing to subprojects was to be provided through a credit line to the Ministry of Finance (MoF), a
   LIBOR-based U.S. dollar denominated instrument for US$100 million, with fixed spread (commitment fee)
   and disbursement-linked repayments. The MoF would on-lend to the participating financial institutions
   (PFIs) on the same financial terms. The PFIs would then on-lend to the industrial enterprises (IEs), either in
   U.S. dollars or Vietnamese dongs, and charge commercial interest rate, which would include the PFI’s



                                                                                                    Page 2 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Vietnam Energy Efficiency Financing (P151086)



  margin (based on cost to the PFI, subproject risk, and sub-borrower’s creditworthiness) and foreign
  exchange risk premium.

  The subprojects would support technologies such as:

       i. Energy systems: upgrading boilers and switching fuels, using cogeneration facilities and electric-
         driven systems, including compressed air systems, electric chillers, machinery, and lighting;
      ii. Process technology: upgrading and replacing equipment, machinery, and facilities; and
     iii. Waste heat and waste use: use of waste heat (of hot/warm gases, liquids and solids) and burning
         combustible waste (gases, liquids, solids);

  with investments in EE subprojects utilizing renewable energy (RE) potentially also being considered,
  including:

       i. Cogeneration facilities or process furnaces and stoves, and
      ii. Solar water heaters for sanitary hot/warm preparation.

  Component 2 Project Implementation Support (cost at appraisal: US$1.7 million; actual cost: US$ 0.457
  million) aimed to provide the following technical assistance and capacity building: (i) to the Ministry of
  Industry and Trade (MOIT) on Project’s monitoring and supervision; (ii) to the relevant government agencies
  on developing the regulatory framework, and EE standards and guidelines (PAD, page 6); and (iii) to the
  PFIs in evaluating and extending EE loans; for generating an EE lending pipeline; for providing due
  diligence of eligible EE sub-loans; and for developing EE-related financing instruments.

  2. Changes in components during implementation

  The Project’s components remained unchanged during implementation.

  The Project underwent one restructuring, requested by the Government on August 16, 2021 and approved
  by the Bank on September 16, 2021. The restructuring was needed to cancel the undisbursed loan amount
  of US$47 million and to adjust the scope of the Project, the allocation of financing to the disbursement
  categories, and the results framework (RF) accordingly. The cancellation was requested due to: (i) the
  regulatory banking constraints (a cap on medium-term credit, limited US$ lending to IEs, credit limit for a
  single borrower, and high foreign exchange premium), which prevented many enterprises from accessing
  the credit line supported by the Project and (ii) the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, which slowed down
  investment in general and in EE particularly, as it was not a high priority for the PFIs. The amount disbursed
  at the time of restructuring was US$34.4 million.

  Additionally, a new Government regulation, which was not in effect at appraisal and was enacted on June
  30, 2018 (ICR, page 30), prevented the use of ODA funds for capacity building activities, affecting
  Component 2. The regulation was related to the Government’s efforts to reduce the overall public debt,
  which was reaching the debt ceiling set at 65 percent of GDP. However, the Project team mobilized
  US$350,000 from the Bank-executed Korean Green Growth Trust Fund (KGGTF), which made it possible to
  implement capacity building under Component 2 as planned at appraisal.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates

                                                                                                   Page 3 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Vietnam Energy Efficiency Financing (P151086)



   Project Cost: The appraisal estimate was US$158.0 million, and the actual Project cost was US$140.9
   million.

   Project Financing: The Project financing comprised an IBRD loan (appraisal amount: US$100 million; actual
   amount: U$53.0 million) and an IDA loan (appraisal amount: US$1.7 million; actual amount: U$0.457
   million).

   Borrower/Recipient contribution: The Borrower’s contribution was US$56.3 million at appraisal and US$87.5
   million at closure.

   Project Dates: The Project was approved on April 14, 2017 and became effective on December 29, 2017.
   The mid-term review was held on September 28, 2020. The original closing date was July 31, 2022. The
   Project was not extended, and the actual closing was on the same date.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country and Sector Context: Vietnam is one of the most energy-intensive countries in East Asia; the energy
elasticity of GDP is estimated at 2, compared to less than 1 for most industrial countries. Industry is the
most energy-intensive economic sector, and the continuing industrialization of the economy is contributing
to the increase in the country’s energy intensity. Vietnam’s limited domestic energy resources and growing
reliance on imported coal raise concerns about energy security and greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions. The
World Bank’s Vietnam Low Carbon Study estimated that comprehensive demand-side EE investments
would result in up to 11 GW savings in new generation capacity by 2030, which would support Vietnam’s
commitment to the Paris Agreement goals.

Relevance to Government Strategies. Vietnam has advanced experience with supporting EE initiatives.
Prior to Project’s approval, the Government passed the Vietnam Green Growth Strategy for the period
2011–2020 with vision to 2050, which aims to restructure and improve economic institutions toward more
efficient use of natural resources and improved competitiveness of the economy. One of the important
strategic objectives is to encourage EE. Vietnam’s Energy Efficiency Program includes national level
targets and comprehensive plans to improve EE and energy conservation in all economic sectors. Law on
Energy Efficiency and Conservation was passed in 2010, and a series of national level decrees to promote
EE was issued afterwards, setting a target to reduce energy consumption by 5–8 percent as compared to
the forecast for 2015. To achieve the Program’s targets, barriers to EE investment had to be lowered, and
the Project was to support this goal. The Project was also aligned with Vietnam’s green banking initiative,
which aims to strengthen the climate finance capacity of financial institutions and to motivate them to build
up green investment portfolios. Specifically, the Project addressed the need in long-term maturity loans for
EE investments.

Furthermore, the Project was expected to contribute to Vietnam’s National Energy Development Strategy
up to 2020 with a vision to 2050; the Vietnam Green Growth Strategy for 2011–2020, with a vision to 2050;
the Law on Energy Efficiency and Conservation; and Vietnam Power Development Plan VII for 2010–2020,
with a vision to 2030.


                                                                                                    Page 4 of 18
                       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                       Vietnam Energy Efficiency Financing (P151086)



Relevance to the World Bank Group's (WBG’s) Assistance Strategies:

The Project was aligned with the World Bank Group’s Vietnam’s Country Partnership Strategy (CPF) for
2012–2016, specifically, with its “Sustainability” pillar, which had a focus on improvements in supply- and
demand-side EE. The Project directly supported both energy sector and climate change outcomes of the
CPF, specifically: (a) Outcome 1.2: Improved Quality and Efficiency of Infrastructure Services, and (b)
Outcome 2.2: Climate Change Mitigation: CO2 Emissions Reductions. The Project was also aligned with
the World Bank’s Energy Engagement Strategy for Vietnam, contributing to its key engagement pillar
focused on supply- and demand-side EE.

More importantly, the Project was aligned with the World Bank Group’s CPF for 2018-22, specifically, with
Focus area 3 Ensure Environmental Sustainability and Resilience, Objective 9 Promote low carbon energy
generation, including renewables and energy efficiency, and reduce GHG emissions. The CPF provides the
following details to this Objective: “the WBG energy sector program seeks to help the country transition in
its energy mix: (i) increase energy efficiency (demand and supply sides), including targeting enterprises to
upgrade inefficient production systems and introduce new and clean technologies; (ii) scale up non-
hydropower renewable energy, with particular focus on solar and wind, and gas-to-power; (iii) promote the
financial viability of EVN and the power sector; (iv) introduce competition in gas and electricity markets; and
(v) improve sector governance.

Link to other WBG operations

Importantly, the Project was based on lessons learned for setting up an EE financing mechanism from
several Bank EE credit lines in other countries, including the China Energy Efficiency Financing (CHEEF,
China), Uzbekistan Energy Efficiency Facility for Industrial Enterprises (UZEEF, Uzbekistan), Ukraine
Energy Efficiency, and Tunisia Energy Efficiency. This experience demonstrated that dedicated credit lines
are effective in mainstreaming EE financing in PFIs and can leverage substantial debt contributions from
the PFIs themselves and equity financing from the IEs, as well as revolve the loans that are paid back and
continue to provide EE financing after the Bank’s project closure.

While this was the first IBRD/IDA project in Vietnam that aimed to demonstrate a financial mechanism for
EE investments in the industry, it had links to several WBG operations that supported EE development and
one that supported a credit line for renewable energy (RE) investment. Specifically, the World Bank’s Clean
Production and Energy Efficiency (CPEE) Project provided analytical underpinnings and was to advise the
Project on industrial energy consumption surveys, EE benchmarking, and service agreements. The Project
was also using the experience of the ongoing IFC’s EE financing advisory services to the PFIs, including for
EE in the industry. Also, the Project was to be implemented in parallel with the ongoing IFC project - a
credit line to Techcombank for EE investment in SMEs, which promoted a similar financing instrument in
the business sector.

The relevance of objective is rated High.


Rating Relevance TBL




Rating
High




                                                                                                     Page 5 of 18
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  Vietnam Energy Efficiency Financing (P151086)



   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               To improve EE in Vietnam's industrial sector.

               Rationale
               The theory of change (ToC) for the Project was developed for the ICR. It showed a direct, logical causal link
               from inputs to outputs and to expected PDO outcomes of this Project. Investment in financially viable EE
               subprojects with innovative technologies, in combination with related capacity building and awareness raising
               activities, were intended to result in the adoption of the EE technologies by the IEs and in new EE
               investments by IEs and PFIs. These outputs were logically linked to the outcomes, and the TOC showed how
               the combination of outputs supported the following: (i) demonstration of financially viable EE investments (by
               creating a credit line through the PFIs to IEs) and (ii) application of innovative EE technologies (by supporting
               the EE subprojects). Overall, the Project would lead to improved EE in the industrial sector and avoided GHG
               emissions by IEs. There is one small limitation in the TOC: the missing interlinks from specific outputs to
               intermediate outcomes. If the links were present, it would be easier to understand what processes were
               employed to transform the outputs into the project-level outcomes.

               Original project:

               Outcomes (as per the ToC in the ICR):

               Outcome 1. Credit line financing for EE investment was demonstrated and was financially and functionally
               sustainable. The mechanism of industrial EE financing through a credit line to PFIs and further to IEs had
               been created, was functional, and led to a scale-up of the industrial EE financing even prior to Project’s
               closure. This was an important intermediate outcome of the Project (as per the ToC), as the PDO was to be
               achieved through this mechanism. The Project team has confirmed that the credit line supported by the
               Project was the first industrial EE financing instrument in the country and played the role of an “ice breaker”,
               inspiring development partners and commercial banks to scale-up Project outcomes. The ICR reports that the
               Project was able to mobilize private financing for EE from PFIs and IEs in the amount of US$87 million (by
               Project design, the PFIs were to co-finance investment in IEs at 20 percent of the loan amount; and the IEs
               were also to contribute 20 percent of the investment as equity financing). The financing model developed by
               the Project has been presented as a best practice experience at various discussion forums, in the country
               and beyond.

               Outcome 2. Pilot investments in EE technologies: the original target was exceeded. At Project closure, the
               share of investment in EE subprojects by the IEs and PFIs was 62 percent, against the original target of 36
               percent. Note that this indicator was not part of the RF in the Project’s PAD, however, its baseline and target
               were defined both in the PAD and in the 2021 Project Restructuring Paper. This indicator reflected
               sustainability of the Project’s outcomes by providing evidence that private sector entities were incentivized to
               invest in industrial EE and therefore important conditions for a scale-up of EE investments demonstrated by
               the Project have been established.



                                                                                                                  Page 6 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Vietnam Energy Efficiency Financing (P151086)



Outcome 3. The original PDO target for energy savings was achieved. By closure, the Project had achieved
total (investments’ lifetime) energy savings of 92,101,479,871 MJ, against the original target of
16,700,400,000 MJ (Note that the ICR presents the Original Project’s energy savings data in MWh, the unit
used at appraisal. At restructuring, the units were changed to MJ to comply with a new Corporate Results
Indicators’ requirement to measure energy savings in MJ. At EIG’s request, the Project team recalculated the
Original target data in MJ for the purposes of this ICR review, to present outputs of the Original and Revised
Projects in the same units of measurement).

Outcome 4. A related avoided emissions’ original target was not achieved. At closure, annual avoided GHG
emissions amounted to 996,250 tCO2e, against the target of 5,027,000 tCO2e.

Outcome not captured on the ToC:

1. Capacity building outcome. Capacity building activities resulted in improved skills of the PFIs’ officers to
appraise EE subprojects, including the capacity to estimate the benefits of EE investments in terms of energy
savings and GHG emissions’ avoidance, as well as to monetize these estimates. During the ICR preparation,
the beneficiaries of the Project reported that the capacity building activities provided them with knowledge and
competence for screening and appraising energy efficiency subprojects. As a result, a barrier to EE lending
was removed, increasing the incentives of the PFIs to provide loans to the IEs for EE investments. Note: This
information was provided by the Project team at IEG’s request.

Outputs (as per the ToC in the ICR):

1. At closure, the Project had delivered 48 bankable EE subprojects, against the original target of 60
subprojects. This target was not achieved. Some of the targeted subprojects were dropped from the pipeline
for the following reasons: (i) regulatory constraints to EE financing (a cap on medium-term credit, limited US$
lending to IEs, credit limit for a single borrower, and high foreign exchange premium); (ii) decisions by the IEs
not to participate in the Project due to the COVID-related slow-down in investments and the low priority of EE
investments; and (iii) inability to complete the loan applications due to COVID-related constraints.

2. Number of IEs who have invested in EE technologies: this original PDO target was not achieved. At Project
closure, the number of IEs who invested in the Project-supported EE technologies was 11, against the
original target of 25. The ICR reports that the adopted EE technologies included three waste heat recovery
and co-generation at sugarcane plants, three waste heat recovery for power generation at cement factories,
one rooftop solar subproject, two biomass/waste steam generation subprojects, one retrofit production line in
a steel factory, and one switching fuel subproject at a glass production factory (ICR, page 19).

3. Capacity building for staffs of the MOIT/ Project Management Board (PMB) and PFIs resulted in the
following outputs:

      A Project website was developed for marketing, raising awareness of EE technologies, and sharing
       lessons learned from the Project.
      Training was conducted for 20 PFI staff on marketing and due diligence of EE sub-loans and
       development of EE-related financing instruments and risk management tools.
      Training was conducted for MOIT/PMB on subproject monitoring and supervision including auditing
       and safeguards monitoring.



                                                                                                    Page 7 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Vietnam Energy Efficiency Financing (P151086)




      Project-supported information workshops were conducted, with hundreds of participants from PFIs,
       IEs, and industrial associations.

Overall, by closure, the Project had accomplished the creation of an “EE financial intermediary lending
program” through the demonstrated “viable mechanism for financing industrial EE investments” (PAD, page
7), which was the core activity under Component 1. The Project achieved or exceeded the original RF targets
for the following indicators: the share of investment in EE subprojects by the IEs and PFIs (reflecting the
potential for a scale-up) and lifetime energy savings. However, the Project did not achieve several of its
original targets, namely: annual GHG emissions savings, the number of IEs who had invested in EE
technologies, and the number of bankable EE subprojects developed. It should be noted that an extension
with the objective of providing more time to fully achieve Project’s objectives was not possible due to the
previously noted new government regulations on using ODA loans (as per IEG’s communication with the
Project’s TTL).

Rating. Based on the evidence provided in the ICR, the Original Project only partially achieved its
objectives/intended outcomes, and its efficacy is rated as Modest.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
To improve EE in Vietnam's industrial sector.

Revised Rationale
Please see the ToC discussion under Original Project.

At restructuring, three types of changes were applied:

1. The scope of the Project was reduced. The original Project did not take into account important regulatory
barriers for the IEs to access the credit line supported by the Project. Many IEs were not able to participate,
and part of the loan had to be cancelled. The negative impact of COVID-19 on investment in general and in
EE particularly led to additional reduction in the Project’s scope.

2. The outcome indicators were modified. The indicator “Projected lifetime energy savings (MWh)” was
replaced by the indicator “Projected lifetime energy savings (MJ)” (to comply with the Corporate Results
Indicators’ (CRIs’) requirement to report energy savings in MJ); and the indicator “Annual GHG emissions
avoided in IEs (tCO2e/year)” was replaced by the indicator “Projected lifetime GHG emissions avoided in IEs
(tCO2e)”.

3. The RF targets were lowered for the following indicators: energy savings (a PDO outcome indicator target),
avoided GHG emissions (a PDO outcome indicator target), and the number of EE subprojects developed (an
output indicator target). This was necessary not only due to the reduction of the Project’s scope, but also
because the design-stage estimate of energy and emissions savings from subprojects was exaggerated. This


                                                                                                   Page 8 of 18
                                 Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                 Vietnam Energy Efficiency Financing (P151086)



                              happened because it was unknown at design which EE technologies would be adopted by the subprojects,
                              and the indicative pipeline had a larger share of IEs with high savings potential than the actual pipeline.

                              Outcomes (only for the outcomes that were not achieved by closure under the Original Project):

                              1. At closure, the Project had achieved total (investments’ lifetime) energy savings in the amount of
                              92,101,479,871 MJ, against the revised target of 50,000,000,000 MJ. This PDO target was exceeded.

                              2. Related lifetime avoided GHG emissions amounted to 21,333,659 tCO2e, as compared to the revised
                              target of 18,000,000 tCO2e. This target was exceeded.

                              Output:

                              1. At closure, the Project had delivered 48 bankable EE subprojects, against the revised target of 42
                              subprojects. The revised target was exceeded.

                              2. At Project closure, the number of IEs who invested in the Project-supported EE technologies was 11,
                              against the target of 25 (this target was not revised at restructuring). The target was not achieved.

                              Overall, by closure, the Revised Project had achieved most of its outcomes and outputs and reached most of
                              the RF targets. Specifically, it had demonstrated the mechanism of EE financing and created conditions for a
                              scale-up of EE investments; achieved the revised energy and emissions targets; and improved the capacity of
                              the PFIs, IEs, and the MOIT in relation to industrial EE financing. The target for the “Number of IEs adopting
                              improved EE technologies” was however not achieved - which was of consequence to the goal of improving
                              EE in the industrial sector.

                              Rating. Taking account of the fact that the Project achieved most but not all of its objectives, its efficacy is
                              rated as Substantial.



                              Revised Rating
                              Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            For the Original Project, the efficacy is Modest because ToC outcomes and outputs were achieved only
                            partially.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating                                      Primary Reason
                            Modest                                                       Unintended negative effects
                  OBJR1_TBL




                                                                                                                                   Page 9 of 18
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Vietnam Energy Efficiency Financing (P151086)




  OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
  Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
  For the Revised Project, the efficacy is Substantial. The Revised Project almost fully achieved its ToC
  outcomes and outputs, with the exception of one RF target. Specifically, by closure, the Project had
  demonstrated the usefulness of the credit line mechanism for EE financing and created conditions for a scale-
  up of EE investments: developed a pipeline of EE subprojects adapting the EE technologies and motivated
  the PFIs and IEs to contribute to the Project’s EE investments (mobilized significant private capital). The
  revised targets for the outcomes of energy and emission savings were reached.



  Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating
  Substantial



 5. Efficiency
I. Economic and Financial Analysis.

Economic and financial analysis was conducted for Component 1 (investments in subprojects), both at appraisal
and closure. The same methodology was used at both points of time.

1. At appraisal.

The analysis was done separately for specific (representative) technologies used in the subprojects, such as
cogeneration from waste heat recovery in the cement industry, variable speed motors and regenerative burners
in steel industry, and energy-efficient pulp washers in pulp and paper industry.

a. Financial analysis. The financial internal rate of return (FIRR) on the PFI loans for the IEs was estimated in
the range from 19 percent to 103 percent depending on the technology assessed. The benefits included avoided
costs of purchased fuel oil, coal, and electricity, estimated at nominal financial prices; and increased revenue
from the additional power generated.

b. Economic analysis. The economic rate of return (ERR) and the net present value (NPV) were calculated with
and without consideration of the avoided emissions externality. Without accounting for the externality, the ERR
ranged from 17 percent to 124 percent, and when the externality was considered, the ERR was in the range
from 30 percent to 325 percent. The NPV for the IEs was positive, while the NPV for the utility (Vietnam
Electricity (EVN)) was negative, as expected, due to the loss in tariff revenue from the IEs. The economic
benefits included industry’s savings of electricity, reduced usage of thermal generation, avoided purchases of
imported coal and oil, reduced transmission grid losses, avoided power capacity to be added, and avoided GHG
emissions. The estimates of benefits were based on the simulations by the National Load Dispatch Centre for
calculation of the avoided cost tariff (ACT) for small renewable energy (RE) producers and on international
(border) prices. For valuing the externalities, the Bank’s guidance for carbon accounting and social value of
carbon were used.

1. At closure.


                                                                                                   Page 10 of 18
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Vietnam Energy Efficiency Financing (P151086)



The analysis was done for all subprojects.

a. Financial analysis. All 11 subprojects had a positive financial return on investment. The estimated FIRR for
all subprojects (the entire Component 1) was 52 percent, ranging from 14 percent for the co-generation
technology in the Tra Vinh Sugarcane plant to 188 percent for the retrofit production line technology in the Toan
Thang Steel plant.The approach to calculating Project benefits was the same as at appraisal, except actual
annual energy savings (as opposed to expected) and actual financial benefits of saving coke (for steel
production) were used.

b. Economic analysis. The ERR and NPV of Component 1 without accounting for the avoided emissions
externality were 73 percent and US$259 million, respectively. When accounting for the avoided emissions
externality, the aggregate ERR and NPV were 105 percent and US$425 million, respectively. These estimates
are close to the appraisal level ones, indicating that the Project was efficient based on the ERR indicator. All 11
subprojects had sound economic return on investment, above 14 percent before the GHG avoidance externality
is considered, which is above the economic opportunity cost of finance in Vietnam (10 percent). The
methodology of calculating the benefits was the same as at appraisal, except actual annual energy savings at
Project completion were used and the Economic Net Present Value (ENPV) was calculated (only NPV was
calculated at appraisal).

II. Administrative and Operational efficiency.

The project was able to implement its activities, however with a significantly reduced scope, without an
extension of its closing date (note that the extension was not possible due to a new government regulation
limiting the usage of ODA financing) and without a corresponding decrease in administrative and operational
costs. The impact of COVID-19, which accounted for 44 percent of the implementation period, was however
managed efficiently. Procurement was conducted through competitive bidding, which did result in some cost
savings (approximately US$350,000; ICR, page 25).

Based on this, the Project’s efficiency is rated substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                 Rate Available?                Point value (%)        *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                       98.90
 Appraisal                                                     30.00
                                                                                        Not Applicable
                                                                                       99.70
 ICR Estimate                                                  105.00
                                                                                        Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.


                                                                                                      Page 11 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Vietnam Energy Efficiency Financing (P151086)



6. Outcome

Original Project:

Relevance of objectives: High

Efficacy: Modest

Efficiency: Substantial

Outcome: Moderately Unsatisfactory (a value of 3).

Revised Project:

Relevance of objectives: High

Efficacy: Substantial

Efficiency: Substantial

Outcome: Satisfactory (a value of 5).

Due to the Project restructuring, a split evaluation has to be applied. When a split evaluation is undertaken, the
overall outcome rating is calculated by weighting the outcomes of the Original and the Revised projects using
the shares of disbursed financing before and after the restructuring. Based on the shares of the disbursed
funds before and after restructuring (US$34.4 million or 63.5 percent before the restructuring in September 2021
and US$19.1 or 36.5 percent after restructuring), the overall project outcome rating is Moderately Satisfactory
(0.635*3+0.365*5=3.73).


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Government ownership. This risk could arise if EE development in the industrial sector loses its priority
position in the Government agenda, as it relates to the IEs’ energy efficiency improvements. However, there
is a high degree of confidence that the Government’s commitment to the industrial EE investments will stay
as a top priority because it supports industrial modernization and constitutes a critical and most cost-efficient
measure of the Vietnam’s climate change mitigation agenda. The risk is assessed as negligible.

Policy. This risk could arise if there were further policy or legal barriers to EE investment in the industrial
sector or disincentives for the private sector to invest in EE. Considering the Government’s commitment to
climate change mitigation, related priority of the EE development, and a track record of developing
regulations that support EE, this risk is low. However, as it happened during Project implementation, new
regulations, which are not directly aimed at EE development, can have a negative impact on EE investments.


                                                                                                      Page 12 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Vietnam Energy Efficiency Financing (P151086)



In Project’s case, the regulations created limitations for ODA lending. Overall, this risk is estimated as
moderate.

Financial. This risk could arise if the PFIs are not able to maintain the created credit line, and the Project’s
outcomes are not scaled up as a result. However, this risk has been mitigated. First, to sustain the credit line,
the Project included capacity building support to the PFIs, which resulted in PFI’s improved ability to appraise
EE subprojects and increased incentives to provide loans to the IEs for EE. Second, an ongoing Bank project
Vietnam Scaling Up Energy Efficiency (P164938), approved in June 2019, complements the Project
reviewed here by supporting EE investments in the IEs through a risk sharing facility, which will finance
partial credit guarantees to the PFIs to cover potential IEs’ defaults on the loans they provided for EE
investments. This risk is assessed as low.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The Project’s design was adequate to respond to the need to incentivize EE investment in the industrial
  sector by financing a credit line for those PFIs that require long-term funding to be able to lend to IEs for
  EE. Most of the related risks were analyzed and mitigated during the preparation stage. The ICR reports
  that the Project’s design “covered the required aspects of the project implementation, such as a list of
  103 potential subprojects in the pipeline, project operation and maintenance (O&M), and capacity-
  building activities needed for project implementation” (ICR, page 33). In addition, as reported in the
  Efficiency section, the Project is among the most cost-efficient EE projects financed by the World Bank,
  based on unit cost of both energy and emissions savings.

  However, certain weaknesses in design, in combination with external challenges that were outside of the
  Project’s control, led to the need to restructure the Project. The regulatory constraints to the IEs’
  borrowing for EE from the PFIs, as well as the PFIs’ due diligence process, could have been analyzed
  and mitigated at the preparation stage. However, this opportunity was missed, and “the PFIs applied
  restricted credit appraisal and collateral requirements”, disqualifying some ”IEs with high potential thermal
  energy saving” (ICR, page 33). This is considered a moderate shortcoming because most of the risks
  were anticipated at appraisal and the consequences of missing the opportunity to mitigate this risk from
  start had a moderate impact on Project outcomes.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 During implementation, the Project was supervised by a locally-based multi-disciplinary team consisting of
 highly qualified technical specialists, enabling hands-on supervision. The Project was regularly monitored:
 eleven implementation support missions took place and were thoroughly documented. Project performance
 indicators and ISR ratings were shared with the client and also used as early warning signs of the

                                                                                                      Page 13 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Vietnam Energy Efficiency Financing (P151086)



 challenges to achieving Project’s objectives. Importantly, the team was able to realize the necessity to
 restructure the Project on time while it was still possible to significantly improve its efficacy by adapting the
 Project to both the negative impact of COVIID-19 on demand for loans for EE and the regulatory
 constraints that were not mitigated at appraisal. At restructuring, the Project’s scope was reduced, and the
 IEs that satisfied the PFI’s requirements for EE lending were targeted. This timely restructuring provides a
 good practice example for future operations.

 During implementation, the PFIs were not always capable of providing support to IEs in the preparation of
 loan applications, and the team should have stepped in but missed such an opportunity. As a result, IEs
 were dependent on individual consultants’ help with the completion of loan applications, which included
 such complicated and time-consuming tasks as conducting feasibility studies and preparing investment
 appraisal reports. Due to this constraint, some of the applications were not completed, and the related
 subprojects were not financed. This is considered a deficiency.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The Project's RF adequately reflected the logic of Project interventions and was sufficiently linked to the
 PDO. All indicators were quantitative, time-bound, had baselines and targets, and were attributable to the
 Project. There was a gender-disaggregated indicator. The RF adequately measured the project-level
 outcomes (energy and emission savings) and the outputs, including the key ones: number of IEs adopting
 improved EE technologies and number of EE bankable subprojects developed.

 However, the RF had minor deficiencies. First, the RF did not have any outcome level indicators measuring
 results of capacity building activities, which were important for Project’s sustainability. Second, the RF
 indicator “number of direct project beneficiaries” incorrectly defined the staff of the beneficiary IEs as
 Project’s beneficiaries. In fact, since the Project’s objective was to improve EE in the industry, the benefits
 were in reduced energy usage and increased climate change mitigation, benefitting three main
 constituencies: global population, the population of Vietnam (through such economic benefits as reduced
 demand for imported fossil fuel and improved industrial sector efficiency), and local population (through
 reduced pollution from fossil fuel combustion). The Project did not aim at benefiting the staff of the
 beneficiary IEs, and if such unintended benefits occurred, this population constitute a very small part of the
 beneficiary population.

 The Project’s M&E is assessed by the IEG as Substantial, due to the minor weaknesses.




                                                                                                       Page 14 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Vietnam Energy Efficiency Financing (P151086)



b. M&E Implementation
  Data collection and reporting of the M&E indicators were provided to the Project team quarterly and
  biannually using a standard template. The financial and disbursement data were well collected and
  presented by the PMB/MOIT in an appropriate manner. (ICR, page 31)



c. M&E Utilization
  The ICR reports that the M&E data was utilized to inform Project management and decision making. The
  data and the proposals to address arising issues were shared and discussed with the Government
  stakeholders. The M&E supported Project restructuring. A web-based reporting system was developed
  for online reporting of Project indicators, including disbursements, energy savings and emission
  reductions, and the financing plan. Also, loan applications from the IEs could be submitted through the
  online system. Related training on the use of system was provided to IEs, PFIs, and the MOIT. (ICR,
  page 31-32)



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Environmental Safeguards. The Project was classified as Environmental Category F; potential impact was
   minor to moderate. The following Bank’s safeguard policies were triggered: Environmental Assessment
   (OP/BP) 4.01, Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP) 4.11, Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12), and
   Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10). Safeguard instruments - the Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF), the
   Ethnic Minority Development Framework (EMDF), and the Environmental Management Framework (EMF) -
   were prepared, consulted, and disclosed at design. Environmental Management Plans for the 11
   participating subprojects and Environmental Due Diligence and Environment Protection Commitments for
   other subprojects were prepared, consulted, approved, and disclosed per the Bank’s and Government's
   requirements. Throughout implementation, the Project complied with safeguard policies. No accidents,
   environmental issues, or affected households were reported during implementation.

   Social Safeguards. The Project closed without any outstanding social safeguard issues. The Project
   followed the World Bank's social safeguard policies, guidelines, and quality standards, including during
   construction works and fiduciary and environmental and social safeguards that ensure compliance with OP
   4.12, OP 4.01 and other safeguard policies.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Procurement. The ICR reports that procurement was efficient, contributing to the Project's successful
   completion. Eight consultant bidding packages were completed. All bidding processes were conducted in

                                                                                                 Page 15 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Vietnam Energy Efficiency Financing (P151086)



   compliance with the required procedures as confirmed through World Bank prior and post reviews. (ICR,
   page 33)

   Financial Management (FM). The ICR reports that financial management was in compliance with the World
   Bank's financial management policies and procedures. Quarterly financial reports were submitted by the
   MOIT/PMB to the World Bank. Financial audits by an independent firm were conducted annually and were
   of acceptable quality and submitted in accordance with the Loan Agreement. The MOIT and PFIs were
   submitting their annual audited financial statements, prepared as per international financial reporting
   standards. The audit reports were unqualified and stated that the financial management was well-executed
   and the Project had no financial management issues. (ICR, page 33)




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
                                                                                 IEG agrees with the ICR’s rating
                                                                                 of the Original Project as Modest
                                                                                 but disagrees with the ICR’s
Outcome                         Satisfactory          Moderately Satisfactory    rating of the Revised Project as
                                                                                 High and rates it as Satisfactory
                                                                                 because one of the RF targets
                                                                                 was not achieved.
Bank Performance                Satisfactory          Moderately Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                  Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                  ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The following lessons were derived from the ICR with some modifications by IEG (ICR, pages 35-
36):

1. The Project has been recognized by the Government and private sector for demonstrating
economic, financial, and environmental benefits of EE investments and for creating an on-lending
mechanism, which was effective in mobilizing remarkable private capital funding. The credit line
supported by the Project had a significant leveraging effect, mobilizing a sizable private financing for
EE in the amount of US$87 million, from PFIs and IEs, and turned out to support a scale-up. Such
an important outcome would not be possible if the Project did not address such EE financing barriers

                                                                                                    Page 16 of 18
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Vietnam Energy Efficiency Financing (P151086)



as the lack of incentives, insufficient liquidity, and short-term maturity of the loans. It did so by using
the KGGTF grant funding and by utilizing TA support from other Bank and IFC projects. The lesson
is that in countries with economic and political incentives to implement EE and a strong Government
ownership in relation to EE projects, a parallel development of a financial mechanism for EE and
capacity building for EE can be a most effective and efficient approach to EE mainstreaming.

2. Selection of strong PFIs with dedicated project teams was vital for the success of the EE credit
line created by the Project. The Project benefited from a sound commitment of the PFIs’
management to the EE lending strategy and their dedicated project teams. The Project also
benefited from a wide PFI participation, which enhanced the IE client base, covering a range of
industrial clients and increasing the opportunities for EE lending. The lesson is that during the
preparation stage, a careful selection of strong PFIs with dedicated project staff is critical for a
successful creation of an EE financing mechanism.

3. The Project relied too much on the risk tolerance of the PFIs and credit ratings of the IEs, which
explains why it was not successful in attracting the expected number of subprojects and a variety of
EE technology types. The Project suffered from risk aversion of some PFIs (in particular, to lending
to steel and cement IEs), and many perspective EE subprojects were not financed because the PFIs
considered the IEs’ credit ratings to be too low. The lesson is that to avoid such experience: (i) a
more intensive, well-financed, and well-supervised TA to the PFI would be a good mitigating
mechanism; and (ii) a wider range of EE technologies and additional financial instruments could be
considered. Specifically, the follow-up Vietnam Scaling up Energy Efficiency Project (P164938,
approved in 2019) used a US$8.3 million grant for TA and focused on the development of a risk
sharing facility to provide partial credit guarantees to the PFIs.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provides sufficient technical details to understand the value-added of the activities and the outcomes
of the Project; a good justification of the PDO relevance; comprehensive and robust evidence on all aspects of
Project’s evaluation; and a clear linking of evidence to findings. The ICR is analytical and has internal
consistency. The lessons learned are linked to the narrative and the ratings and are useful for future lending
operations. At the same time, the ICR has the following minor weaknesses:

    1. The ICR could have provided more evidence regarding one of the central Project outcomes: the creation
       of the mechanism of EE financing and the conditions for a scale-up of EE investments (establishment of
       a credit line for EE financing, development of a pipeline of EE subprojects adapting the EE technologies,
       and creation of incentives for the PFIs and IEs to contribute to the Project’s EE investments).
    2. Evidence of the outcomes of capacity building activities could have been included in the ICR, in addition
       to the listed inputs/outputs, such as the number of workshops conducted, the number of people trained,
       and a website developed. The outcomes would include relevant skills developed by the trained staff,


                                                                                                       Page 17 of 18
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  Vietnam Energy Efficiency Financing (P151086)



    increased awareness due to the workshops conducted, and the acknowledgement of the applicability of
    the information on the website that was created by the Project.
 3. Data presentation could have been more rigorous: the ICR could have included clearer disbursement
    data and report on energy and emission savings (major RF indicators using consistent units of
    measurement.



a. Quality of ICR Rating
   Substantial




                                                                                           Page 18 of 18
