     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PK:Punjab Irrigated Agriculture Producti (P125999)



                                                                                   Report Number: ICRR0023185

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                   Project Name
 P125999                                      PK:Punjab Irrigated Agriculture Producti

 Country                                      Practice Area(Lead)
 Pakistan                                     Agriculture and Food


 L/C/TF Number(s)                             Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-87990,IDA-50810                         31-Dec-2018                                        333,665,026.90

 Bank Approval Date                           Closing Date (Actual)
 20-Mar-2012                                  31-Dec-2021

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            250,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                             380,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Actual                                         333,665,026.90                                               0.00




 Prepared by                  Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Hassan Wally                 Avjeet Singh                  Avjeet Singh                   IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) of the Punjab Irrigated Agriculture Productivity Improvement
   Program Project (PIPIPP) as articulated in the Financing Agreement (FA, page 5) was identical to the one
   stated in the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, paragraph 27) and aimed to:"improve productivity of water
   use in irrigated agriculture."




                                                                                                    Page 1 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PK:Punjab Irrigated Agriculture Producti (P125999)



   Parsing the PDO. The PDO will be parsed based on one objective: To improve productivity of water use in
   irrigated agriculture.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  30-Nov-2017

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The PDO was supported by the following four components:

   1. Installation of High-Efficiency Irrigation Systems (appraisal cost: US$234 million, AF: US$60
   million, actual cost: US$175.20 million). This component included the following two sub-components:

   1.1. Installation of High-Efficiency Irrigation Systems (HEIS). This component would support the
   installation of drip, trickle, bubbler, or sprinkler irrigation systems at the field level for high-value horticulture,
   vegetables, floriculture, and other high-value crops. A service provider would install the irrigation systems
   on a shared cost basis. The farmers would provide 40% of the cost of works, and the project would provide
   the remaining 60% of the cost of works and the administrative and management costs. The drip units would
   include a pumping unit, fertilizer tank, delivery fittings, filters, main underground pipeline, and delivery lines.
   High-efficiency irrigation systems were expected to be installed over 120,000 acres.

   1.2 Strengthening of Precision Land Leveling Services in the Private Sector. Un-leveled fields cause
   wastage of water, resulting in low irrigation application efficiency and much lower yields. Laser land leveling
   saves up to 30% of irrigation water, results in uniform seed germination, and increases fertilizer uptake
   efficiency, enhancing crop yields by up to 20%. Under this component, the laser leveling equipment would
   be provided to the service providers on a shared cost basis. The service providers would carry out laser
   leveling service for interested farmers on a charge-back basis as a business. An annual capacity for about
   two million acres of laser land leveling would be developed, for which about 3,000 laser leveling units would
   be provided. About 50% of the laser land leveling equipment cost would be provided by the service
   provider, who also owns a tractor capable of operating the LASER unit.

   2. Upgrading of Community Irrigation Systems (appraisal cost: US$160.00 million, AF: US$44.5
   million, actual cost: US$345.10 million). The component included the following three sub-components:

   2.1. Watercourse Improvements in Canal Irrigated Areas. This sub-component would assist Government
   efforts to improve water courses (W/Cs), which were the tertiary level water distribution system where water
   losses were expected to be the highest. In Punjab 17,000 W/Cs needed improvement. Concrete parabolic
   channel sections up to 8 feet (or U sections namely canalets) would be placed on leveled compacted earth

                                                                                                            Page 2 of 20
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  PK:Punjab Irrigated Agriculture Producti (P125999)



with water tight joints, thus improving existing technology of brick lining. Where suitable and where farmers
prefer, watercourses would be lined using traditional bricks with plaster. Water turnout structures would be
replaced with adequately designed concrete structures. The earthen sections of the watercourse would be
improved using clean compacted soil. Efforts would be made to have private contractors/service providers
construct the canalets and then be installed by the Water Users Associations (WUAs). The project would
provide technical assistance for layout and construction supervision to the WUAs.

2.2. Completion of Partially Improved Watercourses. Many W/Cs in Punjab were only partially (barely)
improved in the early part of the program in the late 1970s. The improvement works on these W/Cs would
have to be completed to realize the benefits fully. The project would cover the completion of about 1,500
W/Cs that have been partially improved. Farmers would contribute skilled and unskilled labor with the
Project funding the remaining cost.

2.3. Improvement of Community Irrigation Systems in the Non-canal Commanded Areas. This sub-
component would cover W/C improvements in the rain-fed (Barani) areas, i.e., areas that are not in
command of barrage-controlled irrigation but have localized irrigation schemes. These were generally small
W/Cs, and the improvement cost is less than in other areas. The project would cover about 2,000 W/Cs in
Barani areas. The project would provide material costing up to US$2,950 for each scheme. Farmers would
contribute skilled and unskilled labor and material cost above US$2,950—the cost-sharing arrangement
results in about 40% by the farmers and about 60% by the project.

3. Improvement of Agricultural Technology and Practices, and Monitoring and Evaluation of Project
and Environmental and Social Mana (appraisal cost: US$9.00 million, AF: US$11.00 million, actual
cost: US$7.10 million). This component included the following two sub-components:

3.1. Improved Agriculture Technology and Practices. This component aimed to enhance the productivity
of the irrigated lands through supporting: (i) effective research, extension, and agricultural information
services; (ii) participatory training for farmers, involving the training of specific target groups in various agro-
technical fields, farm management, and irrigation agronomy; (iii) demonstration and assistance in improved
and modern technologies and methods to increase agricultural production through better agronomic
practices; and (iv) the establishment of a Farmers Information Service Desk linked with internet and cell
phone services.

3.2. Monitoring and Evaluation of Project Impact. This component would cover Monitoring and
Evaluation (M&E) of the project's impacts. This would be done primarily by using a sampling technique and
by conducting case studies, Geographic Information System (GIS), and satellite data. M&E activities would
likely cover, but not be limited to (i) the impact of the irrigation improvements on water use efficiency,
groundwater levels and quality, and soil salinity; on-farm water use; cropping patterns and yields; and
livestock population, health, and production; (ii) socio-economic impacts and the impact on the level of
employment, livelihood, and household incomes in the project area; estimation of the project's
overall benefits and economic rate of returns.

4. Project Management, Supervision, Technical Assistance, Training, and Strategic
Studies (appraisal cost: US$20.50 million, AF: US$14.2 million, actual cost: US$23.30 million). This
component would cover the cost of (i) project implementation and management, including mobilization of
farmers, surveys, engineering and designs, implementation supervision and assistance to the farmers and
suppliers, and ensuring quality of the works carried out by farmers and suppliers/vendors; (ii) project
supervision and spot checks, covering quality and quantity aspects, by third party consultants based on


                                                                                                      Page 3 of 20
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    PK:Punjab Irrigated Agriculture Producti (P125999)



  which the funds would be disbursed; (iii) strategic studies and pilot projects that would be identified during
  project implementation, and technical assistance, training, in particular, training the project staff (i.e.,
  training of the trainers) in crop diversification, shift to horticulture, vegetable and floriculture crops, operation
  and maintenance of the irrigation systems and the units installed under the project; and (iv) activities
  identified in the Operational Risk Assessment Framework (ORAF) and governance and accountability
  measures.

  Revised Components. The AF in November 2017 added additional activities to components 1 and 3 and
  scaled up component 2. These changes were as follows:

  Component 1:The allocation was increased by US$60 million (IBRD). Financing for constructing ponds in
  canal command areas underlain with saline groundwater and ponds for rainwater harvesting in the
  Pothohar region of Punjab was added (project contribution PKR 750,000/pond).
  Component 2: The allocation was increased by US$44.5 million (IBRD). The target for the number of
  improved watercourses and irrigation schemes constructed was increased to respond to the high demand
  for this activity from 9,000 to 11,550. Also, the length of the lining of watercourses increased from 30% to
  50% based on analysis on optimizing the lining length for water saving.
  Component 3: The allocation was increased by US$11 million (IBRD). A new pilot was added on value
  chain improvements to assess the effectiveness of support to post-harvest processing of increased High-
  Value Agriculture (HVA) (sub-component 3.3). The sub-component included the provision of equipment (at
  a 50% cost-sharing basis), technical assistance, and training. This was to test possible solutions to the
  emerging market access challenge for farmers transitioning towards HVA due to weak value chains.
  Component 4: Financing was increased by US$14.2 million (IBRD) for continued project management.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost. The total project cost was estimated at US$423.50 million equivalent. According to the ICR
  (Data Sheet, page 2), the actual cost was US$543.97 million. The increase resulted from additional
  financing that the project received in 2017 (see below for more details).

  Financing. The project was financed through an IDA loan worth US$250.00 million. In 2017, the project
  received an IBRD additional financing (AF) worth US$130.00 million. The total financing amount was
  US$380.00 million. According to the ICR (Datasheet, page 2), the actual amounts disbursed were
  US$233.83 million and US$99.83 million for the IDA loan and IBRD AF, respectively. The total disbursed
  financing was US$333.67 million, or 88.6% of the expected financing amount.

  Borrower Contribution. The borrower was expected to provide US$173.50 million through beneficiary
  contributions. The actual amount was US$210.30 million. The increase was to match the increment in the
  project scope after the AF.

  Dates. The project was approved on March 20, 2012, and became effective about a month later, on April
  26, 2012. The Mid-Term Review was conducted on January 15, 2016, compared to an expected date
  on October 31, 2016. While the MTR was conducted about 9.5 months earlier than expected, it was still
  adequate since it was about four years into effectiveness. The project closed on December 31, 2021, three
  years beyond the original closing date on December 31, 2018. While the ICR did not explicitly provide a
  reason for the extension, it was implied that the three years extension was needed as part of the AF


                                                                                                         Page 4 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PK:Punjab Irrigated Agriculture Producti (P125999)



   to accommodate the expansion of the project scope and allow enough time to complete the planned
   activities.

   The project received additional financing (AF, US$130 million) on November 30, 2017, with the closing date
   of December 31, 2021, when the amount disbursed was US$190.81 million. As part of the AF, the project
   had the following changes: revision of the Results Framework (RF), change in components and cost, and
   the closing date of the original IDA credit was extended from December 31, 2018, to December 31, 2019,
   and the implementation schedule was revised.

   The project was restructured once (Level 2) on December 17, 2019, when the amount disbursed was
   US$264.03 million, to extend the closing date of the original IDA credit from December 31, 2019, to
   November 30, 2020. According to the Restructuring Paper, the borrower requested this extension to allow
   enough time to spend all the funds in the designated account.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Context at Appraisal. Agriculture remains the most critical source of employment and exports in Pakistan,
accounting for two-thirds of employment and 80% of exports. In 2009, agriculture accounted for 22% of the
country's GDP. Pakistan relies on the largest contiguous water system in the world, namely the Indus Basin
Water System (IBWS), for basic food security and water supply for all sectors of the economy. Efficient use
of available water resources is the key to meeting the uncertain water supplies in the future under changing
climate. This project would be a significant contribution to that
the goal, both in reducing water demand and helping to produce more crops per drop and creating a system
that can convert the seven days turn system into a regular supply system.

Previous Bank Experience. The Bank has a long history of partnership and collaboration with Pakistan in
the water sector. As a key partner and principal donor, the Bank provided support to several main
interventions in the development of the IBWS, including (i) facilitating the Indus Water Treaty negotiations
between Pakistan and India; (ii) establishing the Indus Basin Development Fund that supported the
construction of Mangla and Tarbela dams and several inter-river link canals and barrages; (iii) formulation
of the Salinity Control and Reclamation Program (SCARP-1968); (iv) formulating the Revised Action Plan
for Irrigated Agriculture in 1979; (v) assisting in the development of the Water Sector Investment Planning
Study (WSIPS) in 1991; and (vi) providing guidance on the Drainage Sector Environmental Assessment in
1993 which contributed to the development of the Ninth Five Year Plan. The Bank also developed the
Irrigation and Drainage Strategy of 1994 (grey cover Pakistan: Irrigation and Drainage – Issues and Options
11884-PAK) and the Pakistan Water CAS (Pakistan‟s Water Economy Running Dry, 2005 34081-PK) that
led to a major shift in the I&D sector of Pakistan and the implementation of the current
institutional reform agenda. Finally, the Bank has supported several On Farm Water Management Projects
and has helped to introduce innovation in these operations in all provinces of Pakistan.

Consistency with the Bank Strategies. At appraisal, the PDO aligned with the Bank's Country
Partnership Strategy for Pakistan(CPS, FY2010-FY2013). The CPS was organized around four pillars to
improve: (i) economic governance; (ii) human development and social protection; (iii) infrastructure to
support growth; and (iv) security and reduce the risk of conflict. This project was guided by the strategic

                                                                                                    Page 5 of 20
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      PK:Punjab Irrigated Agriculture Producti (P125999)



               principles of the third pillar by engaging in a program that would strengthen irrigation infrastructure and
               agricultural competitiveness. By improving Pakistan's water use efficiency and encouraging technology that
               would promote crop diversification and increase productivity, the project supported the Bank's emphasis on
               improving the efficiency of irrigation systems.

               At completion, the PDO continued to align with the Bank's Country Partnership Strategy for Pakistan (CPS,
               FY2015-FY2019), which was extended to FY21. The project directly contributed to Result Area 2: Private
               Sector Development, specifically outcome Outcomeich focused on improving farm competitiveness and
               productivity. The CPS emphasized farmers’ adoption of technology for efficient water use and improvement
               in irrigation and drainage systems. The project also contributed to Result Area 3 on Inclusion, specifically
               Outcome 3.3, which focused on increased disaster resilience.

               The PDO was also in line with the Bank's flagship report on Pakistan (Pakistan @100: Shaping the Future,
               2019), a Bank-led analytical initiative designed to assess strategic development directions for Pakistan up
               to 2047. In the report, one of the four elements of the growth strategy proposed for Pakistan was
               ‘Environmental and Social Sustainability,’ which highlighted improved water management as a significant
               reform priority. Efficient water use and increased agriculture productivity were key focus areas to achieve
               water management outcomes.

               Consistency with Government Strategies. At appraisal, the PDO aligned with the Government's priorities
               for the irrigation sector. After 1994, the Government adopted a new approach to address the irrigation
               system issues. It started an institutional reform program to revamp irrigation and drainage (I&D) institutions
               to establish an efficient, self-sustaining I&D system.

               At project completion, the PDO continued to be in line with the government’s priorities, where the National
               Water Policy 2018, Vision 2025, Punjab Water Policy 2018, and Punjab Growth Strategy 2023 all commit to
               investing in water use efficiency and productivity (ICR, paragraph 17). According to the ICR (paragraph 17),
               "these documents highlighted agriculture growth and water use efficiency as priority investment areas for
               the government."

               Summary of Relevance of Objectives Assessment. The PDO statement was clear, focused, and pitched
               at an adequate level of ambition. At completion, the PDO aligned with the Bank's Strategy and Government
               priorities. Also, it is expected that improving irrigation efficiency will continue to be a top priority in the future
               for Pakistan at both the national and state level. Therefore, the Relevance of Objectives is rated High.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective

                                                                                                                          Page 6 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   PK:Punjab Irrigated Agriculture Producti (P125999)



To improve productivity of water use in irrigated agriculture.

Rationale
Theory of Change (ToC). To achieve the stated objective, the project would support the following activities:
selection and lining of watercourse/Irrigation schemes; operationalization of and ongoing support to
WUA; engagement with the private sector to provide equipment and after-sale support; identify
beneficiaries and provide equipment after necessary field survey and receipt of beneficiary contribution;
technical assistance to the farmers on the use of technology and modern practices for high-value agriculture
(HVA); farmer field schools (FFS) and demo farms set up; irrigated agriculture research center set up;
and Social mobilization of farmers to create awareness about the benefits of high-efficiency irrigation system
(HEIS) and laser land leveling (LLL) (including FFS) and to set up WUAs. As a result of the activities above,
the following outputs would be achieved: water courses and Irrigation schemes would be improved; LLL
services would be made available to farmers through the provision of equipment to service providers; HEIS
would be installed and operationalized on beneficiary farms; Farmers would be trained on efficient use of
inputs, HVA, and improved agriculture practices like tunnel farming; and pilots would be conducted to inform
advice given to farmers on improved agriculture practices. The expected intermediate outcomes included: (i)
improved conveyance/delivery efficiency; (ii) improved application efficiency (irrigation practices); and (iii)
farmers adopting improved agricultural practices to increase cropping intensity and change cropping patterns.
All this combined was expected to contribute to the achievement of the PDO “improved productivity of water
use in irrigated areas” measured through outcomes: (i) reduction in water loss; and (ii) improved crop output
per unit of water.

The achievement of the stated objective was underpinned by the following six critical assumptions: 1. Local
farmers endorse the WUA, participatory decision-making is ensured, and WUAs remain operational for O&M;
2. Even if the supply side is initially weak, as demand increases, suppliers will also increase; 3. Farmers who
opt for investment in technology are more likely to be convinced to become progressive farmers; 4. The
OFWM department can manage demand-driven research, and farmers engage with them to seek advice; 5.
Farmers and LLL service providers can access necessary maintenance services; and 6. Farmers adopt
improved agriculture practices and can market their higher/more diverse produce.

Overall, the activities reflected in the ToC were connected to the outputs, intermediate outcomes, and
outcomes in a plausible causal chain. The stated critical assumptions were logical and realistic.

Outputs/Intermediate Results

(a) Reduction in water losses

1. 90,000 acres were brought under HEIS (baseline: no HEIS installed) below the target of 120,000 (75%
achievement).
2. Number of companies supplying HEIS equipment increased from 7 to 17 between 2015 and 2021 (no
target provided).
3. Proportion of respondents reporting that their post-HEIS installation complaints were not resolved reduced
from 50% in 2015 to 13% in 2021 (no target provided).

4. Command area of 4 million acres was provided for improved community irrigation infrastructure (no target
provided).
5. Average percentage of watercourse lined was 35% which was below the revised target of 44% but
exceeded the original target of 29%.

                                                                                                  Page 7 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   PK:Punjab Irrigated Agriculture Producti (P125999)



6. More than 60% of watercourses were lined with precast concrete parabolic segments (PCPS), a more
efficient and effective material for lining.
7. 1.5 million acres were land leveled annually with estimated water saving of 1.13 million acre feet (MAF)
water annually (no target provided).
8. 575 rainwater harvesting ponds with 14,042 acre-feet capacity were constructed to store water for
irrigation (no target provided).

9. 17,300 community irrigation infrastructure were improved, exceeding the revised target of 11,550.
10. 12,825 water courses were improved, exceeding the target of 8,900, resulting in estimated additional 1.5
million acres brought under cultivation after improvement.
11. 4,475 irrigation schemes were improved, exceeding the revised target of 2,650, resulting in 33,545 acres
of additional land irrigated
12. 9,577 HEIS units were provided, of which 70% of HEIS units size was below 12.5 acres
13. 5,000 LLL were provided on average level 300 acres per annum (target achieved).
14. 6,375 new WUA was set up, and 6,450 existing WUA were re-engaged (no target provided). 16% percent
of WUAs had at least one female member, below the envisaged target of 30% female members of WUA.

(b) Increasing productivity of water

1. Cropping intensity increased by 13% under HEIS, 8% in the watercourse command area, and 44% in the
irrigation scheme command area (no targets provided).
2. More than half of the HEIS area is under orchards, and a quarter of cropped area under HEIS utilizes
tunnel farming to get exceptional yields for high-value vegetables (no targets provided).
3. Land used from traditional major crops as a proportion of total cropped land fell by 56% under HEIS, 14%
under watercourse, and 7% under the irrigation scheme (no targets provided).

4. 9,577 HEIS beneficiaries (100%) and about 20,000 farmers on watercourses (6.1% of 321 thousand)
received training on improved agricultural practices (no targets provided).
5. Renala Kurd Water Management Research Facility was established to conduct pilots, research, and
demonstrations for farmers. Pilots conducted included testing gated pipes to deliver water from the
watercourse to the farm, using a moisture meter to track soil moisture, and developing remote farm
management tools. Experiments to estimate water saving under different conditions (for instance, use of
HEIS or leveling in different conditions and its impact on water efficiency).
6. Trainings were provided to build technical capacity including: (no targets provided).a. 156 professional
courses were provided to 5,225 participants; b. 581 technical courses were provided to 26,015; participants;c.
28 specialized courses were provided to 501 participants; d. 86 refresher courses were provided to 1790
participants; and e. 307 farmer field days were conducted for 20,000 participants

Outcomes

The PDO (improving the productivity of water use in irrigated agriculture) would be assessed based on two
elements: (i) reducing water loss during conveyance and application and (ii) Increasing agriculture output per
unit of water.

(i) Reducing water loss during conveyance and application. Reducing water loss in the project area was
achieved through improvements to irrigation schemes (including lining watercourses), applying laser land



                                                                                                 Page 8 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   PK:Punjab Irrigated Agriculture Producti (P125999)



leveling technology to reduce application time, and installing high-efficiency irrigation systems (HEIS) to
improve irrigation efficiency.

      By project completion, the command area served by improved water courses reached 3.85 million
       acres, significantly exceeding the revised target of 1.78 million acres. The project improved 17,300
       (new 6,375; partial 6,450; irrigation schemes: 4,475) watercourses and irrigation schemes, resulting in
       the project exceeding its target by about 50% (revised target: 11,550 (new 5,700; partial 3,200;
       irrigation schemes 2,650). The project overachieved the command area covered by 116% through
       watercourses alone. This is due to the achievement exceeding the targeted number of
       watercourses and the larger than-expected command area of watercourses (300 acres at end-of-
       project compared to the appraisal expectation of 200 acres per scheme). About 316 thousand farmers
       directly benefited from improved watercourses, with 67% of landholding less than 12.5 acres. The
       project survey measured water loss before and after lining 60 watercourses (a small but comparable
       sample). The results showed a 57% reduction in water loss exceeding the end target of 45%. Survey
       findings also showed that 84% of previously barren land on the watercourse command area was
       cultivated because of increased water availability. Also, 99% of survey respondents reported reduced
       groundwater pumping (indicating increased availability of surface water to fulfill needs) and reduced
       reliance on groundwater extraction. These findings confirmed the achievement of conveyance water
       loss reduction in the project area.
      The project also achieved the target of providing 5,000 laser land leveling (LLL) equipment
       (intermediate indicator) to service providers to provide leveling services. It overachieved the 90,000
       project beneficiaries expected at the time of appraisal. According to the ICR (paragraph 26), the
       project survey found that recipients of LLL services reported a 35% reduction in time taken to irrigate
       per acre, which means less water is lost in the application and is therefore available for irrigation.
       However, the total area that LLL serviced was not reported.
      The project achieved 75% in the installation of HEIS, which according to the ICR (paragraph 24), was
       expected to result in a 35% reduction in on-farm water utilization on the 90,000 acres supported by the
       project. The ICR also explained that the expected savings were not a result of actual project
       measurements but based on experimental models conducted in Renala Khurd Water Management
       Research Farm (paragraph 24). The ICR (paragraph 22) noted that most HEIS units (73%) were
       installed in non-command/rainfed areas or at the tail end of watercourses indicating high uptake by
       users experiencing water scarcity.

(ii) Increasing agriculture output per unit of water. The project overachieved improvement in agriculture
productivity, measured as the value per unit of water, through (a) increased cropping intensity and crop
diversification; and (b) increased yield. Changes in crop intensity and cropping pattern were achieved through
access to water, technology, and training (ICR, paragraph 27).

Assessment of results on productivity improvement between 2012-2021 based on survey data showed that in
improved watercourse areas, agriculture output per unit of water used increased by 120% for the survey
sample from a baseline of 7 Rupees per m3 for row Crops (wheat, maize, cotton, and sugarcane) to
16 Rupees per m3 against a target of 13 Rupees per m3 using 2012 constant prices. Also, in HEIS
areas, agriculture output per unit of water used increased by 200% for the survey sample from a baseline of
12 Rupees per m3 for vegetables and orchards to 35 Rupees per m3 against a target of 17.40 Rupees per
m3 using 2012 constant prices.




                                                                                                   Page 9 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   PK:Punjab Irrigated Agriculture Producti (P125999)



(a) Increasing crop diversification and cropping intensity. Assessment of results on cropping intensity
and patterns between 2015-2021 based on survey data showed that in HEIS areas, cropping intensity
reached 175% compared to a baseline of 155% in 2015. In watercourse areas, cropping intensity reached
181% compared to a baseline of 167.6% in 2015. Under irrigation schemes, cropping intensity reached 184%
compared to a baseline of 128% (pre-improvement). The ICR (footnotes #24) noted that "the project cropping
intensity was measured using total cropped area (area under orchards was multiplied by 2 to indicate land
utilization in both seasons)/total area under cultivation. During this time, Punjab’s estimated cropping intensity
changed from 154% to 157 %.Net sown area and total cropped was taken from statistical abstract from
Punjab development statistics (PDS) 2021 and 2016".

In HEIS areas, orchards represented 63% of the cultivated area compared to 13% at baseline.
Also, vegetables, spices, tomatoes, and potatoes occupied 63% of the cropped area compared to 3% at
baseline. In watercourse areas, orchards occupied 3% of the cultivated area compared to none at baseline;
also, vegetables, spices, tomatoes, and potatoes increased to 18% compared to 0.5% of the cropped area at
baseline. In irrigation schemes, orchards occupied 4% of the cultivated area compared to 2% at baseline, and
fodder cropped area doubled from 6% at baseline to 12%, while vegetables, spices, tomato, and potatoes
cropped areas slightly increased to 11% from 10% at baseline. However, the cropped area of major crops
(cotton, sugarcane, rice, maize, wheat) decreased across all three areas; in HEIS, it decreased from 89% at
baseline to 29%, and in the watercourse, it decreased from 89% at baseline to 75%, and in irrigation
schemes, it decreased from 84% at baseline to 74% at completion. During the same period in overall Punjab
% of the non-orchard area under cultivation under fodder increased from 11% to 14%, major crops decreased
from 75% to 69%, and other crops increased from 15% to 17%, The ICR notes (Table 7) that the difference of
the increase in crop yield compared to the average in Punjab over the same period was (i) 335% for
Tomatoes (HEIS and Tunnel); (ii) 210% for Bitter gourd (HEIS and Tunnel); and 6% for Potatoes (HEIS).

Farmers in command areas of watercourses and HEIS beneficiaries received training on improved
agricultural practices like tunnel farming. However, adopting this training and changes in cropping patterns is
most pronounced among users of HEIS. HEIS beneficiaries had more than half of the area under cultivation
dedicated to orchards, a quarter of cropped area under the tunnel, and they show a significant transition away
from major crops.

(b) Increased yields. Wheat yields increased by 31%, 34%, and 14% in irrigation schemes, watercourses,
and HEIS areas. About a quarter of cropped area under HEIS is farmed using tunnel farming to grow produce
that was hardly grown by farmers before (therefore zero project baseline data) and achieving exceptional
yields; for example, tomatoes produced 33 tons per acre, and bitter gourd produced 15.28 tons per acre. As
for orchards, increased yields were also attributed to increased tree density which was made possible by
designing higher-density orchards for HEIS. Comparing the number of trees per acre of citrus orchards (more
than half of all new orchards designed for HEIS) between orchards designed for HEIS and those that do not
have HEIS shows that tree density was increased by 52%, and in the case of orchards 40 months or older,
yield increased by more than 8% (ICR, paragraph 29).

The ICR (paragraph 14) reported that activities relating to sub-component 3.3 (strengthening value chain
development activities) did not get implemented, and the resources for the subcomponent were utilized to line
additional watercourses.

Summary of Efficacy Assessment. The evidence provided in the ICR pointed to the project's success
in improving watercourses and irrigation schemes and exceeding its end target by about 50%. In addition, the
project fully met its target on laser land leveling and achieved 75% in the installation of HEIS. Overall, the

                                                                                                   Page 10 of 20
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                PK:Punjab Irrigated Agriculture Producti (P125999)



                            outcome of water loss reduction was largely achieved. However, the survey sample on laser land leveling
                            was very small (11 service providers and 11 service recipients). It is worth noting that the project M&E should
                            have captured that area serviced by LLL rather than just the number of LLL units distributed by the project.
                            Also, it was not clear whether LLL serviced land was under a watercourse, irrigation scheme, or in HEIS
                            areas. Finally, the evidence also pointed to the project's success in improving agriculture productivity,
                            measured as the value per unit of water, through changes in crop intensity and cropping pattern achieved
                            through better access to water, improved technology, and training. The project exceeded its PDO outcome
                            target of increased agriculture output per unit of water used for improved watercourse and HEIS areas.
                            Therefore, the Efficacy with which the PDO was achieved is rated Substantial but with minor shortcomings.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Overall efficacy is rated as Substantial. The PDO indicators relating to watercourse improvement, reduction in
                            water losses, and improved water productivity were exceeded. While the project only achieved 75% of the
                            target on HEIS installed, it significantly exceeded the target on watercourses which cover about 4 million
                            acres compared to the missed target of 30,000 acres on HEIS coverage.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



   5. Efficiency
   Economic and Financial Analysis (EFA)

   ex-ante

                               The overall project economic rate of return (ERR) was estimated at 32.6% and a benefit /cost (B/C) ratio
                                of 1.9 at a 12% discount rate.
                               A simplified approach was used to estimate the incremental benefits of the project, and a cost-benefit
                                analysis was carried out by determining a discount rate that equalizes the costs and benefits.
                               Sensitivity Analysis. The ERR was robust and not sensitive to reasonable cost overruns, reduced
                                benefits, and a combination of both. For example, if cost increased by 20%, the ERR dropped to 25.7%;
                                if benefits were reduced by 20%, the ERR dropped to 24.2%; if cost increased by 20% and benefits were
                                reduced by 20%, the ERR dropped to 18.5%, if benefits were delayed by two years the ERR dropped to
                                19.6%. If costs increased by 90% and benefits decreased by 47%, the ERR dropped to 12%.

                                                                                                                             Page 11 of 20
         Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
         PK:Punjab Irrigated Agriculture Producti (P125999)



      Overall, the PAD (Annex 7) included a comprehensive economic analysis that justified the project
         investments.

ex-post

      The ex-post analysis estimated the value of the economic internal rate of return (EIRR) of the combined
         interventions at 33.9% compared to 32.6% at appraisal and 30.2% at AF. The ex-post analysis applied
         the same methodology applied at appraisal to ensure consistency and comparability, except
         that updated prices and project costs were used.
         Benefits were quantified to the extent possible for interventions under components 1 (HEIS and LLL)
         and 2 (watercourse improvements). However, the economic analysis did not include benefits related to
         establishing farmers' and water users’ representative bodies like WUA, training farmers on using
         equipment like HEIS and LLL and changes in cropping patterns, and enhanced employment
         opportunities for the rural population.
        The sensitivity analysis (using a 20% increase in operating cost, a 20% decrease in overall benefits, and
         both simultaneously) also proved that the EIRR was robust.
        Implementation Efficiency. The project was implemented over 9.5 years. It was scaled up after five
         years of implementation with additional financing due to the government’s request to increase coverage
         (ICR, paragraph 33). While some activities, like watercourse improvement and LLL, started quickly after
         approval and demonstrated early results, other activities that required mobilization, like the uptake of the
         new technology of HEIS, were relatively slow to start (ICR, paragraph 33). In 2018, the country was
         going through an election, and a caretaker government was in power. During this period, the project
         experienced implementation delays because the disbursement of budgeted funds for the project was
         delayed for six months. Some delays impacted HEIS activities due to COVID-19 restrictions over the last
         1.5 years of implementation. While the project maintained overall implementation progress, the ICR
         (paragraph 33) noted that implementing LLL and watercourses activities demonstrated more
         implementation efficiency than HEIS investments.
        The ICR (Annex 4) included a comprehensive economic analysis that justified the project investments.
         However, the analysis could have benefited from including a cost comparison with similar projects
         regarding the rehabilitation of irrigation schemes and water courses. Also, cost per beneficiary would
         have provided further insight into efficiency relative to similar projects.

Summary of Efficiency Assessment. The ex-post EIRR at 33.9% slightly exceeded the 32.6% and 30.2%
estimated at appraisal and AF, respectively. Implementation efficiency was mixed, as noted above. Overall,
Efficiency is rated Substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                   Rate Available?            Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)


                                                                                                       Page 12 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      PK:Punjab Irrigated Agriculture Producti (P125999)



                                                                                       0
Appraisal                                                   32.60
                                                                                        Not Applicable
                                                                                       0
ICR Estimate                                                33.90
                                                                                        Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The relevance of Objectives was rated High. Overall Efficacy was rated Substantial, with minor
shortcomings. The PDO indicators relating to watercourse improvement, reduction in water losses, and
improved water productivity were exceeded. However, the project only achieved 75% of the target on HEIS
installed, and strengthening value chain development activities were not implemented. Efficiency was rated
Substantial. The ex-post EIRR at 33.9% slightly exceeded the 32.6% and 30.2% estimated at appraisal and AF,
respectively.

Based on the assigned ratings for the three outcome criteria, the Outcome is rated Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The ICR (paragraph 67) discussed three main risks that could potentially impact the Development Outcome:

1. Institutional risk. This is related to the sustainability of water user associations (WUAs) and their ability to
manage Operations & Maintenance (O&M) of watercourses. The WUA is trained on their primary functions,
including O&M of the watercourses improved under the project. They are the main focal point for
coordination between on-farm water management (OFWM) field teams and farmers, so the likelihood that
they will cease to exist is low. The willingness of beneficiary farmers to support WUA in O&M activities is
likely to remain high as they highly value the benefits of improved watercourses. Therefore, it is expected
that WUAs should continue to be able to coordinate O&M activities, provided its members remain actively
engaged. OFWM field teams must keep these platforms active and relevant to farmers to ensure they
maintain their capacity to coordinate O&M activities.

2. Technical risk. This relates to the possibility that service providers will no longer provide equipment and
maintenance once the subsidy ends. Based on survey data and field visits, beneficiaries have been receiving
post-sale services from service providers (free post-installation support is ensured for two years after
installation, after two years, farmers pay for services), and access to spare parts has not constrained
maintenance. Since part of the technology has been indigenized, it demonstrates the commitment of service
providers to invest in this market. The government plans to continue supporting irrigation efficiency, so the
likelihood of service providers discontinuing investment in this space is low, at least in the short term.




                                                                                                       Page 13 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PK:Punjab Irrigated Agriculture Producti (P125999)



3. Financial risk. This relates to the project farmers returning to traditional cropping patterns. The most
significant change in cropping pattern has been observed in the high-efficiency irrigation system (HEIS)
users because of the ability of this technology to lower input cost making high-value agriculture (HVA) even
more profitable. Since most farmers engaging in the HEIS are likely to be progressive farmers investing in
HEIS to engage in more profitable HVA, they will unlikely return to their traditional cropping pattern.

This Review emphasizes the following risk:

4. Environmental risk. This relates to the potential of extreme weather events that could impact the project
area and reverse the gains achieved under the project. Therefore, a comprehensive climate mitigation plan
that emphasizes climate mitigation and adaptation efforts needs to be in place to address climate change
and disaster risks.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
        Strategic relevance and approach. The project was strategically relevant and aligned with Bank
            strategies and Borrower priorities (see section 3 for more details). The project aimed to improve
            irrigation efficiency by reducing water loss and increasing productivity. The Bank's Water
            Resources Assistance Strategy (2005) highlighted the declining per capita availability of water,
            making Pakistan one of the most water-stressed countries in the world.
           Technical, financial, and economic aspects. The project was designed in the context of other
            ongoing engagements with the On-Farm Water Management Wing (OFWM) of the government of
            Punjab. Lessons from other World Bank engagements, including a Development Policy Loan
            (DPL) on irrigation policy reforms and an Investment Project Financing (IPF) for storage and
            significant canal delivery infrastructure improvement, were incorporated into the project design.
            The PAD included a comprehensive economic analysis that justified the project investments.
           Poverty, gender, and social development aspects. The migration of people from rural areas
            continues to contribute to unplanned urban growth and urban poverty. Improving agricultural
            productivity in project areas was expected to reduce poverty. Women were expected to benefit
            from the project through increased farm employment and involvement in participative decision-
            making in WUA. On the social side, enhanced equity between tail and head users was expected
            to strengthen community relations and reduce tensions.
           Environmental aspects. The project design included appropriate environmental and social risk
            assessments with adequate mitigation strategies. According to the ICR (paragraph 62), the
            project "allocated sufficient resources to monitor the implementation of an Environmental and
            Social Management Plan (ESMP)."
           Fiduciary aspects. Financial management and procurement arrangements were adequate.
           Implementation arrangements. The project was implemented by the On-Farm Water
            Management (OFWM) wing of the Punjab Government’s Agriculture Department, which was
            involved in implementing similar operations. The core Project Implementation Unit (PIU) team was
            in place soon after effectiveness activities like watercourse improvement, and LLL started
            quickly. However, other activities which needed more mobilization of farmers and service
            providers, like the uptake of the new technology of HEIS, were relatively slow to start (ICR,

                                                                                                   Page 14 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PK:Punjab Irrigated Agriculture Producti (P125999)



         paragraph 33). Also, the project experience showed that OFWM lacked the relevant capacity to
         strengthen value chains.
        Risk assessment. Nine risks were identified at the appraisal stage with a Moderate overall rating.
         The identified risks are related to two main areas: Inherent Risk and Control risk. The PAD
         included relevant risk mitigation measures. However, the challenge of precisely tracking
         smallholders and medium-sized farmers remained throughout implementation. This risk is related
         to the targeting of project beneficiaries, which might have been underestimated at appraisal.
        M&E arrangements. While the M&E design was adequate overall, it suffered from some
         weaknesses related to the lack of intermediate-level indicators to track changes in farmers'
         practices and measure the area that received LLL services.

  Summary of QAE Assessment. The project was strategically relevant with a clear PDO. While the
  design was technically simple, implementing activities related to supply chain strengthening was
  challenging. The design featured adequate environmental and fiduciary aspects. Implementation
  arrangements facilitated a smooth start after effectiveness. While the risk assessment was thorough, the
  risk-related beneficiary targeting was underestimated. Finally, M&E arrangements were adequate but
  with minor shortcomings. Overall, Quality at Entry is rated as Satisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
       The Bank conducted 20 supervision missions over the 9.5 years of the project implementation. The
        project benefited from continuity in this task team leadership with only one change in Task Team
        Leadership throughout implementation. Also, with fiduciary and safeguards specialists supporting
        the project team based in Pakistan, this facilitated working closely with the PIU (ICR, paragraph 64).
       According to the ICR (paragraph 64), the project ratings throughout implementation were candid
        and realistically reflected the project performance.
       M&E implementation benefited from adequate resources, which allowed effective monitoring of the
        monitor implementation progress. However, the Bank supervision could have addressed the M&E
        design weaknesses at the AF stage or earlier. Also, strengthening value chain activity should have
        received more attention to ensure implementation.

 Summary of Quality of Supervision Assessment. The Bank team successfully guided the project
 implementation toward a successful outcome. However, the Bank Supervision should have attempted an
 earlier project restructuring to address M&E weaknesses, and more attention should have been given to
 strengthening value chains. Overall, the Bank supervision is rated Satisfactory, with minor shortcomings.

 Based on the assigned ratings, Bank Performance is rated Satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

                                                                                                  Page 15 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PK:Punjab Irrigated Agriculture Producti (P125999)




  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
      The PAD did not include a Theory of Change (ToC), which the Bank did not require at the time of
        appraisal. Nonetheless, the ICR included a ToC constructed based on the project activities, outputs,
        and outcomes described in the PAD. The ToC also included the underlying critical assumptions
        underpinning the achievement of the PDO.
       The achievement of the PDO was assessed throubyuring two key PDO outcome indicators: (i)
        Reduction in water losses in the project area; and (ii) Increased agriculture output per unit of water
        used. These indicators were directly connected to the PDO, measurable, included baseline data,
        and had reasonable targets.
       The Results Framework (RF) included eight intermediate results indicators (IRIs) to track and
        measure the different activities supported by the project. The IRIs were measurable, had
        reasonable targets, and were directly connected to the supported activities. That said, the indicator
        measuring laser land leveling measured the number of laser units distributed by the project rather
        than the area of land that received service. Also, the RF lacked indicators to track changes in
        farmers' practices and adoption of new technologies.
       Overall, the M&E design was adequate but had some shortcomings, as noted above.



b. M&E Implementation
       M&E implementation was handled by a private M&E firm hired by the PIU through a competitive
           process, but with some delay. M&E activities included: monitoring the implementation progress,
           carrying out spot checking and technical audits of works being implemented, and ensuring project
           beneficiary targeting, among other aspects; and (b) evaluating project outcome and assessing its
           physical, hydrological, environmental, social, and economic impacts (ICR, paragraph 51).
          The ICR (paragraph 52) noted that US$3 million were specifically allocated to maintaining
           adequate capacity (both in-house and independent) to deliver regular and high-quality evaluation
           reports.
          Adequate M&E capacity was maintained until project completion as the M&E firm remained on
           board until project completion to ensure consistency and continuity in the quality of reporting to
           PIU and other stakeholders. A baseline, mid-term evaluation, and final impact assessment report
           were prepared as planned.
          M&E reports were shared with all stakeholders regularly. Also, technical reports on specific
           aspects of project implementation were provided on request, for example, reports on the impact of
           tunnel farming and the use of solar energy (ICR, paragraph 54).
          According to the ICR (paragraph 55), "the methodology used for data collection was robust, and
           the M&E system used a good mix of triangulating data sources in its monitoring of the project."
           This was achieved through a mix of sample surveys, field observations, interviews, and research
           institute experiments to evaluate project implementation results and outcomes.

                                                                                                   Page 16 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PK:Punjab Irrigated Agriculture Producti (P125999)



        Project outcome surveys relied on random samples of beneficiaries of HEIS, watercourse
         improvement, and LLL. To ensure adequate representation, the sample size from each region
         was drawn based on the proportion of project beneficiaries in that area. Similarly, equal
         representation of beneficiaries from head, middle, and tail-end was selected to ensure
         representation of farmers in different sections of the watercourse (ICR, paragraph 55).
        Overall, the evidence provided in the ICR point to effective implementation of the M&E activities.



c. M&E Utilization
       The M&E system generated much data from the field and service providers and was well
         connected with the implementation supervision firm to assess progress. This enabled the
         project management to develop insights and facilitated decision-making as required (ICR,
         paragraph 64).
        According to the ICR (paragraph 56), "the project developed strong in-house M&E capability of
         OFWM, which enabled them to conduct quick tests and evaluations to inform changes in project
         implementation where required."
        M&E evaluations informed management and resulted in an implementation change.
         This included evaluating optimum watercourse lining length, comparison of technical efficiency of
         brick and PCPS lining, field experiments, and sample surveys to estimate water savings through
         investment volume and impact of tunnel farming for HVA.
        The findings of data gathered through M&E were also utilized to guide the improvement of
         outcomes, including specific guidance for using HEIS on orchards and the use of tunnel
         technology to encourage HVA.

  Summary of M&E Quality Assessment. The M&E arrangement benefited from an adequate design
  that was supported by suitable funding. M&E implementation relied on an independent consultant firm
  for project monitoring and evaluation, which was an effective arrangement. Finally, the project
  management utilized the M&E system-generated data and evaluation reports to inform decisions.
  However, the M&E design had some weaknesses related to intermediate indicators, and the hiring of the
  M&E firm experienced some delay. Overall, M&E Quality is rated Substantial, with minor shortcomings.




  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was an environmental category B. It triggered two environmental safeguards: Environmental
   Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) and Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50). Overall the project was
   expected to have positive environmental benefits; however, during project implementation, some low to
   moderate, short-duration impacts such as damage to assets, loss of land, and soil erosion were to be


                                                                                                  Page 17 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PK:Punjab Irrigated Agriculture Producti (P125999)



   expected. An Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) was prepared as part of a full
   Environmental Assessment (EA). The project area was located on the Indus Basin, an international
   waterway; thus, international waterways safeguard under (OP 7.50) was triggered. According to the PAD
   (paragraph 99), "the project will not adversely affect the quality or quantity of water flows to other riparians,
   and it will not be adversely affected by other riparians' water use."

   Compliance with Environmental Safeguards. An exemption to the notification requirement was obtained
   for the project regarding OP 7.50. The ICR (paragraph 58) stated that the "project maintained an adequate
   institutional setup for compliance with safeguards requirements." However, no explicit statement on
   compliance with the Bank's safeguards policies was included.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management (FM). According to the ICR (paragraph 60), the FM had an adequate internal
   control system, and the FM unit was adequately staffed with experienced professionals. The
   ICR (paragraph 60) stated that "financial reports, including Interim Financial Reports and Audited Financial
   Statements, were submitted to the Bank within the timelines stipulated in legal agreements." During FY
   2017-18, the release of project funds from the Finance Department was delayed because the designated
   project account required re-validation. The project was audited by the Auditor General of Pakistan. This
   resulted in one qualified opinion in FY2019-20, highlighted in a subsequent management letter. The ICR
   noted that the observations were resolved by the project, and FM was rated Satisfactory at completion
   (paragraph 60).

   Procurement. The ICR (paragraph 59) reported that "staffing for fiduciary functions was adequate." The
   project's fiduciary functions benefited from being part of an existing government program, as existing
   teams were able to facilitate implementation. The ICR did not report any mis-procurement incidents and
   noted that "procurement ratings were rated Satisfactory at completion and during most of the
   implementation period."




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None.



d. Other
   None.




11. Ratings


                                                                                                       Page 18 of 20
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       PK:Punjab Irrigated Agriculture Producti (P125999)



                                                                                      Reason for
Ratings                            ICR                      IEG
                                                                                      Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                            Satisfactory             Satisfactory

Bank Performance                   Satisfactory             Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                     Substantial              Substantial

Quality of ICR                     ---                      Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR included six lessons. The following three are emphasized with some adaptation of
language:

1. To increase the impact of infrastructure investments, a sustained dialogue between
stakeholders and relevant institutions on irrigation tariffs is required. Project results show that
water pricing is important to ensure the uptake of high-efficiency irrigation technology. The existing
irrigation tariff structure provides no incentive to adopt water conservation practices. Water pricing
reform is necessary to invest in maintaining the irrigation infrastructure, discourage inefficient water
use, and increase demand for water-saving technologies. Policy dialogue on such reform was
ongoing during project implementation, and the irrigation tariffs were doubled in 2020. However,
these rates still do not reflect the cost of water delivery.

2. Increasing farmers' access to financing sources can facilitate the adoption of modern
irrigation technologies. The high upfront investment cost and lack of access to financial services
constrain adopting of high-efficiency irrigation systems (HEIS). It is important to mobilize funding to
help farmers participate in the technology market and increase demand for productivity enhancing
solutions. This requires supporting the financial sector to develop lending products/instruments
suitable for the needs of farmers, particularly for productivity enhancement technologies (like HEIS).

3. To ensure the successful implementation of activities, operational design should
carefully assess the strengths and weaknesses of existing institutional structures involved in
implementing project activities. While On-Farm Water Management's (OFWM) strong capacity to
implement water efficiency activities was well known, the support they needed to implement the next
phase of strengthening value chains was not well understood. Because of this, the project could not
implement the pilot on post-harvest processing and value addition as expected. Subsequent
investments in irrigation need to include value chain development capacity within the implementing
arrangements.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No



                                                                                                        Page 19 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PK:Punjab Irrigated Agriculture Producti (P125999)



14. Comments on Quality of ICR

Quality of Evidence. The ICR benefited from the data collected by the M&E system, which enabled tracking the
progress of activities and assessing the achievement of the PDO.

Quality of Analysis. The ICR provided clear linking between evidence and findings and used the evidence base
to serve the arguments under the different sections, particularly the discussion on outcomes.

Lessons. Lessons reflected the project experience and were based on evidence and analysis.

Results Orientation. The ICR included a comprehensive discussion on the achievement of the PDO. While the
outcome discussion was slightly skewed towards achieving the PDO indicators, the ICR still adequately
reported on what the project achieved on the ground.

Consistency with guidelines. The ICR used the available data to justify most of the assigned ratings. However,
the ICR lacked an explicit statement on the project's compliance with the Bank's safeguard policies.

Conciseness. The ICR provided comprehensive coverage of project activities and candidly reported on
shortcomings.

Summary of the Quality of ICR Assessment. The ICR was well-written and benefited from the evidence base
generated through the project's M&E system. It included a clear discussion on achieving outcomes and
reflected relevant lessons. However, reporting on safeguard compliance was not explicitly stated. Overall, the
Quality of the ICR is rated Substantial, with minor shortcomings.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                  Page 20 of 20
