     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Guizhou Rural Development Project (P133261)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0023193

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P133261                                    Guizhou Rural Development Project

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 China                                      Agriculture and Food


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-84340                                31-Aug-2020                                         100,000,000.00

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 30-Sep-2014                               31-Aug-2021

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                          100,000,000.00                                                0.00

 Revised Commitment                           100,000,000.00                                                0.00

 Actual                                       100,000,000.00                                                0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                 ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Hassan Wally                Fernando Manibog            Avjeet Singh                    IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   This project was part of a series of Bank-financed projects to scale up innovative features in China’s poverty
   reduction program. The first three projects (during 1995-2006) demonstrated multi-sector approaches to rural
   poverty reduction in various areas of extreme rural poverty. Two subsequent projects during 2005-2012
   promoted more participatory and community-driven approaches to rural development in marginal areas.




                                                                                                   Page 1 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Guizhou Rural Development Project (P133261)



   The Project Development Objective (PDO) of the Guizhou Rural Development Project as stated in the Loan
   agreement (LA, page 5) was identical to the one stated in the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, paragraph
   10) and aimed to:

   "demonstrate a model for agricultural sector restructuring and modernization, improved
   organizational arrangements, and strengthened public service delivery in the Project Counties of
   Guizhou Province."

   Parsing the PDO. Since the formulation of the PDO as stated does not allow a meaningful evaluation, this
   Review infers—based on the project’s activities, since the outcome targets were also unclear—that the
   intended objectives are in this inferred PDO:“to improve organizational functioning and strengthen public
   service delivery in the agriculture sector of Project Counties of Guizhou Province, thereby establishing the
   foundations for sector restructuring and modernization.” While taking this inferred PDO into account, the
   stated PDO will be parsed according to the following three objectives:

   1. To establish a model for agricultural sector restructuring and modernization in the Project Counties of
   Guizhou Province.

   2. To improve organizational arrangements in the Project Counties of Guizhou Province.

   3. To strengthen public service delivery in the Project Counties of Guizhou Province.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  05-Sep-2018

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The PDO was supported by the following four components:

   1. Modernization of Agricultural Key Commodity Value Chains (appraisal cost: US$63.73 million,
   actual cost: US$66.42 million). This component included the following five sub-components:

   1. 1. Farmer Cooperative Development. Construction of offices and acquisition of basic office furniture
   and office equipment for the use of Project Farmer Cooperatives.
   1.2. Farmer Cooperative Development Fund (CDF). Provision of Grants to Project Farmer Cooperatives
   to finance Establishment Costs and investments in agricultural products and services for value chain
   development.


                                                                                                    Page 2 of 21
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Guizhou Rural Development Project (P133261)



  1.3. Value Addition. Provision of financing to Cooperating Agro-enterprises for investments in commercial
  processing, post-harvest handling, storage and packaging of agricultural products produced, in partnership
  with Project Farmer Cooperatives.

  1.4. Market Exploration and Development. Carrying out of marketing studies, product promotion, up-
  grading of quality standards and food safety monitoring, certification, labelling and brand naming, and
  construction of product markets.

  1.5. Risk Prevention and Mitigation. Provision of agricultural crop insurance for selected crops in order to
  pilot crop- and livestock insurance schemes for the benefit of qualifying members of Project Farmer
  Cooperatives.

  2. Public Infrastructure and Services (appraisal cost: US$52.09 million, actual cost: US$48.34
  million). This component included the following two sub-components:

  2.1. Supporting infrastructure construction. This included: (i) off grade production road infrastructure,
  and (ii) tractor roads, field tracks, and foot paths; construction of irrigation and drainage infrastructure;
  establishment of communications and information infrastructure including acquisition of equipment;
  construction of public market facilities, including installation of electricity supply and other infrastructure and
  acquisition of goods necessary to facilitate and complement investments under Component 1 of the Project.
  2.2. Carrying out of public services in support of Project Farmer Cooperatives. This included: (i)
  construction of food testing certification facilities and acquisition of equipment; (ii) carrying out of food safety
  testing and control; (iii) provision of public extension and training services; and (iv) carrying out of
  agriculture research, and technology transfer activities, including recruitment of cooperative advisors.

  3. Training and Capacity Building (appraisal cost: US$9.13 million, actual cost: US$5.86 million). This
  component would provide technical assistance and training to farmers and agricultural technicians,
  including preparation of training materials, review and improvement of investment proposals for key
  commodity value chains, training in safeguards awareness and implementation training.

  4. Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation (appraisal cost: US$5.35 million, actual cost:
  US$5.86 million). This component included the following two sub-components:

  4.1. Strengthening of institutional capacity and capability of the county, municipality and provincial
  Project management offices to manage, implement and monitor Project activities. This included the
  monitoring of environmental and social safeguards requirements, through the provision of technical
  assistance and domestic and international training.
  4.2. Carrying out of policy advisory studies in the Project Counties. This included studies on poverty
  reduction, agriculture development, and rural sectors in poor areas, and on how to improve the investment
  environment, governance, and fair benefit sharing for cooperatives and enterprises.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost. The total project cost was estimated at US$140.51 million. The actual cost according to the
  ICR Data Sheet (page 2) was US$135.82 million or 96.6% of the estimated amount. The difference was due
  to cost savings that were achieved through competitive bidding (ICR, paragraph 54).



                                                                                                        Page 3 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Guizhou Rural Development Project (P133261)



   Financing. The project was financed through an IBRD Loan worth US$100.00 million, with a maturity of 29
   years, including a 6-year grace period. According to the ICR Data Sheet (page 2) the loan amount was fully
   disbursed.

   Borrower Contribution. The Borrower was expected to provide US$40.51 million of counterpart funds. The
   actual amount contributed was US$35.82 million or 88.4% of the expected amount.

   Dates. The project was approved on September 30, 2014 and became effective six months later on March
   9, 2015. The Mid-Term Review was conducted on September 18, 2017, which was about 2.5 years into
   effectiveness. While the PAD did not specify a date for the MTR, it was adequately timed for a five year
   project. The project was expected to close on August 31, 2020, but the closing date was extended by 12
   months to close on August 31, 2021. According to the ICR (paragraph 22) "the extension was needed in
   order to allow more time for implementing the restructured project and to achieve the expected outcomes."

   The project was restructured once (Level 2) on September 5, 2018, when the amount disbursed was
   US$27.68 million, in order to revise the Results Framework (RF), introduce changes to components and
   cost, extend the Loan closing date from August 31, 2020 to August 31, 2021, reallocate funds between
   disbursement categories, and change the implementation schedule.

   While the PDO targets were revised, a split rating will not be applied to assess the overall outcome because
   neither the objectives nor overall level of ambition of the project changed. In addition, the original targets for
   PDO indicators 1,3 and 4 were substantially achieved or exceeded, and the original PDO indicator 2
   was dropped. Finally, applying a split rating will not affect the weighted outcome calculation (ICR, paragraph
   29).




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Context at Appraisal. Guizhou Province is a land-locked province in southwest China with a total
population of about 40 million of which about 40% belong to various ethnic minorities. It continues to be the
poorest province in China. About 80% of Guizhou’s total land area belongs to the karst topography areas of
the Wuling and Wumeng Mountains. These geographic conditions, combined with poor accessibility, pose
challenges to sustainable and economically viable agricultural development. Agriculture remains a key
sector and entry point for rural development, poverty reduction, and long-term employment and income
opportunities for segments of the population that will not migrate. Agriculture also provides new
opportunities for returnees with good business ideas. Restructuring of the sector is necessary to develop
efficient markets for rural land transfers; promote the consolidation of production into larger units in the form
of specialized households, cooperatives or enterprises; accelerate technological change; and increase
productivity and efficiency to allow for income growth and the catching up with urban incomes.

Previous Bank Experience. This project was part of a series of Bank-financed projects to scale up
innovative features in China’s poverty reduction program. The first three projects (during 1995-2006)
demonstrated multi-sector approaches to rural poverty reduction in various areas of extreme rural poverty.
Two subsequent projects during 2005-2012 promoted more participatory and community-driven approaches


                                                                                                       Page 4 of 21
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Guizhou Rural Development Project (P133261)



               to rural development in marginal areas. In addition, the Bank has a rich regional and global experience is
               supporting agriculture development in different countries.

               Consistency with the Bank Strategies. At appraisal, the PDO was in line with Bank’s Country Partnership
               Strategy for China (CPS, FY2013-FY2016). The project would support the CPS’ strategic theme two:
               promoting more inclusive development, by geographically focusing on lagging regions and small towns and
               by supporting policies and demonstration projects that address inequalities. It would contribute to the CPS
               outcome 2.3: enhancing opportunities in rural areas and small towns, by piloting new ways to boost rural
               incomes and reduce poverty and by promoting inclusive innovation to decrease disparities.

               At completion, the PDO continued to be in line with the Bank’s Country Partnership Framework for China
               (CPF, FY 2020-FY2025), which, among other things, aimed to address the inequalities that have emerged
               during China’s rapid development, promote shared prosperity, enhance critical services in the lagging
               regions, and strengthen China’s private sector development. The project contributed to poverty reduction
               and responded to the following CPF aspects: Sharing the benefits of growth (Engagement Area
               3), Supporting critical services in lagging regions (CPF Selectivity Criterion), and Fostering private sector
               development (CPF Selectivity Criterion).

               Consistency with the Government Strategies/Priorities. At appraisal, the PDO was in line with China’s
               12th Five Year Plan and is in line with the Outline for Development-oriented Poverty Reduction for China’s
               Rural Areas (2011-2020) and Guizhou’s rural development and poverty reduction strategies and programs
               (PAD, paragraph 9). At completion, the PDO continued to be in line with key priority areas in Guizhou
               Province’s 14th FYP (2021-2025), including the development of agricultural value chains to be led by
               farmer cooperatives in collaboration with private sector investment. The PDO also continued to be in line
               with China’s Rural Revitalization Program (RRP, 2018-2035), which stated that sustainable increase in rural
               income and enhancing access to rural infrastructure and public services was its main objective. The RRP
               also put agricultural value chain promotion as one of the pillar activities in its sub-program for green
               agriculture development (ICR, paragraph 27).

               Summary of Relevance of Objectives Assessment. At completion, the PDO (taking into account the
               actual activities hence inferred PDO) remained relevant and in line with Bank's strategy and the Borrowers
               priorities at both regional and national levels. However, the original PDO statement could have benefited
               from a better formulation to reflect a simpler more focused statement of objectives that had a clear
               connection with stated activities. The ICR (paragraph 67) noted that "the formulation of the PDO and the
               relation with PDO indicators were not clearly defined." Overall, Relevance of Objectives is rated
               Substantial.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                                                                                                                   Page 5 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Guizhou Rural Development Project (P133261)




OBJECTIVE 1
Objective
To establish a model for agricultural sector restructuring and modernization in the Project Counties of
Guizhou Province.

Rationale
Theory of Change (ToC). To achieve the stated objective, the project would establish new and support
existing farmers cooperatives, support the farmers cooperative development fund to invest in cooperatives
business plans, and strengthen forward and backward market linkages. As a result of these activities, the
following outputs would be achieved: 81 cooperatives would be mobilized and established, 80 business plans
developed, approved and implemented, value chain (VC) function upgraded with 59 products receiving
certification. The expected outcomes included: 1. Strengthened VC institutions (cooperatives) and market
linkages, 2. Poor farmers able to participate in VC economic activities, 3. Private investments leveraged for
key VCs, and 4. Production quality and value addition improved. All this combined was expected to contribute
to the achievement of the PDO "to demonstrate a model for agricultural sector restructuring and
modernization in the Project Counties of Guizhou Province." The anticipated long-term impact was expected
to be increased farmers' income especially for ones under poverty; and achieving inclusive and sustainable
rural industrialization.

The achievement of this objective was underpinned by the following two critical assumptions: 1. The training
provided would be technically and financially viable for farmers to adopt, and 2. An enabling policy
environment would exist for the cooperatives management and sustainability.

Overall, the stated activities in the ToC were directly linked to the outputs, and outcomes in a plausible causal
chain. However, the connection to the PDO was not clearly defined. The critical assumptions were realistic
and logical.

Outputs/Intermediate Results

1. 80 cooperatives were legally established exceeding the target of 72.
2. 80 cooperatives received development funds exceeding the target of 72.
3. 59 agro-products under the project obtained brands or certifications exceeding the target of 12.

Outcome

      The assessment of objective 1 is guided by establishing the conditions for agricultural restructuring
       and modernization. The modernized agriculture sector was reflected through improved value chains
       for leading agricultural commodities with strengthened institutions and forward and backward
       marketing linkages (ICR, paragraph 28). The project promoted a productive partnership (company +
       cooperative + farmer) model, supported contract farming, and therefore established a stable
       production/sales relationship to enhance farmer horizontal and vertical integration.
      Under the project, 80 farmer cooperatives were legally established and supported by development
       funds (revised target exceeded). The project adopted a market-driven model with investment
       decisions based on sound business planning. As a result of greater scale and better organization in
       the cooperatives, production became standardized, production quality and quantity improved
       (paragraph 33) and access to market information and services increased (paragraph 40), farmers’
       bargaining power increased (paragraph 34), and overhead expenses decreased. The share of poor


                                                                                                   Page 6 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Guizhou Rural Development Project (P133261)



         households (as share of total poor households per village) in the community that join newly
         established or improved cooperatives reached 83% which exceeded the target of 60% (PDO indicator
         3).
        The project guided cooperatives to engage in processing, branding, marketing, and market
         information services, all of which enhanced value addition of farmer production. Through cooperatives,
         farmers diversified their marketing channels: direct sale to supermarket, online platforms, farmer
         exhibitions, and agricultural product promotion conferences. Through project support, 59 agro-
         products obtained brands or certifications, significantly exceeding the target of 12. The project also
         promoted e-commerce which allowed cooperatives located in remote areas to access remunerative
         markets that would otherwise remain inaccessible (ICR, paragraph 33).
        By project completion, 45% of the cooperatives became profitable exceeding the target of 40% ( PDO
         indicator 1). The ICR (paragraph, 34) explained that farmers' income increased through various
         channels: (i) employment generation where data from 19 representative cooperatives showed an
         additional US$0.3 million was paid to farmers through on-site employment generation (i.e., 247,858
         person-days),which was a 9% increase compared to the situation if no cooperatives were established,
         (ii) higher farm gate prices received, where data from 13 randomly selected cooperatives had an
         additional US$0.64 million paid for purchasing farm products indicating higher farm gate prices (23.5%
         higher than retail sale by farmers individually), and (iii) dividends received where a total of US$0.4
         million paid by 23 cooperatives (i.e., 52% of cooperatives). The share of poor households (as share of
         total poor households per village) in the community that join newly established or improved
         cooperatives reached 83% which exceeded the target of 60%.
        To avoid market distortions, the project used public funding to create sustainable institutions to
         address market failures (i.e. mobilizing farmers into cooperatives to improve economies of scale and
         reduce transaction costs) while allowing the private sector to work on long-term competitiveness. This
         was evidenced by PDO indicator 4 (Private capital mobilized) which achieved more than four times its
         target (Target: CNY 100 million; Actual: CNY 407.8 million). This was, in part, because the project
         design emphasized the linkages with private sector investment to improve the financial sustainability
         of the cooperatives. Co-financing with the private sector was also envisioned, with improved
         institutions and public infrastructure for production and processing activities lowering transaction costs
         for private enterprises to participate, while public investment and technical assistance lowered the
         risks of investment (ICR, paragraph 35).
        The ICR (paragraph 36) noted that some project counties to lag behind and require additional support
         and oversight from the provincial project management office (PPMO) after project closure. This was
         partially attributed to inadequate assessments during the identification stage which led to financial loss
         and discontinuation of the cooperatives, which in turn caused farmers to lose confidence and trust in
         private enterprises. Also, five cooperatives discontinued their operations in some remote villages. This
         was due to poor accessibility and high transportation costs, which reduced competitiveness, and
         made it challenging to retain qualified cooperative managers.

Summary of Efficacy Assessment. The evidence provided in the ICR pointed to the success of the
project in demonstrating a model for agricultural sector restructuring and modernization
through improved value chains with strengthened institutions and forward and backward marketing linkages.
The project exceeded its PDO outcome targets for the three PDO indicators pertaining to this objective. Also,
the target for one intermediate outcome indicator was exceeded and two were fully achieved. However, there
were some shortcomings related to the sustainability of cooperatives in remote villages and lagging activities




                                                                                                     Page 7 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Guizhou Rural Development Project (P133261)



in some areas. Therefore, the efficacy with which this objective was achieved is rated Substantial with
moderate shortcomings.




Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To improve the organizational arrangements in the Project Counties of Guizhou Province.

Rationale
Theory of Change (ToC). To achieve the stated objective, the project would construct and rehabilitate public
infrastructure to support farmers cooperatives and rural value chains, and carry out public service to support
cooperatives (e.g. certification extension, training and Research and Development). As a result of these
activities, the following outputs would be achieved: road or foot paths constructed/rehabilitated with increased
connectivity; extension, training, research marketing service carried out; and training conducted to farmers
cooperatives management staff and government staff. The expected outcomes included: improved production
quality and value addition; and improved capacity for farmers and cooperative managers. All this combined
would contribute towards achieving the PDO: "to demonstrate improved organizational arrangements in the
Project Counties of Guizhou Province." The anticipated long-term impact was expected to be increased
farmers' income especially for ones under poverty; and achieving inclusive and sustainable rural
industrialization.

The achievement of this objective was underpinned by the following two critical assumptions: 1. No adverse
weather conditions or disaster situation; and 2. Inputs and services provided can reach to the intended target
beneficiaries.

Overall, the stated activities in the ToC were directly linked to the outputs, and outcomes in a plausible causal
chain. However, the connection to the PDO was not clearly defined. The critical assumptions were realistic
and logical.

Outputs/Intermediate Results

1. A total of 819 km of roads, tractor roads, and field paths were built or improved by the project exceeding
the target of: 640 km.
a. 485.8 km of production roads were built or improved by the project exceeding the target of target: 200 km.
b. 186.36 km of tractor roads were built or improved by the project exceeding the target of: 50 km.
c. 147 km of foot paths were built or improved by the project which was below the target of: 390 km.
2. 3,468 person-months of advisory or facilitation services provided to cooperatives under the project which
was below the target of: 5,000.


                                                                                                   Page 8 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Guizhou Rural Development Project (P133261)



3. 92 water tanks were constructed with a total volume of 6,203 cubic meters (no target provided).
4. 36 Water towers were constructed (no target provided).
5. 170 km of water pipe network (no target provided).

Outcomes

      This objective lacked any final development outcome indicators to measure its achievement. The ICR,
       and in accordance with the Bank's ICR guidelines, relied on two intermediate results indicators for
       assessment. By project completion, a total of 819 km of roads (IRI 1), tractor roads, and field paths
       were built or improved exceeding the revised target of: 640 km, but slightly below the original target of:
       890 km. Two out of three sub-indicators significantly exceeded both the original and revised targets,
       while the foot path sub-indicator is 62% short of the target as noted above. According to the ICR
       (paragraph 38) the overachievement of the two sub-indicators while falling short on the third was
       because infrastructure was largely demand-driven, and could not be fully predicted. according to the
       ICR (paragraph 38) "the counties reported that the roads constructed significantly reduced travel time,
       production/marketing costs, and maintenance and management costs." The project also supported
       training of 3,468 person-months of advisory or facilitation services provided to cooperatives under the
       project which was below the target of: 5,000 (IRI 2).
      The project also rehabilitated/constructed irrigation and drainage infrastructure. This improved water
       availability for production, processing capacity, and drinking water safety (ICR, paragraph 38).
      Finally, the project contributed to the improvement of the service delivery system that supports farmer
       cooperatives. The project constructed trading centers, farmers markets, and storage and cold chain
       facilities; provided agricultural technology through extension and advisory services, market
       information systems, financial services (e.g., insurance); provided food safety testing and quality
       control services; and carried out agriculture research and technology transfer activities, including
       recruitment of cooperative advisors. But there is no evidence that the provision of these various
       outputs was and would lead to changes to the organizational arrangements. It could be inferred, but
       the mix of success factors and specificity regarding the transformative effect is missing and thus the
       impact remains speculative.

Summary of Efficacy Assessment. The project supported a number of activities as noted above and
exceeded one intermediate outcome target, the contribution of these activities to the achievement of the
stated objective was documented by the ICR. However, given the lack of direct evidence on final
development outcomes, the efficacy rating for Objective 2 is modest.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
To strengthen public service delivery in the Project Counties of Guizhou Province.

Rationale


                                                                                                   Page 9 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Guizhou Rural Development Project (P133261)



Theory of Change (ToC). To achieve the stated objective, the project would support farmer technical training
and cooperative management training. The expected outputs included: training of farmers, cooperative
management staff and government staff conducted; and analytical studies finalized and disseminated. The
expected outcome is improved government management capacity and service delivery. All this combined
would contribute towards achieving the PDO "to demonstrate strengthened public service delivery in the
Project Counties of Guizhou Province." The anticipated long-term impact was expected to be achieving
inclusive and sustainable rural industrialization.

The achievement of this objective was underpinned by the following two critical assumptions: 1. The training
provided would be technically and financially viable for farmers to adopt, and 2. An enabling policy
environment would exist for the cooperatives management and sustainability.

The activities stated in the ToC were connected to outputs, but there had limited connection to the
outcome and to the PDO.

Outputs/Intermediate Results

1. Three analytical studies were completed and disseminated compared to a target of: 2 (target exceeded).
2. 97,451 farmers were trained by gender and ethnic minority exceeding the target of: 88,000.
a. 43% of trained farmers were female (target: 30%, exceeded).
b. 60% of trained farmers belonged to an ethnic minority (target: 30%, exceeded).
3. 11,694 cooperative management staff were trained by gender and ethnic minority (person-times,
cumulative) (target: 7,500, exceeded)
a. 22% of the trained staff were female (target: 20%;exceeded).
b. 51% of the trained staff belonged to an ethnic minority (target: 20%, exceeded).

4. 35 study tours and workshops conducted under the project for knowledge exchange (target achieved).

Outcome

      As with objective 2 this objective lacked any final outcome indicators to measure the achievement of
       the objective. The ICR (paragraph 44) reported that management capacities of the
       cooperatives improved. The Management Effectiveness Tracking Tool (METT) assessment showed a
       significant improvement of professionalism of the cooperatives: from an average score of 22 in the first
       round, to 34 in the second round, to 62 in the last round. The METT score measured management
       effectiveness of farmer cooperatives through a qualitative self-assessment. In a further
       communication, the project team emphasized that METT score was a key parameter to assess the
       outcome of the capacity building activities.
      The ICR also reported that the project significantly increased household incomes and contributed to
       poverty reduction. The endline survey, showed that the average income of the 440 project villages
       households increased from US$ 6,670 to US$ 10,880 at midline and to at US$ 11,725 endline. In
       comparison, the average income of households residing in the non-targeted villages increased from
       US$ 7,911 to US$ 11,017 at midline and to US$11,519 at endline. The difference-in-difference growth
       rate was 30% when comparing cooperatives and villages without cooperatives.

Summary of Efficacy Assessment. The project supported a number of activities as noted above and met or
exceeded its intermediate outcome targets, the contribution of these activities to the achievement of the
stated objective was documented by the ICR. The project also achieved significant improvement in

                                                                                                Page 10 of 21
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Guizhou Rural Development Project (P133261)



                            management effectiveness of cooperatives as noted above. However, given the lack of direct evidence on
                            final development outcomes, the efficacy rating for Objective 3 is substantial, with shortcomings.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Overall Efficacy was rated Substantial, with moderate shortcomings. The ICR reflected convincing evidence
                            on the achievement of the first objective, and relied on intermediate outcome indicators to assess the
                            achievement of the third objective. The progress against the second objective remains vague and it is not
                            clear from the activities that there has been a transformation in the relevant organizational arrangements. The
                            assessment of both the second and third objectives of the project was undermined by the lack of final
                            outcome indicators to comprehensively measure the achievement of these two objectives making the
                            achievement marginally so.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



   5. Efficiency
   Economic and Financial Analysis (EFA)

   ex ante

                               The overall Economic Rate of Return (ERR), taking into account all overhead costs, was estimated at
                                18.5% with a Net Present Value (NPV) of RMB366 million.
                               Financial Internal Rate of Returns (FIRRs) of cropping and household activity models ranged between
                                6.1% to 38.8%
                               Direct benefits expected from the project included: improved productivity, value-addition, and market
                                opportunities which are expected to result in
                                increased incomes and long-term local employment opportunities.
                               A standard cost-benefit analysis of various value chain production systems in the project areas was used
                                to assess expected economic development impact. No separate benefits are calculated for project
                                investments in public infrastructure, institutional capacity building, training, market development, risk
                                mitigation and project management and evaluation.
                               Sensitivity Analysis. The economic return was not sensitive to increases in the project investment costs.
                                A cost increase of 10% would reduce the EIRR by one percent and a cost increase of 20% would reduce

                                                                                                                             Page 11 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Guizhou Rural Development Project (P133261)



       the EIRR by two percent. The project’s economic viability was however sensitive to changes in the
       agricultural product prices. For example, if all output prices would drop by 10% the EIRR would drop from
       18.5% to 11.2%.
      Overall, the PAD EFA was comprehensive and provided enough justification for the project investments.

ex post

      The overall economic rate of return (ERR) was estimated at 22% compared to 18.5% at appraisal. The
       ERR was based on: (i) the net benefits from operations of the 19 cooperatives, plus an additional 20% of
       their revenues; and (ii) apportioned costs for the 19 cooperatives from the total project costs. The
       financial internal rate of return (FIRRs) for the cooperatives ranged between 12% to 37% which was
       comparable to the appraisal estimates.
      Project benefits considered in the analysis included: (i) increased employment incomes from the
       extended value chain linkages; (ii) farm gate commodity price increases for non-members due to the
       operations of the cooperatives, and improved infrastructure and capacity building; and (iii) post-harvest
       loss reduction for non-members due to increased processing capacity and marketing access, particularly
       for perishable products. The analysis covered 19 cooperatives out of the 75 project-supported
       operational cooperatives.
      No ex post sensitivity analysis was conducted. The ICR (Annex 4) stated that a sensitivity analysis was
       not warranted because output prices were conservatively estimated, the cooperative investment costs
       were actual, which did not give rise to more variations to be assumed. This Review finds that conducting
       a sensitivity analysis would have been useful to give better insight on the impact of different scenarios on
       variations of the ERR. Assuming that no variations would arise was not a realistic assumption.

Implementation efficiency. The project closing date was extended by 12 months to allow more time for
implementing the restructured project and to achieve the expected outcomes (ICR, paragraph 22). According to
the ICR (paragraph 54) "procurement and financial management performance were generally
satisfactory." While the project experienced implementation delays in the early stage, all project activities were
completed before the extended project closure (ICR, paragraph 54). The project fully disbursed the Bank loan of
US$100 million. While the project management cost was slightly higher than the PAD estimation (US$5.86
million compared to US$5.35 million), the ICR (paragraph 54) noted that management cost accounted for less
than 5% of overall project cost, which was "within accepted norms."

Summary of Efficiency Assessment. The overall economic rate of return (ERR) was estimated at 22% which
exceeded the appraisal estimate at 18.5%. The implementation efficiency was adequate despite initial delays.
Finally the ex-post EFA provided enough justification for the project investments, but could have benefited from
conducting a sensitivity analysis. Therefore, Efficiency was rated Substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:



                                                                                                     Page 12 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Guizhou Rural Development Project (P133261)




                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     0
Appraisal                                                  18.50
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     0
ICR Estimate                                               22.00
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of Objectives was rated Substantial. Overall Efficacy was rated Substantial, with moderate
shortcomings. The ICR reported convincing evidence on the achievement of the first objective, and relied on
intermediate outcome indicators to support the limited achievement of the second and third objectives. The
assessment of the second and third objectives of the project was undermined by the lack of final outcome
indicators to comprehensively measure the achievement of these two objectives. Efficiency was rated
Substantial. The overall economic rate of return (ERR) was estimated at 22% which exceeded the appraisal
estimate at 18.5%.

Based on a Substantial rating for Relevance of Objectives, Overall Efficacy, and for Efficiency, the Outcome
rating is Moderately Satisfactory. There were moderate shortcomings in the project’s achievement of its
objectives and its relevance.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The ICR discussed the following three risks that could potentially impact the development outcome:

1.Government ownership/commitment risk. The sustainability of the project development outcomes
needs a conducive policy environment. After achieving its target of eradicating extreme poverty in December
2020, China is now transitioning to implementing its Rural Revitalization Program (RRP), for which
cooperative based value chain development remains one of the key pillars (ICR, paragraph 95).

2. Institutional support risk. The sustainability of the project development outcomes needs continued
institutional support and capacity building for farmer cooperatives. The Provincial Government issued a
directive in August 2022 on the management of assets created by the poverty reduction programs for
sustainability, with detailed arrangements for O&M costs. The PPMO committed to providing continued
support to the cooperatives in areas of product marketing and cooperative management skills (ICR,
paragraph 96).

3. Financial risk. The sustainability of the project development outcomes will benefit from
enhancing cooperative financial sustainability. The financial viability of the project-supported cooperative has


                                                                                                     Page 13 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Guizhou Rural Development Project (P133261)



been assessed and market risk will be mitigated through linkages and co-financing arrangements with the
private sector. The involvement of the private sector provides cooperatives with clear business rationale,
sound management, and business planning to enhance market competitiveness for longer-term sustainability
(ICR, paragraph 97).




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
        Strategic relevance and approach. The project was strategically relevant and in line with Bank
           strategies and Borrower priorities (see section 3 for more details). However, the PDO was broad
           and lacked clear connection with the PDO indicators (see section 9 a for more details).
          Technical, financial, and economic aspects. The project design adopted an integrated
           approach, combining infrastructure investment and capacity building for farmers’ cooperatives. It
           was designed to promote the participation of agro-enterprises and seek to leverage private sector
           investments, which were expected to provide a clear business rationale and longer-term
           sustainability of the commodity value chain. However, the causal relationship between the stated
           activities and the PDO were not well developed. The ICR (paragraph 68) noted that the project
           design "underestimated the time and effort needed for establishing viable and pro-poor business-
           oriented farmer cooperatives at the county level."
          Poverty, gender, and social development aspects. The project was designed to support the
           government’s poverty reduction strategy in the 2011-2020 Outline, which highlighted the critical
           role of industrial development, including in the agriculture sector, for poverty alleviation. Project
           sites were located in two nationally recognized poor mountainous regions (Wuling and Wumeng
           mountains) and most project villages were listed as key poverty reduction villages. Providing
           equal opportunity for women to take part in the development of farmer cooperatives was identified
           as a challenging task and was taken into account. Special consideration would be given to the
           voices of women as a vulnerable group, both in accessing employment and in taking part in
           cooperative decisions.
          Environmental and Fiduciary aspects. The project design included appropriate environmental
           and social risk assessments with adequate mitigation strategies. Fiduciary aspects were also
           adequately covered in the PAD. Overall, financial management and procurement arrangements
           were adequate.
          Implementation arrangements. The implementation management structure was effectively
           designed adopting similar arrangements followed under previous World Bank poverty reduction
           projects (ICR, paragraph 66).
          Risk assessment. Seven risks were identified at appraisal that related to three main
           areas: stakeholders, implementation agency and project-specific risks. The overall risk in project
           implementation was Substantial with the limited capacity of the implementing agencies at the
           provincial and county levels to implement the project and the challenges associated with
           institutional innovation seen two main risks to the achievement of the PDO (PAD, paragraph 30).
           According to the ICR (paragraph 65) "the project risks were clearly identified and effective
           mitigation measures were incorporated into the project design."



                                                                                                     Page 14 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Guizhou Rural Development Project (P133261)



        M&E arrangements. M&E design was poor with a complex PDO that had a poorly defined
         relation with the PDO indicators. This undermined the project and made assessing the
         achievement of the PDO difficult.

  Summary of QAE Assessment. While the project was strategically relevant, it had a complex PDO. The
  project design adopted an integrated approach, combining infrastructure investment and capacity building
  for farmers’ cooperatives. Design featured adequate environmental and fiduciary aspects.
  Implementation arrangements were adequate. Risk assessment was thorough with adequate mitigation
  measures. Finally, M&E arrangements had design shortcomings as noted above. Overall, Quality at Entry
  is rated Moderately Satisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
       The Bank conducted 15 supervision missions over the duration of the implementation period.
        According to the ICR (paragraph 92) Bank missions had the appropriate mix of specialists. Missions
        were conducted virtually during the COVID-19 outbreak. The PPMO benefited from the
        team's team strategic and operational guidance specifically during the earlier missions.
       The Bank’s supervision missions effectively promoted the standardized procurement, improved FM,
        and proposed measures on environmental and social safeguards. Also, the China-Based Bank task
        team members mostly stayed in place from preparation through completion, together with most
        technical staff, which according to ICR (paragraph 92) enabled the team to provide timely solutions
        to the client.
       However, the Bank team show have worked on restructuring the project earlier and
        comprehensively address the PDO complication and the M&E design weaknesses.

 Summary of Quality of Supervision Assessment. The Bank team actively guided the project
 implementation. However, the Bank Supervision should have attempted to address M&E design
 shortcomings to enable a comprehensive assessment of the project outcomes. Overall, the Bank
 supervision is rated Moderately Satisfactory.

 Based on the assigned ratings for Quality at Entry and Supervision, Bank Performance is rated Moderately
 Satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory



                                                                                                Page 15 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Guizhou Rural Development Project (P133261)



9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
      The PAD did not include a Theory of Change (ToC) which was not required by the Bank at the time
        of appraisal. Nonetheless, the ICR included a ToC that was constructed based on the project
        activities, outputs, and outcomes as described in the PAD. However, the PDO lacked clear
        connections with the outcomes.
       The achievement of the PDO was assessed through measuring four PDO outcome indicators: (a)
        Percentage of cooperatives making a profit (financial success and sustainability indicator); (b) Net
        Present Value generated by project investments (economic success indicator); (c) Share of poor
        households in the community that join newly established or improved cooperatives (outreach and
        inclusiveness indicator); and (d) Private enterprise investments leveraged through project
        investments (indicating the success of modernization and attractiveness of key value chains for
        private investment). These four indicators were pitched more at the intermediate outcome level, and
        lacked a clear connection with the stated PDO. In addition, the second indicator overlapped with the
        first, and according to the ICR (paragraph 16) had measurement difficulties and was dropped during
        implementation. Finally, the PDO as stated included three objectives (see section 2A). The second
        and third objectives of the PDO lacked any outcome level indicators to measure their achievement.
        In fact, the ICR relied on intermediate outcome indicators to measure objectives 2 and 3.
       The Results Framework (RF) included 11 intermediate results indicators (IRIs) to track and
        measure the different activities supported by the project. Overall, the IRIs were measurable and
        directly connected to the supported activities. However, some project supported activities were not
        covered in the RF such as irrigation and market facilities (ICR, paragraph 75).
       Overall, M&E design was poor and lacked relevant outcome indicators to assess the full a scope of
        the PDO. While causal relationships between project interventions and the intermediate and PDO
        indicators were adequate, the formulation of the PDO and the relation with PDO indicators were not
        clearly defined (ICR, paragraphs 63 &67).



b. M&E Implementation
       According to the ICR (paragraph 75) "M&E arrangements were supported with adequate budget
           and defined institutional responsibilities, with the PPMO for overall planning, coordination, and
           internal M&E implementation." A computerized management information system (MIS) was set up
           at the county and provincial PMO levels to track and document physical, institutional, and financial
           project progress.
          Delayed data inputting caused the MIS data to lag behind the actual physical progress. The ICR
           also noted that there were some inconsistencies for a few intermediate results indicators in the
           MIS records and the Implementation Status and Results Reports (ICR, paragraph 78).
          External entities were contracted to undertake independent evaluation of project interventions
           through representative surveys. Those were conducted at three stages: at baseline, at the mid-
           term, and a final survey at project completion.
          The Cooperative METT was adopted to measure the management effectiveness of farmer
           cooperatives supported by the project (ICR, paragraph 79)
          Restructuring and revision of targets. The end target for PDO Indicator 1was reduced from 60 to
           40% to make it consistent with the newly updated poverty database established under the

                                                                                                    Page 16 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Guizhou Rural Development Project (P133261)



         Precision Poverty Alleviation Program and other ongoing similar poverty reduction projects.
         Also, PDO Indicator 2 (Net Present Value generated by project investment) was dropped due to
         its overlap with PDO Indicator 1 in measuring economic success and financial viability as well as
         measurement difficulties; and a clarified the definition of ‘village’ as ‘administrative village’ for PDO
         Indicator 3 was included and the target was reduced from 80 to 60%. There were also revisions to
         the IRIs where three saw their targets reduced, one was dropped and one had a clarification to its
         definition.
        While the project was restructured, the M&E design problems persisted and were not
         comprehensively addressed.



c. M&E Utilization
       The data and information generated through the project's M&E reports were used to assess the
         implementation progress of activities and the likelihood of the project achieving its PDO and
         contributed substantially to the project restructuring and ICR preparation (ICR, paragraph 79).
        The M&E data informed project management and helped in decision making. This was
         evidenced by the identification of implementation bottlenecks and the reallocations of Bank loan
         proceeds.
        According to the ICR "information gathered in the M&E process also helped identify best
         practices that would be scaled up at the provincial level."

  Summary of M&E Quality Assessment. The M&E design suffered from significant shortcomings that
  undermined the possibility of conducting a comprehensive assessment of the PDO. During
  implementation, these design shortcomings were not fully addressed at restructuring. While there was
  adequate utilization of the data generated through the M&E system, it was not enough to
  comprehensively assess the achievement of the PDO. Therefore, M&E Quality is rated Modest.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as an environmental Category B. It triggered the following environmental
   safeguard policies: Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01), Pest Management (OP 4.09), and Natural
   Habitats (OP/BP 4.04). Also two social safeguard policies were triggered: Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)
   and Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12). While the project overall was expected to generate positive
   environmental benefits, activities under two of its components could have adverse environmental impacts
   that require mitigation. An Environmental Management Plan (EMP), a Pest Management Plan (PMP) and
   an Ethnic Minority Development Plan (EMDP) were prepared. Also, a Resettlement Policy Framework
   (RPF) would guide any project-related land acquisition.

   Compliance with Environmental Safeguards. The ICR (paragraph 81) stated that "all environmental and
   social safeguards policies were complied with." Environmental mitigation measures were implemented

                                                                                                       Page 17 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Guizhou Rural Development Project (P133261)



   by the client as detailed in the ESMP. The Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) policy was triggered for a
   precautionary reason. According to the ICR (paragraph 83) project sites were carefully selected to avoid
   sensitive areas throughout project implementation. The project also successfully implemented the PMP
   (paragraph 84).

   Compliance with Social Safeguards. As noted above, all social safeguards policies were complied with
   (ICR, paragraph 81). Four ethnic groups, the Miao, Yi, Tujia, and Gelao were identified in the project area
   through a social impact assessment. An Ethnic Minority Development Plan (EMDP) was implemented to
   enable ethnic minorities to fully participate in and benefit from the project and to ensure the protection of
   their interests and rights in land and resources. Also, a grievance redress mechanism (GRM) was
   established. According to the ICR (paragraph 86) "there was no dispute over land throughout project
   implementation."




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management (FM). FM experienced some weaknesses related to delays in submitting interim
   financial reports (IFRs), inadequate presentation of project financial statements, some inaccurate
   accounting treatment, and weak internal controls, particularly for farm cooperatives (ICR, paragraph 87).
   These weaknesses were gradually addressed through remedial actions and relevant Bank support.
   According to the ICR (paragraph 87) the "project audit reports were submitted annually to the World Bank
   with acceptable quality and unmodified (clear) audit opinion."

   Procurement. The project procurement risk was identified as high at appraisal. To address this
   risk, cooperative procurement training was provided regularly by the Bank and PPMO to project staff at the
   county and cooperative levels. According to the ICR (paragraph 89) "no significant procurement issues
   were noted by the World Bank supervision missions or procurement post reviews, or disclosed by the
   external auditors."




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None.



d. Other
   None.



11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment


                                                                                                    Page 18 of 21
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Guizhou Rural Development Project (P133261)



                                                                               There were moderate
Outcome                        Satisfactory          Moderately Satisfactory   shortcomings in the project’s
                                                                               achievement of its objectives.
                                                                               Quality at Entry had moderate
Bank Performance               Satisfactory          Moderately Satisfactory
                                                                               shortcomings.
                                                                               M&E design had significant
                                                                               shortcomings that were not fully
Quality of M&E                 Substantial           Modest
                                                                               addressed during
                                                                               implementation.
Quality of ICR                 ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR included five lessons. The following three are emphasized with some adaptation of
language:

1. Establishing productive partnerships between cooperatives and enterprises can be an
effective approach to leveraging private sector investments to strengthen agricultural value
chains and reduce poverty. The project experience demonstrated that farmer cooperatives have
proven to be an effective development model for strengthening agricultural value chains and
reducing poverty. The innovative model piloted by this project was scaled up by the government and
World Bank programs.

2. Insurance against natural disaster risks can be a useful tool to reduce farmers
vulnerability against climate risks. The pilot insurance scheme demonstrated its impact on
lowering the operational and climate risks but further efforts are needed for tailored products to
address the specific needs of the cooperatives. Farmers in the project area are vulnerable to nature
disaster risks, for which more well targeted insurance schemes need to be developed to address
specific needs of the cooperatives.

3. Creating an enabling environment through infrastructure development is key to supporting
and developing market linkages. Public investments in infrastructure opened access to markets,
lowered transportation and storage costs, and reduced post-harvest waste. It was also instrumental
to productivity increases (irrigation) and production upgrading (market infrastructure).



13. Assessment Recommended?

  Yes
  ASSESSMENT_TABLE
  Please Explain




                                                                                                 Page 19 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Guizhou Rural Development Project (P133261)



  Further assessment of the project achievements is warranted given the disconnect between the PDO and its
  outcome indicators. Verifying results on the ground would give an opportunity to assess the actual project
  achievements and provide a more informed picture on any sustainability issues.



14. Comments on Quality of ICR

Quality of Evidence. While the ICR benefited from the data collected by the M&E system, assessing the
achievement of the PDO was challenging due to M&E design shortcomings. Targets for some outputs in
(Annex 1) were not reported.

Quality of Analysis. The ICR provided clear links between evidence and findings to the extent
possible, and used the evidence base to serve the arguments under the different sections, in particular the
discussion on outcomes. However, the ICR did not provide a comprehensive assessment on the achievement
of the PDO due to M&E design shortcomings.

Lessons. Lessons reflected the project experience and were based on evidence and analysis.

Results Orientation. The ICR included a comprehensive discussion on the achievement of the PDO.
However, the outcome discussion at times lacked evidence to back the stated claims.

Consistency with guidelines. The ICR used the available data to justify most of the assigned ratings. The ICR
included an explicit statement on the compliance of the project with the Bank's safeguard policies. Also, the
discussion on safeguards covered all the triggered policies.

Conciseness. The ICR provided comprehensive coverage of project activities, and candidly reported on most
shortcomings in a concise and well written report. However, at 24 pages the main body of the report was
slightly lengthy.

Summary of the Quality of ICR Assessment. Overall, the ICR was undermined by the poor M&E design and
justifying the outcome of the project relied on intermediate outcome indicators. The ICR reflected relevant
lessons and adequately reported on safeguard compliance and fiduciary aspects. Overall, the Quality of the
ICR is rated Substantial, with minor shortcomings.




  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                  Page 20 of 21
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
Guizhou Rural Development Project (P133261)




                                                                           Page 21 of 21
