     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     HT Cultural Heritage and Tourism Sector (P144614)



                                                                                      Report Number: ICRR0023465

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                   Project Name
 P144614                                      HT Cultural Heritage and Tourism Sector

 Country                                      Practice Area(Lead)
 Haiti                                        Urban, Resilience and Land


 L/C/TF Number(s)                             Closing Date (Original)                  Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-H9440                                    31-Aug-2020                                             17,310,649.08

 Bank Approval Date                           Closing Date (Actual)
 19-May-2014                                  29-Jul-2022

                                              IBRD/IDA (USD)                                        Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                              45,000,000.00                                                  0.00

 Revised Commitment                               26,150,000.02                                                  0.00

 Actual                                           17,843,117.59                                                  0.00




 Prepared by                  Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator            Group
 Katharina Ferl               Vibecke Dixon                 Kavita Mathur                     IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Project Appraisal Document (PAD) (p.ii) and the Financing Agreement of July 9, 2014 (p.4)
   the objective of the project was to “a) increase the attractiveness of the cultural heritage sites in North of Haiti
   for tourists; (b) improve the living environment for the residents living in North of Haiti; and (c) support the
   Recipient’s capacity to respond promptly and effectively to an Eligible Emergency, as needed.




                                                                                                        Page 1 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     HT Cultural Heritage and Tourism Sector (P144614)



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  27-Aug-2020

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   The project included five components. According to the World Bank team (June 7, 2023) no actual costs per
   component were reported since during the June 2020 restructuring only one disbursement category,
   combining all components, was established.

   Component A: Physical Cultural Heritages sites and Touristic Circuits in the PNH-CSSR and Cap-
   Haitian Historic Center (appraisal estimate US$28.0 million). This component was to finance the following
   activities: i) conservating and rehabilitating the Citadelle Henry, the Palais de Sans Souci, the Chapelle de
   Sans Souci and Les Ramiers in the Parc National Historique Citadelle-Sans Souci-Ramiers - National
   History Park (PNH-CSSR) including structural strengthening, refurbishment, presentation, sanitation and
   safety improvement through the carrying out of works and the provision of goods and consultants’ services;
   ii) supporting the management of the PNH-CSSR; iii) urban upgrading of the Cap-Haïtien historic city
   center; iv) strengthening the planning and management capacity of the Natural Cultural Heritage Institute
   (ISPAN) and provision of technical assistance for the implementation of the activities stated under this
   component.

   Component B: Local Investments in Milot, Dondon and Cap-Haitien (appraisal estimate US$7.0
   million). This component was to finance the following activities: i) improving the local urban infrastructure in
   Milot, Dondon and Cap Haitien to carry out investments selected based on a participatory decision-making
   mechanism through the carrying out of works and the provision of goods and consultants’ services; ii)
   preparing a solid waste management study in Milot and Dondon, and sanitation and urban planning studies
   for Cap-Haïtien; and iii) strengthening the capacity of the municipalities located in Milot, Dondon and Cap-
   Haïtien through the provision of goods, consultants’ services and training.

   Component C: Inclusive Tourism Sector Development Support (appraisal estimate US$4.0
   million). This component was to finance the following activities: i) strengthening the capacity of the Ministry
   of Tourism (MT) through: a) the development of tourism sector planning and tourism circuits; b) skills
   development; and c) the upgrading of tourism statistics and enhancing sector coordination through the
   carrying out of small works and the provision of goods, consultants’ services, and training; ii) strengthening
   the capacity of the Destination Management Organization (DMO) in: a) developing tourism promotion
   strategies, marketing, and technical capacity; and b) developing and upgrading tourism products, through
   the provision of goods, consultants’ services and training; and iii) enhancing the local engagement in
   cultural heritage tourism through: a) the provision of Community Events and Tourism Grants to Beneficiaries
   for carrying out sub-projects to develop tourism related services and products; and b) the improvement of



                                                                                                      Page 2 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    HT Cultural Heritage and Tourism Sector (P144614)



  the capacity of the local communities to develop tourism related services and products, through the
  provision of goods, consultants’ services and training.

  Component D: Contingency Emergency Response (appraisal estimate US$1.0 million, zero
  disbursement). This component was to finance a provision of support to respond to an Eligible Emergency,
  as needed. Due to the high risk of a catastrophic event in Haiti, the proposed project would include a
  provisional component for Contingent Emergency Response (CER), designed as a mechanism for rapid
  response in the event of an eligible emergency, subject to the request of the government.

  Component E: Project Implementation, Monitoring and Evaluation (appraisal estimate US$5.0
  million). This component was to support Technique d’Exécution (UTE) at the Ministry of Economy and
  Finance (MEF) and the National Cultural Heritage Institute (ISPAN) in the implementation, monitoring and
  evaluation of the project.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project cost. The project was estimated to cost US$45.0 million. Actual cost was US$17.8 million due to
  the dropping of several activities, cost savings, and use of some financing for the COVID-19 response.

  Financing. The project was financed by an IDA grant in the amount of US$45.0 million of which US$26.15
  million was disbursed and US$18.85 million of financing was cancelled.

  Borrower Contribution. It was not planned for the Borrower to make any contributions.

  Dates: The project was restructured six times (all level 2):

        On June 30, 2017, the project was restructured to: i) modify the Results Framework to add two
         intermediate indicators (“establish a Provisional Park Management Authority (P-AGP) in charge of
         implementing” and “prepare and adopt an appropriate work program of conversation and
         consultation activities in the National History Park (PNH-CSSR), where most of the projects
         investment were to take place”); and ii) change in implementation schedule to establish a permanent
         AGP by 2018.

        On June 29, 2018, the project was restructured to: i) drop several activities such as renovation of the
         old prison, rehabilitation of Antenor Firmin House and Alliance Francaise due to delays in the
         submission of critical documents; ii) funds from the dropping of several activities were reallocated to
         component C, inclusive tourism sector development support and to Component E, project
         implementation, evaluation and monitoring; iii) reformulate and adjust indicators: and iv) align
         procurement arrangements with the World Bank’s 2017 procurement guidelines.

        On June 6, 2020, the project was restructured to cancel US$5.3 million to mobilize resources to
         support the government in its COVID-19 response under a different World Bank project.

        On August 27, 2020, the project was restructured to: i) reduce activities under Component A due to
         delays in the preparation of technical documents and foreign firms not being able to start work on
         the project site due to COVID-19 restrictions; ii) cancel US$7.75 million of project financing; iii)
         extend the project’s closing date by 23 months from August 31, 2020, to July 31, 2022 to allow for

                                                                                                   Page 3 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     HT Cultural Heritage and Tourism Sector (P144614)



          the implementation of project activities which were delayed due to significant socio-political
          upheavals and the COVID-19 pandemic; iv) modify Results Framework accordingly; and v) change
          disbursement estimates.

         On October 9, 2021, the project was restructured to: i) create a new disbursement category to
          finance the project’s possible resettlement-related expenditures for the upgrading of facades in two
          main streets of Cap Haitien’s city center due to the government not being able to provide funding.

         On March 4, 2022, the project was restructured to: i) cancel US$5.8 million by dropping the
          rehabilitation of Ancienne Capitainerie under component A due to an unsuccessful call for bits as
          week as savings made under different activities.

   Split Rating. A split rating will be conducted because PDO targets were revised during August 2020
   restructuring.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country context: According to the PAD (p. 1) in 2012, two years before project appraisal, Haiti’s Gross
Domestic Product (GDP) per capita was US$771, making it the poorest country in the Americas.
Recovering from the devastating earthquake in 2010 that resulted in damages and losses of US$7.9 billion
(120 percent of the country’s GDP) with needed reconstruction efforts estimated at US$11.3 billion.
However, at appraisal, economic growth was increasing mainly due to a pick-up in agricultural production,
construction, and the industrial sector, in particular the textile and garment industry. Also, security indicators
were improving, and the government aimed to improve climate investment, foster entrepreneurship and
public-private partnership for infrastructure. Also, Haiti had the potential to attract new investments in
agribusiness, apparel, and tourism.

Sector context: Cap Haitien, the second largest city in Haiti, located in the North of the island, was
surrounded by historic monuments representing the country’s history and cultural heritage. Cap Haitien and
its surrounding area was seen as having considerable potential for tourism and economic development.
Conservation and management of cultural heritage were seen as critical for the sustainable development of
tourism. Demand for domestic and international tourism to the area was growing. In 2009, receipts from
international tourists in the North were US$312 million accounting for about 34 percent of the value of
Haiti’s total service exports and 8 percent of GDP that year.

Alignment with the government’s strategy: In 2014, the government started to actively foster tourism.
The 2013-2014 Tourism Strategy aimed to work with the private sector to improve existing hospitality and
convention facilities and constructed new hospitality training centers. The FY14 budget of the Ministry of
Tourism was increased by 26 percent and staff to work on various touristic sites was hired.

Alignment with the World Bank’s strategy: The objective of the project was in line with three of the focus
areas of the World Bank’s most recent Country Partnership Framework (CPF) (FY2016-FY2021): i)
enhancing inclusive growth by promoting development in the north of Haiti; ii) strengthening resilience by
earthquake-proofing cultural heritage and buildings; and iii) improving governance in the management of

                                                                                                       Page 4 of 18
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      HT Cultural Heritage and Tourism Sector (P144614)



               the PNH-CSSR and by strengthening agencies managing tourism and cultural heritage. When the CPF was
               enhanced through a Performance Learning Review (PLR), the two objectives of the project (“to improve the
               living environment for the residents living in the North of Haiti” and “support the recipient’s capacity to
               respond promptly and effectively to an eligible emergency”) remained relevant when the project closed.
               However, the objective “to increase the attractiveness of the cultural heritage sites in the North of Haiti for
               tourists” was not relevant anymore due to the deterioration of the political and social issues as well as
               the security situation, exacerbated by the COVID-19 pandemic, and resulting in the need for more basic
               needs to be addressed.

               Taking everything together, the relevance of the objective is rated Substantial.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Increase the attractiveness of the cultural heritage sites in North of Haiti for tourists.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change. The project’s theory of change envisioned that project activities such as making
                             physical investments to improve resilience, restore, conserve, and beautify heritage assets, developing and
                             implementing a park management plan for the PNH-CSSR (including a master plan and business plan) as
                             well as operationalizing the Park Interim Management Authority (AGP), were to result in outputs such as
                             three main historic sites being rehabilitated, a park management plan being implemented, and the AGP being
                             operational. These outputs were to result in the outcome of increased attractiveness of the cultural heritage
                             sites in North of Haiti for tourists, and increased resilience of heritage assets to natural disasters. Also, the
                             theory of change envisioned that longer-term outcomes would include increased economic growth for the
                             local population. These assumptions seem reasonable. The project’s theory of change was adequate and
                             logical without apparent logical gaps.

                             The ICR reported the following outputs that included a target:

                                        An interim authority (AGP) with staffing acceptable to IDA was set up in the PNH-CSSR, achieving the
                                         target. However, a permanent AGP was never established, putting the sustainability of an effective
                                         Park Management System at risk. The Minister of Culture (MC) appointed a liaison agent charged with
                                         the task of developing the AGP. However, when the government changed in 2020, the liaison agent
                                         left. It took time to find a new liaison, leaving no time to legally create the permanent AGP.
                                        A National History Park Management Plan was finalized. The plan is not under implementation yet.
                                         Therefore, the target of the plan being finalized and under implementation was only partially achieved.


                                                                                                                                  Page 5 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   HT Cultural Heritage and Tourism Sector (P144614)




      Two touristic routes were developed, not achieving the original target of five tourist routes being
       developed and promoted through project investments/activities. The route from Sans-Souci to
       Choiseul was completed and a tourist circuit that includes Rue 16 and 20 was proposed. The original
       target of five touristic routes was not achieved.

Additional outputs reported in the ICR without target values:

      Diagnostic studies for the rehabilitation of the monuments were finalized (including topographical
       surveys, geotechnical and conservation studies).
      Urgent conservation works were done at the Henri-Ramiers Citadelle.
      ISPAN’s documentation center was constructed.

Outcomes:

      An effective Park Management system was not established. Therefore, the target of an effective Park
       Management system contributing to sustainable development of the park was not achieved.
      The original target of seven restored buildings with increased resistance to seismic events was not
       achieved. During the 2018 restructuring, the rehabilitation of the old prison, the Mainson Antenor
       Firmin and the Alliance Francaise were dropped. In 2022, the upgrading of the Ancienne Capitainerie
       was dropped due to delays in the procurement of a construction firm. The project only conducted
       emergency repairs to parts of Citadelle Henr- Ramiers, considered the largest fortress in the
       Americas.
      The number of tickets sold annually to the PNH-CSSR decreased from 12,500 in 2014 to 10,500 in
       2022, not achieving the original target of 16,750 tickets.
      The number of entities that provided cultural and tourism services in the project areas decreased from
       310 in 2014 to 256 entities in 2022, not achieving the original target of 350 entities.

The project did not achieve any of the PDO indicator targets. However, diagnostic studies for the
rehabilitation of the monuments were finalized and urgent conservation works at the Henri-Ramiers Citadelle
were conducted, ISPAN’s documentation center was constructed, and the PNH management Plan was
completed and submitted to the World Heritage Center. While these achievements were limited, they may
contribute to increasing the resilience and attractiveness of the cultural heritage sites in North of Haiti.
Therefore, this objective is rated Modest.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
Increase the attractiveness of the cultural heritage sites in North of Haiti for tourists.

Revised Rationale
The objective remained the same, but the targets were adjusted. The theory of change remained the same.


                                                                                                     Page 6 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   HT Cultural Heritage and Tourism Sector (P144614)



Outputs:

      Two touristic routes were developed, achieving the revised target of two touristic routes being
       developed and promoted through project investments/activities.

Outcomes:

      The revised target of one building being restored was not achieved.
      The number of tickets sold annually to the PNH-CSSR decreased from 12,500 in 2014 to 10,500 in
       2022, achieving the revised target of 10,500 tickets.
      An effective Park Management system was not established. Therefore, the target of an effective Park
       Management system contributing to sustainable development of the park was not achieved.
      The number of entities that provided cultural and tourism services in the project areas decreased from
       310 in 2014 to 256 entities in 2022, not achieving the revised target of 288.

Most output and outcome indicators under this objective were not achieved. However, the revised target of
tickets sold annually to the PNH-CSSR was achieved. Taking everything together, the achievement of this
objective was Modest.



Revised Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Improve the living environment for the residents living in North of Haiti.

Rationale
Theory of change: The project’s theory of change envisioned that project activities such as improving local
urban infrastructure, preparing solid waste management, sanitation and urban planning studies, strengthening
the capacity of municipalities for participatory planning and providing tourism development grants to engage
and strengthen local populations’ involvement in and inputs to the tourism sector were to result in outputs
such as improved urban infrastructure, solid waste management, sanitation and urban planning studies being
prepared. These outputs were to result in outcomes such as strengthened capacity of municipalities,
increased income from the tourism sector for the local population and an improved living environment for the
residents in the North of Haiti. Also, the theory of change envisioned that longer-term outcomes would
include improved quality of life for the local population and inclusive and sustainable local development.

The project’s theory of change was adequate and logical without apparent logical gaps.

Outputs:

The ICR reported the following outputs that included a target:




                                                                                                   Page 7 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   HT Cultural Heritage and Tourism Sector (P144614)




      2,670 meters of streetscapes were upgraded in project target areas, exceeding the original target of
       300 meters.
      Three infrastructures were properly operated and maintained (Place de Milot, Place de Dondon, and
       the ISPAN documentation center) following project financing, not achieving the original target of five
       infrastructures.
      47 sub-projects were financed. Out of these, 24 sub-projects promoted handicrafts, cultural activities,
       or entertainment such as music, theater, and painting. Seven grants supported food processing like
       manioc and chocolate, and Haitian cuisine. Another 13 sub-projects financed the upgrade and
       maintenance of tourist sites and destinations while another three sub-projects supported transport and
       tour guides. The original target of 100 sub-projects was not achieved. 25 percent of the sub-projects
       were implemented by women, not achieving the original target of 40 percent. 25 percent of the sub-
       projects were implemented by youth, achieving the original target of 25 percent.

The ICR reported the following outputs that did not include a target:

      Rehabilitation of facades in Street 16 and 20 in the historic center of Cap Haitien.
      According to the Bank team (June 7, 2023) during the restructuring in March 2022, three solid waste
       management studies were dropped.

Outcomes:

      The project benefitted a total of 63,450 beneficiaries, exceeding the original target of 35,000
       beneficiaries. 35 percent of beneficiaries were female, not achieving the original target of 40 percent.
       The beneficiaries benefitted from the upgrading of the public squares and improved streetscapes.
      76 percent of the population in project areas was satisfied with the quality of infrastructure financed by
       the project, exceeding the target of 75 percent (this target was not revised).

The project was able to make improvements in regard to upgrading streetscapes and satisfying project
beneficiaries. However, the project was not able to achieve the target of number of entities providing cultural
and tourism services and operationalizing the National History Park Management Plan. Therefore, this
objective is rated Modest.




Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 2 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
Improve the living environment for the residents living in North of Haiti.

Revised Rationale
The objective remained the same, but the targets were adjusted. The theory of change remained the same.


                                                                                                   Page 8 of 18
                                 Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                 HT Cultural Heritage and Tourism Sector (P144614)



                              Outputs:

                                    Three infrastructure assets were properly operated and maintained following project financing,
                                     achieving the revised target of three infrastructure assets.
                                    47 sub-projects were financed, exceeding the revised targets of 40 sub-projects being financed. 25
                                     percent of the sub-projects were implemented by women, achieving the revised target of 25 percent.

                              Outcomes:

                                    2,670 meters of streetscapes were upgraded in project target areas, exceeding the revised target of
                                     150 meters.

                              The project exceeded all output and outcome targets under the revised objective resulting in Substantial
                              achievement of this objective.



                              Revised Rating
                              Substantial


                              OBJECTIVE 3
                              Objective
                              Support the Recipient’s capacity to respond promptly and effectively to an Eligible Emergency, as needed.

                              Rationale
                              The contingency fund was not triggered. Therefore, this objective is not being assessed.



                              Rating
                              Not Rated/Not Applicable


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The achievement of the first objective with original targets was rated Modest. The achievement of the second
                            objective with original targets was also rated Modest. Overall achievement was Modest.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating                                   Primary Reason
                            Modest                                                    Low achievement
                  OBJR1_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
                                                                                                                              Page 9 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      HT Cultural Heritage and Tourism Sector (P144614)




  Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
  The achievement of the first objective with revised targets was Modest. The achievement of the second
  objective with revised targets was Substantial. Overall achievement was Modest.



  Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating                         Primary Reason
  Modest                                                     Low achievement


5. Efficiency
Economic analysis:

The PAD (p. 12) conducted a traditional economic analysis for component A (US$28 million, 62 percent of total
project financing). The benefits were defined as tourist inflows and associated expenditures over a time horizon
of 10 years. The analysis used a discount rate of 10 percent and calculated an Economic Rate of Return (ERR)
of 39 percent and a Net Present Value (NPV) of US$18 million. However, the Economic analysis did not take a
reduction of tourist inflows into account. Also, it was based on tourist figures of 2015, which were especially
high. Furthermore, the project design assumed that cruise line tourists would visit the PNH-CSSR even though it
would take approximately six hours to drive from the cruise ship’s docking location to the monuments. Later, the
security situation made this even more impossible.

Throughout project implementation, component A’s financing was reduced and actual disbursement for
component A was US$16.95 million (planned financing was US$28.0 million), 93.5 percent of total financing.
The ICR (p. 19) used the same method as at appraisal and calculated an ERR of one percent and a NPV of
minus US$146 million, indicating that the project was not a worthwhile investment.

Operational efficiency:

The project encountered several significant implementation issues due to weak institutional capacity, conflicts
between Technical Implementation Unit (UTE), ISPAN and UNESCO, coordination issues between a large
number of partners and stakeholders, the local security deteriorating, and the outbreak of the Covid-19
pandemic. All these issues resulted in significant implementation delays, which required the extension of project
implementation by a total of 23 months. Also, due to implementation issues several project activities were
dropped and financing in the amount of US$13.05 million. When the project closed US$17.84 million was
disbursed (39.6 percent of planned financing).

Taking everything together, the project’s efficiency rating is Modest.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:


                                                                                                      Page 10 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      HT Cultural Heritage and Tourism Sector (P144614)




                                Rate Available?               Point value (%)            *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                         62.00
Appraisal                                                     39.00
                                                                                          Not Applicable
                                                                                         0
ICR Estimate                                                  1.00
                                                                                          Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of the objective was Substantial given the objective’s alignment with the World Bank’s most recent
Country Partnership Framework (CPF) (FY2016-FY2021). Efficacy was Modest both before and after
restructuring due to low achievement. Efficiency was Modest due to significant implementation issues, a
negative NPV and an estimated ERR at only 1%. Taking everything together, the project’s outcome rating is
Moderately Unsatisfactory before and after the restructuring. Therefore, overall outcome is Moderately
Unsatisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Unsatisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Governmental commitment: According to the ICR (p. 32) the government has not committed to restoring
the cultural heritage sites based on the preliminary studies completed by this project. If those sites are not
being rehabilitated, there is a high risk of those sites not being resistant to seismic events and eventually
collapsing.

Technical capacity: An interim authority (AGP) was set up and staffed by the project. However, the UTE
was not able to timely hire a suitable lawyer to prepare the permanent AGP formalization decree. As a result,
the AGP was not established, putting the sustainability of an effective Park Management System at risk.
Also, given the frequent changes in government, there is a high risk that staff, trained under the project, will
no longer be in their positions.

Political and security situation: Haiti continues to remain in a politically and security volatile situation. If
this continues, there is a high risk that tourists will not return to the country, which will negatively impact the
development of the local tourism industry and the sustainability of small businesses catering to tourists.

Exposure to natural disaster: According to the ICR (p. 26) between 2012 and 2022 Haiti was hit by 16
floods, eight hurricanes, two droughts, two earthquakes, two cholera outbreaks, and the COVID-19
pandemic. There is a high risk of further natural disasters in the future and the cultural heritage sites are at
risk of being affected by these.




                                                                                                         Page 11 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     HT Cultural Heritage and Tourism Sector (P144614)




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project was part of a larger approach to developing the North of Haiti and the World Bank
  coordinated with the Inter Development Bank (IDB) and USAID who made other investments in the area.

  According to the PAD (p. 12) the overall implementation risk of the project was High. The World Bank
  team identified several implementation risks and the main risks as low institutional capacity of
  government agencies and large number of stakeholders. The World Bank team aimed to mitigate these
  risks by: i) phasing activities over time taking into account the capacity of the different agencies; ii)
  anchoring the project at the Ministry of Economy and Finance (MEF), which had a convening capacity for
  other ministries and government agencies; iii) engaging the Unite Techique de Execution (UTE), an
  agency with a strong track record implementing projects, as the PIU; iv) using a multi-sector team
  drawing on experience from different parts of the World Bank; and v) leveraging technical assistance
  from specialized institutions such as UNESCO. However, these mitigation measures were insufficient.
  Also, the World Bank team did not identify the risk of choosing the UTE as PIU. UTE did not have any
  technical knowledge in the area.

  The World Bank team chose the PIU based on its experience in implementing other donor-financed
  projects and several project preparations advances for other World Bank-financed projects. It was
  planned that the technical inputs on cultural heritage were to be provided by the National Cultural
  Heritage Institute (ISPAN), with technical support from UNESCO. Since ISPAN used to manage previous
  cultural heritage projects in the North, it disagreed with this arrangement. The UNESCO country
  representation supported ISPAN in this disagreement which impacted project coordination and required
  the involvement of UNESCO headquarters. ISPAN was responsible for providing technical oversight for
  component A. However, due to the disagreement, the project suffered from poor coordination, delays in
  developing Terms of Reference, and revision of technical documents. Also, the ICR (p. 23) stated that
  UNESCO entered into an implementation agreement with the government to support the implementation
  of the project. However, the project experienced many delays during the first phase of the project
  implementation and in 2018, the World Bank concluded that UNESCO’s support was insufficient resulting
  in the reformulation of the convention to reduce the scope and simplify the list of remaining deliverables.
  In addition, the World Bank team did not identify the risk of high turnover of decision makers in the
  government, which resulted in implementation delays. Finally, the World Bank team did not identify the
  risk of generation of solid waste by the project and the lack of appropriate infrastructure for the treatment,
  disposal, and management of it.

  According to the ICR (p. 22) the UTE found it challenging to manage a complex set of activities and
  coordinate a large number of partners and stakeholders. Also, the UTE lacked knowledge in World Bank
  financial management, procurement, and social and environmental safeguards resulting in
  implementation delays. Furthermore, the project’s institutional set up was overly complex and centralized
  including three different ministries, various entities and beneficiaries.

  The ICR (p. 30) states that the project assumed that a large part of the visitors to the PNH-CSSR and its
  monuments were to be cruise ship tourists. However, this assumption proved to be wrong since the
  cruise ship tourists were not allowed to leave the area where they docked. As a result, the tourists could

                                                                                                     Page 12 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     HT Cultural Heritage and Tourism Sector (P144614)



  have only been coming from the Dominican Republic and the diaspora, which was further restricted
  during the COVID-19 pandemic.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 According to the ICR (p. 25) the World Bank team conducted 17 supervision missions, of which seven were
 virtual due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Some if these missions included senior management.

 The project had four different Task Team Leaders (TTLs) over its life span. All TTLs and most support staff
 were based outside the country. Especially during the early years, project implementation was negatively
 affected by the frequent turnover of TTLs not allowing for a continuous monitoring and early identification of
 implementation bottlenecks. Also, the project experienced a high turnover in and lack of assigned
 procurement staff resulting in the project not receiving procurement supervision for extended periods of
 time. According to the ICR (p. 31) supervision improved from 2017 onwards when an action plan was
 developed to create a more decentralized implementation modality. To address procurement related
 issues, the project received Hands on Extended Implementation Support (HEIS). However, HEIS only
 began eight months before project closure.

 The project was restructured a total of six times to address various implementation challenges by
 relocating funds to strengthen project management and monitoring, dropping activities, and revising the
 Results Framework. While some of these actions had a positive impact on project implementation some
 were insufficient.

 During the project restructuring in 2020, the number of cultural heritage works was reduced further and the
 coordination with UNESCO was improved, resulting in an upgrade of the PDO rating from Moderately
 Unsatisfactory to Moderately Satisfactory. However, with the reduction in cultural heritage works, the
 project’s focus moved away from cultural heritage reservation to urban upgrading and tourism sector
 support.

 Despite these restructurings, the project remained a problem project for five of eight years since these
 actions came too late. The first project restructuring took place almost three years into project
 implementation. Furthermore, the lack of cooperation and communication between UTE, ISPAN, and
 UNESCO was not resolved. The ICR (p. 31) stated that the project at times lacked strategic direction,
 management support and guidance as well as fiduciary support, especially related to procurement, as
 mentioned above, and safeguards



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating

                                                                                                   Page 13 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     HT Cultural Heritage and Tourism Sector (P144614)



  Moderately Unsatisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The project’s objective was clearly specified. The project’s theory of change and how key activities and
 outputs were to lead to the intended outcomes was sound but not well reflected in the Results Framework.
 The Results Framework included four PDO indicators to measure the first aspect of the PDO (“increase the
 attractiveness of the cultural heritage sites in North Haiti for tourists”) and one PDO indicator to measure
 the second aspect of the PDO (“improve the living environment for the residents living in North Haiti”).

 While the selected indicators were measurable, several indicator targets were overly ambitious. Also, the
 project delivered several outputs that were not included in the Results Framework and lacked targets.
 According to the PAD (p. 11) the UTE was responsible for the project’s M&E activities. Also, an M&E
 system was to be put in place for different activities of the project to ensure that required M&E data were to
 be regularly generated and tracked.



b. M&E Implementation
  According to the ICR (p. 26) the UTE did not establish the M&E system as planned due to delays in hiring
  experts. Also, the planned baseline study was only delivered in January 2022, six months before project
  closure.

  During three of the six project restructurings, the Results Framework was modified. Two of the initial
  outcome targets were reduced, four of the original intermediate outcome targets were reduced and one
  intermediate outcome indicator was dropped. Also, one intermediate outcome indicator was added.

  The project restructuring in 2018 reallocated funds to strengthen the project’s M&E activities. As a result,
  M&E data were collected from different sources and verified during supervision missions.



c. M&E Utilization
  During the initial years of project implementation until 2018, limited data were available to assess
  progress towards the achievement of the PDO. Also, the ICR (p. 27) stated that M&E data were not
  used to inform the project restructurings and Mid-Term Review. After 2018, four years into project
  implementation, performance and results data were used to inform decision making.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues


                                                                                                    Page 14 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    HT Cultural Heritage and Tourism Sector (P144614)



a. Safeguards
  The project was classified as category B and triggered the World Bank’s safeguard policies OP/BP 4.01
  (Environmental Assessment), OP/BP 4.04 (Natural Habitats). OP/BP 4.09 (Pest Management), OP/BP 4.36
  (Forests), OP/BP 4.11 (Physical Cultural Resources) and OP/BP 4.12 (Involuntary Resettlement).

  According to the ICR (p. 28) the project prepared an Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP),
  and Summary Resettlement Plans (SRPs). The ICR further stated that sub-projects under component A
  were better monitored since they are at the same location as the project office in Cap Haitien than sub-
  projects under component B and C, which were located in communities further away. The project
  faced issues with the treatment, disposal, and management of solid of different natures due to the lack of
  appropriate infrastructure. Also, the project’s budget for safeguard compliance was insufficient to finance
  remediation actions. As a result, some of the project’s activities were dropped. Also, according to the ICR
  (p. 25) the lack of a permanent environmental and social safeguard specialist in Cap Haitien from 2014-
  2019 as well as the lack of adequate equipment, made the supervision of safeguard compliance
  challenging. Since the environmental specialist at the PIU resigned and was not replaced, the safeguard
  rating was downgraded to Moderately Satisfactory. At project closing the project’s environmental and social
  safeguard performance was rated Moderately Unsatisfactory due to the non-completion of all planned works
  such as the development and enhancement of the tourist site Chute de Cotard, requalification of the built
  fronts of Rue 16 and Rue 20, renovation work on the facades of houses around the Place de Dondon,
  enhancing Caramel beach of Bas-Limbé and redesigning the roof of a commercial shed on the beach of
  Saint Michel de Camp Louise. As a result, a post-closure action plan had to be developed and the borrower
  had to commit to complete all sub-projects in line with applicable operational procedures and relevant
  mitigation measures.

  According to the World Bank team (June 7, 2023) the World Bank required environmental and social
  monitoring and follow-up on construction sites. In addition, a section on environmental and social aspects
  was added to the half-yearly reports at the World Bank's request.

  The ICR (p. 28) stated that by September 2022, all triggered safeguard policies and mitigation measures
  were implemented successfully.

  Furthermore, the ICR (p. 28) stated that the project’s Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) was managed
  by the PIU’s environmental and social specialist. Complains could be submitted through the telephone,
  WhatsApp and the internet. As of July 2022, the GRM had received 18 complaints. According to the World
  Bank team (June 7, 2023) a complaint about Cotard Falls (chute de Cotard) was only successfully resolved
  after the project closing with the Government’s own resources. This was a complaint made by the local
  community about poorly executed work. After project closure, the PIU carried out remedial work resulting in
  the community being satisfied.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management. According to the ICR (p. 29) the project complied with the financial management
  arrangements throughout implementation. The project assigned a Financial Management Specialist who
  worked exclusively on the project and with the World Bank to address bottlenecks in a timely manner. The
  project’s Interim Financial Reports (IFRs) and financial audits were submitted as requested by the

                                                                                                 Page 15 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     HT Cultural Heritage and Tourism Sector (P144614)



   financing agreement and were accepted by the World Bank. The ICR stated that even though the IFRs
   were sometimes submitted with a delay, it did not affect project implementation. According to the World
   Bank team (June 7, 2023), in March 2019, the auditors included one recommendation regarding the need
   to establish a monitoring tool for contracts. The external auditor’s opinions were unqualified. The project’s
   Financial Management rating was rated Satisfactory at project closure.

   Procurement. According to the ICR (p. 29) the project experienced procurement issues throughout
   implementation. During the first four years of project implementation the UTE did not have sufficient
   procurement capacity. Between January and mid-2018 the project did not have procurement staff
   assigned to it. Also, the project’s procurement process was very centralized when it came to the
   authorization of payments, going through several levels and requiring approval by the Ministry of Finance.
   This process slowed procurement down and resulted in implementation delays.

   According to the World Bank team, the June 2018 restructuring paper included adjustments in
   procurement aiming to align all procurement arrangements under this operation with the mandatory World
   Bank’s new procurement framework “World Bank Procurement Regulations for IPF Borrowers (July 2016
   revised November 2017)”. The World Bank team also stated that the World Bank identified shortcomings
   and addressed these through restructurings such as the June 2018 and the August 2020 restructurings.
   Measures taken included: i) developing a plan to improve internal procedures; ii) setting up a project
   management computer system; and iii) transferring all contracting activities to STEP.

   The World Bank provided Hands-on Expanded Implementation Support (HEIS) between October 2021 and
   project closure (July 2022). However, this happened too late in project implementation and did not allow for
   any significant improvements. When the project closed, there were 16 ongoing activities (total amount of
   US$2.3 million) that still had to be completed (they were completed by January 2023).

   The project’s procurement performance was rated Moderately Satisfactory at project closure.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   NA



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                     Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                      IEG
                                                                                     Disagreements/Comment
                                Moderately               Moderately
Outcome
                                Unsatisfactory           Unsatisfactory



                                                                                                       Page 16 of 18
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       HT Cultural Heritage and Tourism Sector (P144614)



                                                                                       The rating is in error. The ICR
                                  Moderately               Moderately
Bank Performance                                                                       rates Bank Performance as MU,
                                  Satisfactory             Unsatisfactory
                                                                                       the same as IEG's assessment.
Quality of M&E                    Modest                   Modest

Quality of ICR                    ---                      Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR (p. 33-35) provided several lessons learned, which were adapted by IEG:

        Assessing cooperation dynamics between local agencies may allow for better project
         implementation and sustainability. The project design of this project included the
         cooperation of three different agencies, UTE, ISPAN, and UNESCO. Due to the project
         choosing UTE as implementing agency, ISPAN and UNESCO were unwilling to corporate
         initially. Also, UTE lacked the necessary technical capacity and fiduciary experience to
         successfully implement the project. As a result of these two issues, the project experienced
         significant implementation bottlenecks and delays.

        Equipping a PIU with the necessary capacity before the project becomes effective and
         ensuring that it has a presence in the implementation area as well as decision power
         can positively impact project implementation. In this project, the PIU was based in the
         capital while the project was implemented in the North, not allowing a strong presence in the
         project area. Also, the PIU was not allowed to approve all operational transactions, which
         had to go through the government, resulting in substantial delays.

        Using Trust Funds to provide Technical Assistance can be a useful tool to conduct the
         necessary technical studies. This project was not able to start the actual works on the
         monuments due to most time being spent on procuring and conducting the required
         architectural, topographic, and geotechnical studies.

A lesson learned added by IEG:

        Assessing local circumstances when designing a project to increase revenues from
         tourists, as local circumstances can positively impact project outcomes. This project
         was based on the assumption that tourists would leave their cruise ship and travel about six
         hours by land to visit historic sites. This assumption was unrealistic and would have
         benefitted from being assessed into more detail.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No




                                                                                                         Page 17 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      HT Cultural Heritage and Tourism Sector (P144614)



14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provided an adequate overview of project preparation and implementation, and it was internally
consistent and relatively concise. The economic analysis was adequate, and the lessons learned are useful for
future World Bank engagement in this area. The ICR only provided limited information on critical areas such
as procurement and safeguard compliance despite significant issues. Also, the ICR did not explain what the
Community Fund was. Finally, the ICRR did not conduct a split rating. While the ratings do not change, as the
ICR explains, the significant change to the design of the project warrants the benefit of a split evaluation and it
would have provided useful insights on the challenges even after project changes were made. Thus, the ICR is
rated Substantial, but only marginally so.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                     Page 18 of 18
