     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Benin Covid-19 GPE Project (P174186)



                                                                                Report Number: ICRR0023404

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P174186                                    Benin Covid-19 GPE Project

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Benin                                      Education


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)              Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-B3659                                   31-Dec-2021                                          6,787,530.21

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 09-Sep-2020                                30-Jun-2022

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                    Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            6,850,000.00                                    6,850,000.00

 Revised Commitment                             6,850,000.00                                    6,850,000.00

 Actual                                         6,787,530.21                                    6,787,530.21




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator        Group
 Judith Hahn Gaubatz        Salim J. Habayeb              Eduardo Fernandez             IEGHC (Unit 2)
                                                          Maldonado




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Grant Agreement (page 4) and the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, page 15), the project
   objectives were as follows:




                                                                                                 Page 1 of 12
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Benin Covid-19 GPE Project (P174186)



         To ensure continuity of teaching during and after the COVID-19 pandemic, particularly in
          deprived communes in the Recipient’s territory and to increase the Government’s
          preparedness to mitigate the effects of future crises.




b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Component 1: Ensuring safe reopening of schools and return of students, especially in deprived communes
   (Appraisal: US$ 5.74 million; Actual: US$ 5.41 million): This component aimed to re-open schools safely
   and keep learners healthy. Activities included: community sensitization on the importance of returning to
   school, especially for girls, and for maintaining hygienic practices; provision of hand-washing facilities and
   hygiene materials; grants to schools to encourage vulnerable children to return to school (i.e. to provide
   school kits, school canteens); and remedial programs for students at risk of repetition and drop out.

   Component 2: Improving preparedness to mitigate the effects of future crises (Appraisal: US$ 0.72 million;
   Actual: US$ 0.70 million): This component aimed to strengthen the education system's resilience in the
   medium- and long-term. Activities included: developing partnerships between Ministry of Education and
   radio/television; teacher training in distance learning methodology; development of distance learning
   content; and development of national strategy for learning continuity.

   Component 3: Ensuring monitoring, management and coordination of the project (Appraisal: US$ 0.39
   million; Actual: US$ 0.73 million): This component aimed to support project management and daily
   operations.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project cost

         The project cost at appraisal was US$ 6.85 million. The actual project cost at closing was US$ 6.79
          million.

   Financing

         The project was financed entirely by a Global Partnership for Education (GPE) grant of US$ 6.85
          million, of which US$ 6.79 million disbursed.

   Borrower contribution



                                                                                                    Page 2 of 12
                        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                        Benin Covid-19 GPE Project (P174186)



                            There was no planned Borrower contribution.

                       Dates

                            December 2021: The project was restructured to extend the closing date from December 2021 to
                               June 2022. The extension allowed for (i) the completion of the remedial programs for students at
                               risk of repetition and dropping out; and (ii) compensation of part of incidental costs paid for school
                               canteens in deprived communes. In addition, due to cost savings resulting from exchange rate
                               gains, additional hand washing facilities were procured for additional schools.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
As with all other countries in the world, Benin was faced with an emergency crisis due to the COVID-19
pandemic. All schools were closed in March 2020; schools re-opened for grades 6 and higher in May 2020
and were expected to re-open for grades 1-5 in September 2020. The impact on the education sector was
potentially significant, including decreased expenditures on education, learning loss and increasing
inequality (including for girls), increased dropouts, and decreased teacher quality. The effects were
expected to be most severe for children, youth, and adults living in poverty and conflict contexts, those who
have disabilities, those who are exposed to violence and oppressive conditions, and girls and women in
contexts where they are expected to take on additional caregiving roles. Maintaining and/or increasing
enrollment rates with the reopening of schools would require concerted actions particularly among these
vulnerable groups.

The government prepared an education response plan to mitigate the impact of COVID-19, focusing on
the safety of students and teachers, continuity of teaching, and education system resilience. The five
strategic pillars outlined in the national action plan include: (i) country-level coordination, planning, and
monitoring; (ii) risk communication and community engagement; (iii) surveillance, rapid response teams,
cases investigation and entry points; (iv) equipment of national laboratory with necessary machines for
diagnosis and testing; and (v) case management, infection prevention and control.

The Bank's Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for FY2019-23 included investing in human capital as a
key Focus Area. Improving relevance of education and the quality of basic education were the articulated
goals; these remain relevant even with the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic, although the CPF indicators
did not include basic education outcomes.


Rating Relevance TBL




Rating
High


4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)


                                                                                                                           Page 3 of 12
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  Benin Covid-19 GPE Project (P174186)



EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               To ensure continuity of teaching during and after the COVID-19 pandemic, particularly in deprived communes
               in the Recipient’s territory

               Rationale
               The theory of change was overall sound. The provision of fast disbursing resources to ensure continuity of
               teaching was likely to mitigate the risks of learning loss. The activities to provide equipment and supplies to
               safely re-open schools and protect teachers and students, remedial programs for students at risk, and grants
               to schools to offset the cost of schooling (i.e. school kits, canteens) were likely to contribute to the intended
               outcome. Furthermore, to maximize the impact of the project, the theory of change included a focus on
               deprived communes — geographic areas where the primary completion rate is currently below 50 percent -
               as the spillover effects of the COVID-19 pandemic were expected to be particularly severe in these
               communes. 20 out of the 77 communes in the country were selected, which represented 20% of primary
               students in public schools and 13% of lower secondary students in public schools.

               Outputs

                     Media campaigns and community sensitization activities to ensure safe return to school. The project
                      supported the establishment of partnerships with community radios and media stations (including
                      training of 50 community radio hosts), with messages on the importance of sending children back to
                      school, getting the COVID-19 vaccine, and maintaining good hygiene practices. These messages
                      were deployed through local community organizers and facilitators. 2,489,585 children were reached
                      through the campaigns (target: 2,400,000).
                     Awareness campaigns for the education community (school management committees, pedagogical
                      supervisors) on prevention of gender-based violence and sexual harassment, as part of efforts to
                      encourage families to send girls back to school. The project supported preparation of a brochure on
                      gender-based violence, guide for community radios on advocating for girls' schooling, and a
                      competition within the 20 targeted communes on what measures could be implemented to prevent
                      gender-based violence.
                     Provision of 20,400 handwashing devices, with the support of UNICEF (target: 20,400).
                     Provision of school grants as follows:
                            o Hygiene kits and training to 1,871 schools, including soap, thermoflash thermometers, masks,
                              and other hygiene supplies, and training for school infirmary staff on hygiene and disease
                              prevention.
                            o Learning kits (including textbooks) for 325,295 children in the 20 targeted communes (target:
                              89,000), including 162,295 kits to all the children in grades 1 and 2, and all female students in
                              grades 7 and 8. Due to project cost savings, an additional 163,000 kits were ordered and
                              received prior to project closing. These kits were delivered to school districts in May 2020 for
                              distribution during school year 2022-2023. In addition, UNICEF acquired school kits from its
                              own resources, of which 10,448 have been distributed to girls in grades 7 and 8 in
                              disadvantaged communes.
                            o Incidental costs for school canteens in 1,290 primary schools in deprived communes, thereby
                              reducing school costs to parents and encouraging return to school. The grants covered three-
                              fifths of the amount paid by parents for school canteens.

                                                                                                                   Page 4 of 12
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Benin Covid-19 GPE Project (P174186)




      Remedial programs in 1,900 schools (target: 1,870) for students at risk of repetition and dropping out,
       for grades 1-6 and grade 10 in the 20 targeted communes . This represented 98.9% of schools in the
       deprived communes (target: 60%). 246,783 children in grades 1-5 were assessed to evaluate
       learning loss (target: 208,000).

Outcomes

      2,935,936 children were enrolled in school at project closing, surpassing the target of 2,533,000
       children. This represented 104% of the children previously enrolled, surpassing the target of 85%. Of
       these, the percentage of females previously enrolled who returned to school was 104.7%, surpassing
       the target of 75%; and the percentage of deprived children was 103.5%, surpassing the target of 65%.
      5,743 schools met minimum hygiene standards for the prevention of COVID-19, surpassing the target
       of 3,620 schools. This represented 57.3% of public primary and lower secondary schools nationwide,
       surpassing the target of 35%. However, according to the ICR (page 18), some of the handwashing
       devices provided were defective or in need of repair (UNICEF arranged to make the needed repairs)
       and there were challenges with maintenance at the schools. These challenges led the project team to
       recommend canceling the last batch of devices until repairs were completed for those already at the
       schools.
      86.6% of students in the 20 targeted communes received remedial learning instruction. This
       represented 239,038 students in the first year, and then decreased to 215,297 students during the
       second school year of the project period. The ICR (page 19) noted that most of the decrease was
       attributed to boys in primary school, with the survey team anecdotally determining that boys were
       leaving school to help their parents on their farms and/or to work in the bordering country of Nigeria.




Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To increase the Government’s preparedness to mitigate the effects of future crises.

Rationale
The theory of change was overall sound. The activities to develop a national strategy and establish
institutional partnerships, a distance learning platform and content would likely increase the government's
capacity and strengthen the education system to response to future shocks.

Outputs

      Training of 14 pedagogical experts within Ministry of Education on distance learning
       methodology. These experts then trained 300 teachers in using digital distance tools and/or materials
       to support distance learning (target: 300). Of these, 40.3% were female (target: 30%).



                                                                                                  Page 5 of 12
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Benin Covid-19 GPE Project (P174186)




                                  Production of over 500 video and audio digital courses, focused on the core subjects of French, math,
                                     science and technology, English, and social education, for pre-primary, primary and secondary levels.
                                     300 tablets were provided for teachers to develop distance learning content and 120 tablets for
                                     education inspectors.
                                    Partnerships with local radio and television stations to broadcast distance learning content.
                                    Mechanisms for identifying vulnerable and at-risk children were developed and tested in five public
                                     primary schools and ten lower secondary schools, then validated by all stakeholders in the education
                                     system.
                                    Evaluation of COVID-19 education management, to identify areas of relative strength and weakness
                                     and to guide policies and practices during emergencies.
                                    Collection of citizen feedback on service delivery from the 20 targeted communes, and setting up of
                                     grievance redress mechanism, for which 100% of total grievance received were addressed (target:
                                     90%).

                            Outcomes

                                  A national strategy for continuity of learning was developed and approved by government. The
                                   strategy included remote learning strategies based on international experience, operational action
                                   plan, implementation and monitoring mechanisms, and conditions of success. Guidelines for re-
                                   opening of schools in the event of floods or other natural disasters/ shocks and an emergency
                                   response action plan for education were also developed.
                                  Remote learning opportunities were expanded through the activities reported above.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Achievement of the first objective to ensure continuity of teaching is rated Substantial due to evidence of
                            children returning to school safely. Achievement of the second objective to increase preparedness for future
                            crises is rated Substantial due to evidence of increased government capacity. Therefore, the overall efficacy
                            is rated Substantial.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



          5. Efficiency

                                                                                                                             Page 6 of 12
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Benin Covid-19 GPE Project (P174186)



At project appraisal, the PAD (Annex 5) discussed the economic rationale for investing in the education
sector. It also estimated the economic cost of the COVID-19 pandemic using the World Bank’s country tool for
simulating the potential impacts. Results showed that, in the absence of effective policy action, each student
from today’s cohort in primary and secondary school could face, on average, a reduction of US$45 in yearly
earnings. This was approximately equivalent to US$826 over a student’s work life at present value. The PAD
also estimated the cost of higher repetition rates due to school closures, with results showing that the public
sector will incur the equivalent of CFA 119.6 million (about US$0.20 million) in losses and households incur
inefficiency-related costs equivalent CFA 664.6 million (about US$1.13 million). Lastly, the PAD presented a
cost-benefit analysis for the quality related interventions of the project: the net present value (NPV) of the
intervention was US$17.23 million with an internal rate of return (IRR) of 25.5%

The ICR (Annex 4) had a slightly different approach, estimating the impact of components 1 and 2 on lifetime
income. The estimated impact was an increase in lifetime earnings by 10% for each project beneficiary. This
methodology assumed that in the absence of the Project, 215,297 children without access to remote learning
prior to the program would have missed out on the equivalent of an entire year of school. The net present value
was therefore estimated at US$ 47.7 million, with an IRR of 23.8%. Although not directly comparable to the
PAD estimate, it is a favorable estimate of project impact.

The project disbursed 99% during the project period, albeit with a six month closing date
extension. Implementation made use of existing arrangements from the ongoing GPE project. Targeting of most
at risk children was effectively carried out and likely increased project impact. Due to project cost savings, an
additional 163,000 school kits were ordered and received prior to project closing. However, there were
challenges noted with defects and maintaining the handwashing devices procured for schools. In addition, there
were other minor shortcomings in implementation that likely affected efficiency, including the failure to procure
quality audio-visual equipment to produce digital content; delayed disbursement of grants to schools that
impacted the provision of water in schools, delivery of remedial programs, and compensation for school
canteens. Lastly, project management costs increased from planned US$ 0.39 million to actual US$ 0.73
million.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                    94.00
 Appraisal                                                25.50
                                                                                     Not Applicable
                                                                                    94.00
 ICR Estimate                                             23.80
                                                                                     Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.



                                                                                                    Page 7 of 12
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Benin Covid-19 GPE Project (P174186)



6. Outcome

Relevance of project objectives is High due to strong alignment with country conditions, country COVID
strategy, and Bank strategy. Efficacy is rated Substantial due achievement of the first objective to ensure
continuity of teaching and children returning to school safely, and achievement of the second objective to
increase preparedness for future crises with increased government capacity. Efficiency is rated Substantial due
to favorable economic rate of return and indications of implementation efficiency.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Institutional capacity for continuity of teaching has been strengthened, including through the development of
a national strategy in the event of crises and school closures (the strategy was validated and disseminated
through regional workshops), development and implementation of distance education programs, teacher
training in distance learning methodologies, and establishment of partnerships with radio and television
stations that facilitated the delivery of awareness campaigns as well as distance education programs. Other
activities that provided direct support to schools and students are being continued under the ongoing GPE
project (P167432).




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project was designed in relation to other ongoing Bank operations, namely the GPE 3 project
  (P167432), which addressed broader challenges in the education sector such as improving the quality of
  teaching and learning in basic education and strengthening equity in primary education. This meant that
  the same institutional arrangements were used, which facilitated the project launch. The design was
  guided by lessons learned from the Bank in its recent experience in the fight against the Ebola
  virus. However, despite being an emergency response to the COVID-19 pandemic, the project was still
  conceptualized and designed within the existing education ecosystem, where key education reforms were
  still ongoing. This helped to ensure longer-term relevance and sustainability of the project.

  Due to the above factors, the project risk level was appropriately assessed as moderate, with mitigation
  measures centered on timely data collection and project monitoring, and capacity building activities. The
  M&E arrangements were simple and straightforward, utilizing existing monitoring systems




                                                                                                   Page 8 of 12
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Benin Covid-19 GPE Project (P174186)



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Project implementation got off to a smooth start due to the project implementing unit's ongoing experience
 with GPE operations. The existing collaboration with UNICEF also ensured that key outputs such as the
 handwashing devices and school kits were made available quickly. There were some delays in disbursing
 grants to schools that impacted the related outputs (the provision of water by schools, delivery of the
 remedial programs; and incidental costs for school canteens); however, the Bank team worked with the
 project implementing unit and the Ministry of Finance to disburse funds and resolve the issues.

 Supervision missions were adequately staffed with technical experts in needed areas. The Bank team
 provided continuous capacity building support in the areas of procurement, financial management,
 development of communications and awareness campaigns, and safeguards, particularly related to
 violence against girls.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The M&E framework was simple and straightforward, given the short-term nature of the project. Indicators
 were relevant and monitorable, with baseline and targets identified, including a focus on girls and targeted
 vulnerable children. Monitoring and data collection arrangements were clear, with the Ministry of Education
 responsible for collecting school data and reporting regularly on project implementation progress. Given
 the emergency nature of the project, there were no evaluative activities planned, aside from using routine
 monitoring to help identify corrective actions and a citizen feedback survey.



b. M&E Implementation
  The performance indicators were tracked regularly and updated in a timely manner to inform supervision
  missions. School data for the 2020-21 school year was collected into a statistical yearbook produced in
  May 2021. Two citizen feedback surveys were conducted as planned.



c. M&E Utilization

                                                                                                  Page 9 of 12
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Benin Covid-19 GPE Project (P174186)



  According to the ICR (page 29), data was made available regularly for the results framework and was
  used to inform the analysis of project achievements at closing. The 2020-2021 statistical yearbook data
  was one data source used for reporting achievement project indicators. Two citizen feedback surveys
  were conducted as planned to identify and resolved complaints, as well as remove bottlenecks in project
  implementation, thereby establishing an important feedback loop for improving implementation



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as having a Moderate Environmental Risk, due to low expected environmental
   impact. An Environmental and Social Review Summary was prepared during project appraisal, as well as
   an Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP). Given that the project was prepared in response
   to the COVID-19 pandemic, environmental and health/safety concerns were directly addressed by project
   interventions including handwashing devices, hygiene kits, and community awareness campaigns.

   Safeguards performance was rated Moderately Unsatisfactory for the initial project period due to the fact
   that the PMU was not fully set up and recruitment of the environmental and safeguards (E&S) specialist was
   still ongoing. As a result, the quarterly reports were not being submitted and the ESMP had not been
   prepared. However, relevant staff was hired by December 2021, and the above activities and others were
   being conducted, including establishing the grievance redress mechanism and the action plan for the
   Sexual Exploitation and Abuse and Sexual Harassment (SEA-SH). By project closing, the environmental
   and safeguards performance was upgraded to Satisfactory.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial management: Financial management performance was rated in the satisfactory range throughout
   the project period. The unaudited interim financial reports were submitted and were of acceptable quality.
   Required audits were submitted to the Bank in accordance with the Financing Agreement, without
   qualifications. Capacity development support was provided by the Bank fiduciary specialists to ensure
   adherence to financial requirements and internal auditor recommendations.

   Procurement: Procurement performance was rated in the satisfactory range throughout the project
   period. The Bank’s procurement team conducted regular procurement performance rating assessment
   missions and provided support during implementation to ensure compliance with the procurement
   guidelines. However, there were some challenges with consistently entering all the procurement steps into
   the system. Procurement plans were updated and submitted regularly. According to the ICR, the
   procurement of audio-visual equipment to produce quality audio, visual and digital content was not
   completed under the project, due to difficulties in identifying the technical specifications and the lack of



                                                                                                  Page 10 of 12
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Benin Covid-19 GPE Project (P174186)



   qualified firms in country that could provide the equipment (hence two failed calls for tender). The
   equipment was later procured under the ongoing GPE project.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                    Reason for
Ratings                           ICR                    IEG
                                                                                    Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                           Satisfactory           Satisfactory

Bank Performance                  Satisfactory           Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                    Substantial            Substantial

Quality of ICR                    ---                    Substantial


12. Lessons

Lessons drawn from the ICR (pages 32-33), adapted by IEG:

        Ensuring that girls return to school following an emergency crisis can be supported through
         specific interventions aimed at multiple stakeholders. In the case of this project, specific
         activities covered parents, teachers, female students, and communities. These activities
         included a strong communications strategy to prevent gender-based violence in schools,
         teacher training, community-level competitions on ways to prevent gender-based violence in
         schools, and provision of learning kits for girls in grades 7-8.
        A quick-disbursing operation in response to an emergency crisis can be used as an
         opportunity to strengthen resilience in the system for future crises. In the case of this project,
         immediate outputs were financed to mitigate the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, while
         also developing protocols and guidelines, strengthening the online distance learning delivery
         system, and training staff. These helped to build the capacity of the education sector if future
         shocks arise.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No


                                                                                                       Page 11 of 12
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Benin Covid-19 GPE Project (P174186)



14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR was concise, internally consistent, and consistent with guidelines. The quality of evidence was
satisfactory, with strong data to support the analysis and clear links between project outputs and intended
outcomes. Lessons usefully addressed both the short-term and longer-term goals of the operation.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                   Page 12 of 12
