     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Green Resilient Growth DPF (P159956)



                                                                                Report Number: ICRR0023195

1. Program Information



 Country                                    Practice Area (Lead)
 Lao People's Democratic Republic           Environment, Natural Resources & the Blue Economy

 Programmatic DPF

 Planned Operations                          Approved Operations
 3                                           2

 Operation ID                                Operation Name
 P159956                                     Green Resilient Growth DPF




 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                 Total Financing (USD)
 IDA-60490                                  30-Jun-2018                                        39,654,615.26

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 31-May-2017                                30-Jun-2018
                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                             Co-financing (USD)

 Original Commitment                             38,590,000.00                                            0.00

 Revised Commitment                              38,590,000.00                                            0.00

 Actual                                          39,654,615.26                                            0.00




P166839_TBL
 Country                                    Practice Area (Lead)
 Lao People's Democratic Republic           Macroeconomics, Trade and Investment

 Operation ID                               Operation Name
 P166839                                    Lao PDR Green Resilient Growth DPO 2 ( P166839 )




                                                                                                 Page 1 of 33
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Green Resilient Growth DPF (P159956)




  L/C/TF Number(s)                             Closing Date (Original)                    Total Financing (USD)
  IDA-60490,IDA-64200                          31-Dec-2020                                             40160307.16

  Bank Approval Date                           Closing Date (Actual)
  28-May-2019                                  31-Dec-2020

                                               IBRD/IDA (USD)                                Co-financing (USD)

  Original Commitment                              40,000,000.00                                                0.00

  Revised Commitment                               40,000,000.00                                                0.00

  Actual                                           40,160,307.16                                                0.00



 Prepared by                   Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator           Group
 Chikako Miwa                  Stephen Hutton                Christopher David Nelson         IEGSD




2. Program Objectives and Pillars/Policy Areas
EVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives

The Program Development Objective (PDO) of the first in the series of three operations of the Green Resilient
Growth Development Policy Operation (GGDPO1) was to "support the Government of Lao PDR in achieving
fiscal stability and consolidating its pathway towards green growth," according to the Program Document
dated May 3, 2017 (hereafter PD 2017) (page v).

The PDO of the second operation in the series (GGDPO2) was revised to “achieve fiscal sustainability and
financial sector stability, adopt green growth planning and monitoring, and introduce green growth tools
and principles in priority sectors” (PD dated April 30, 2019, hereafter PD 2019, para 44). The financial sector
stability aspect was added to the PDO to address emerging financial sector risks. The three pillars and their
objectives remain the same as during GGDPO1.

Green growth was defined as “a growth pattern that is efficient in its use of natural resources, clean in that it
minimizes pollution and environmental impacts, and resilient in that it accounts for natural hazards and the role of
environmental management and natural capital in preventing disasters” (PD 2019, footnote 13).

The PDO of GGDPO are parsed to the following three objectives for the purpose of the ICR Review:

Objective 1. Achieve fiscal sustainability and financial sector stability;

Objective 2. Adopt green growth planning and monitoring; and



                                                                                                       Page 2 of 33
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Green Resilient Growth DPF (P159956)



Objective 3. Introduce green growth tools and principles in priority sectors.

The third planned operation in the series (P171431) was dropped in 2020 due to the serious deterioration of the
macro conditions and the trends in debt and debt service. In addition, the COVID-19 pandemic had affected
priorities in 2020 and beyond. In accordance with the harmonized guideline between OPCS and IEG, this ICR
Review will assess the results of the program based on the series-level objectives and pillars. Therefore, this
Review will also take account of the extent to which intended prior actions and program results for DPO 3 (as
appraised by the Bank) were achieved despite the absence of Bank financing.


b. Pillars/Policy Areas
The objective of the program was to be achieved through three pillars that were mutually complementary (PD
2019, para 44):

Pillar 1. Strengthening prospects for fiscal sustainability and financial sector stability. This pillar aimed at
supporting economic management actions to address key macroeconomic risks.

Pillar 2. Consolidating green growth principles across the national development strategy. This pillar
aimed at establishing policy-level instruments for green growth planning, financing, and monitoring.

Pillar 3. Incorporating green growth in selected sectors. This pillar aimed at incorporating green growth
principles in selected sectors, including measures for sustainably using the country’s key natural assets (water,
forests, and biodiversity), building resilience of infrastructure to climate risks, and promoting cleaner, more
efficient production and consumption by regulating pollution. The selected sectors included: power, forestry,
tourism, and nutrition (PD 2019, para 46).


c. Comments on Program Cost, Financing and Dates

Program Cost. At appraisal, the costs of GGDPO1 and GGDPO2 were estimated to be US$38.6 million and
US$40.0 million, respectively (PD 2017, page v, and PD2019, page vi). The actual costs for GGDPO1 and
GGDPO2 were US$39.7 million and US$40.2 million, respectively (ICR, page 1).

Financing. For the first DPO, IDA disbursed a single tranche of SDR28.5 million (Financing Agreement dated
June 7, 2017, page 1). For the second DPO, IDA disbursed SDR28.9 million (Financing Agreement dated May
31, 2019, page 1).

Borrower Contribution. There was no counterpart funding from the borrower.

Dates. The first DPO was approved on May 31, 2017, and became effective on June 26, 2017. It was closed on
June 30, 2018, which was the original closing date. The second DPO was approved on May 28, 2019, and
became effective on June 10, 2019. It was closed on December 31, 2020, as originally planned. The third DPO
was cancelled in 2020 as described in 2.a.


3. Relevance of Design


                                                                                                    Page 3 of 33
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Green Resilient Growth DPF (P159956)



a. Relevance of Objectives

Country Context. Lao PDR faced significant macroeconomic vulnerabilities, most evident in the levels of the
fiscal deficit, the public debt, and the current account deficit that were projected to be 6.2 percent, 68.2
percent, and 14 percent, respectively, of GDP by 2016 (ICR, para 2). The 2016 Joint International Monetary
Fund–World Bank Debt Sustainability Assessment rated the country to be at high risk of debt distress. At the
same time, import demand from state-owned enterprises, fueled by direct lending from the Bank of Lao PDR,
had kept the current account deficit very high. Additionally, the financial sector was concerned about the
absence of good data on the financial soundness of banks, the low capital adequacy among some public
banks, and the high non-performing loan ratios compared to regional peers. An equally important challenge
was that of moving from a pattern of growth reliant on heavy exploitation of natural assets (minerals, forests
and water) to a “green growth” model consistent with environmental sustainability. Key challenges to
implementing this model lay in the absence of adequate legal and regulatory frameworks, the lack of
mechanisms for coordination, monitoring, disclosure and stakeholder consultation, and low institutional
capacity and governance. Faced with the above challenges, the government had begun to address known
challenges systematically, beginning by enshrining green growth principles and goals into its national vision
and strategy documents, such as Vision 2030 and the 8th National Social and Economic Development Plan
(NSEDP, 2016-25). It was also reflected in the establishment of the National Green Growth Steering
Committee (NGGSC), an intergovernmental body to coordinate planning, implementation, monitoring and
reporting.

The Bank’s Assistance Strategy. Throughout implementation, the GGDPOs were seen as a strategic
opportunity to help Lao PDR transition towards a green growth development model, in line with the Bank’s
Country Partnership Framework (CPF) FY17-21. In particular, the GGDPOs aligned with the objective 1.1 of
putting public finances on a sustainable path and supporting financial sector stability and the cross-cutting
theme of strengthening institutions to establish a rules-based environment (CPF, annex 1, pages 48-56). The
CPF (para 101) envisaged that the GGDPOs would support toward improving governance and accountability
to sustainably manage natural resources.

The Government’s Strategy. The GGDPOs were in line with the government’s vision and strategy to
facilitate the achievement of its green growth goals in the 8th National Social and Economic Development
Plan (NSEDP, 2016-25) and the National Green Growth Strategy for 2030, including: (i) a macro-economic
environment that facilitates growth and shared prosperity; (ii) forestry reforms with public and private
investment in production and conservation; (iii) protected area management and tourism; (iv) the
water/energy nexus; (v) environmental management including water, air and chemical pollution, with an
increasing emphasis on waste management; (vi) climate risk management to address flooding, drought, and
changing uses of landscapes; and (vii) livelihoods, jobs, income and human capital development dependent
on natural capital, environmental security, and macro-economic stability (PD 2019, para 40). The GGDPOs
also aligned with the Prime Minister Order No. 2, which was issued in February 2018 to demonstrate the
high-level commitment to addressing the challenges related to doing business in Lao PDR (PD 2019, para 9).

Previous Sector Experience. The Bank had been supporting Lao PDR with green growth engagements and
policy operations on poverty reduction (i.e., the Poverty Reduction Support Operations), which informed the
design of the GGDPO series (PD 2019, para 48).

The relevance of objectives is rated satisfactory.




                                                                                                  Page 4 of 33
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Green Resilient Growth DPF (P159956)



b. Relevance of Prior Actions

Rationale

1. Number and List of Prior Actions (PAs)

Table 1. Numbering and Listing Prior Actions in the GGDPOs

 GGDPO1                                                    GGDPO2
 Objective 1. Achieve fiscal sustainability and financial sector stability.
                                                           PA2. To improve revenue mobilization: (i) the
                                                           Recipient, through the Ministry of Finance, has
                                                           approved the Tax Strategy Development Plan (2018-
                                                           2020); (ii) the Recipient, through the Ministry of
                                                           Finance, has implemented an electronic payment
                                                           system for Road Tax and Land Tax; (iii) the Recipient,
                                                           through the National Assembly, has approved the
                                                           amendments to the VAT Law; and (iv) the Recipient,
 PA1. The Recipient, through the Prime Minister, has
                                                           through the Ministry of Finance, implemented the Tax
 taken steps to support fiscal consolidation, through: (i)
                                                           Revenue Information System (TaxRIS) at (a) the
 eliminating tariff exemptions on fuel imports for
                                                           Department of Tax at the central level; (b) the
 investment projects, as evidenced by Notification No.
                                                           provincial Tax Departments in 5 provinces; and (c) 5
 1152/PM dated 9 August 2016; (ii) limiting the intake
                                                           district tax offices.
 of civil servants to up to 5,000 in 2017, as evidenced
 by Decision No. 73/PM dated 29 August 2016; and
                                                           As evidenced by: (i) Ministerial Instruction No.
 through the Ministry of Finance; and (iii) has revised
                                                           1781/MOF, approving the Tax Strategy Development
 the Implementing Instructions for the Value-added tax
                                                           Plan, dated 13 June 2018; (ii) Ministerial Instruction:
 (VAT) as evidenced by Instruction No. 0077/MF dated
                                                           (a) No. 3455/MOF, implementing electronic payment
 11 January 2017.
                                                           system for Road Tax dated October 2017, and (b) No.
                                                           3909/MOF, implementing electronic payment system
                                                           for Land Tax dated December 2018;(iii) Approval by
                                                           President of the National Assembly - No. 089/NA,
                                                           dated June 2018; (iv) Ministerial Instruction No.
                                                           3532/MOF for the implementation of TaxRIS signed
                                                           by Minister of Finance on 2nd November, 2018 to
                                                           implement TaxRIS by 5th November 2018.
                                                           PA3. To strengthen public financial management: (i)
                                                           the Recipient, through the National Assembly and
                                                           Ministry of Finance respectively, has approved the
                                                           Public Procurement Law and associated implementing
                                                           instructions; and (ii) the Recipient, through the Ministry
                                                           of Home Affairs (MoHA), has rolled out (a) Smart
                                                           Cards to at least 18 Government entities at the central
                                                           level; and (b) the Personnel Information Management
                                                           System (PIMS) to at least the Prime Minister’s Office
                                                           and MoHA.



                                                                                                        Page 5 of 33
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Green Resilient Growth DPF (P159956)



                                                     As evidenced by: (i) (a) Approval by President of the
                                                     National Assembly of the Public Procurement Law No.
                                                     62/NA dated November 2017; and (b) Ministerial
                                                     Instruction for the Public Procurement Law No.
                                                     0477/MOF dated February 2019.; (ii) Report No.
                                                     03/MoHA from the Minister of MoHA to the Prime
                                                     Minister of Lao PDR, dated January 2019.
                                                     PA4. To improve public debt management, the
                                                     Recipient, through the National Assembly, has
                                                     approved the Public Debt Management Law.

                                                     As evidenced by: Approval by President of the
                                                     National Assembly of the Public Debt Management
                                                     Law No.87/NA, dated June 2018.
                                                     PA5. To promote financial sector stability: (i) the
                                                     Recipient, through the Bank of the Lao PDR (BOL),
                                                     has prepared and published 7 core financial stability
                                                     indicators for the banking sector; and (ii) the
                                                     Recipient, through the National Assembly, has
                                                     approved the amendments to the Bank of the Lao
                                                     PDR Law in line with good practices, including
                                                     restricting fiscal deficit financing by BOL, auditing of
                                                     BOL accounts and limiting BOL lending to the financial
                                                     sector.

                                                      As evidenced by: (i) Data published on Bank of the
                                                      Lao PDR’s official website; and (ii) Approval by
                                                      President of the National Assembly of the
                                                      amendments to the Bank of the Lao PDR Law No.
                                                      88/NA, dated June 2018.
Objective 2. Adopt green growth planning and monitoring.
PA6. The Recipient has incorporated the principles of
green growth in national development planning
through (i) the National Assembly adopting the 8th
                                                      PA10. The Recipient, through the Prime Minister, has
NSEDP (2016-2020) that sets forth Outcome 3 and
                                                      approved the National Green Growth Strategy
Outputs 1 to 3 associated with environmental
                                                      (NGGS), including a monitoring and evaluation
protection and sustainable natural resources
                                                      framework.
management as evidenced by Resolution No. 9/NA
dated 22 April 2016; and (ii) the Prime Minister
                                                      As evidenced by: Prime Minister’s Decree No 20/GOL
establishing the National Green Growth Steering
                                                      Approving and Adopting the National Green Growth
Committee to oversee the planning, implementation,
                                                      Strategy of Lao PDR to 2030, dated January 31, 2019.
monitoring, and evaluation of the country’s green
growth agenda, as evidenced by Agreement No.
95/PM dated 8 December 2016.
PA7. The Recipient, through the Prime Minister, has PA11. The Recipient has established the legal
restructured the Environment Protection Fund (EPF) framework to increase revenue generation for
with provisions that (i) create an inter-ministerial  environmental and green growth priorities (i) through


                                                                                                 Page 6 of 33
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Green Resilient Growth DPF (P159956)



governance mechanism to manage the EPF                 the National Assembly, by establishing the mandate to
operations and resources, (ii) require revenues and levy wastewater discharge fees, fines and service
expenditures to be operated by the National Treasury charges, and (ii) through the EPF Board, by
System, and (iii) specify eligible revenue sources, as establishing mechanisms for EPF to prioritize its
evidenced by Decree No. 94/PM dated 8 March 2017. resource allocation.

                                                      As evidenced by: (i) Decree of the National Assembly
                                                      President on the Promulgation of the Law on Water
                                                      and Water Resources 115/POR dated June 22, 2017;
                                                      (ii) EPF By-law 004/EPF Board, dated 30 January
                                                      2018; and (iii) Additional Decision on Amendment and
                                                      Addition of some Articles of the Decision on
                                                      Management of the EPF 001/EPF Board, dated 21
                                                      March 2019.
PA8. The Recipient, through the Prime Minister, (i)
has mandated the Ministry of Natural Resources and
Environment (MONRE) to collaborate with key line
                                                     PA12. The Recipient, through MONRE in consultation
sectors in the preparation of sectoral Strategic
                                                     with MPI, has established detailed regulations and
Environmental Assessments (SEAs), as evidenced by
                                                     procedures for implementing SEAs, including
Decree No. 445/PMO dated 19 December 2016, and,
                                                     information disclosure and public participation.
through MONRE, (ii) has required SEAs in the
formulation of all policies, programs, and strategic
                                                     As evidenced by: Ministerial Instruction
plans, to incorporate environmental and social
                                                     No.6616/MONRE on Procedures for Implementing
sustainability considerations, and the Sustainable
                                                     SEA, dated 31 December 2018.
Development Goals in public planning, as evidenced
by Ministerial Decision No. 483/MONRE dated 6
February 2017.
                                                     PA13. The Recipient, through the Prime Minister, has
                                                     issued an Environmental and Social Impact
                                                     Assessment (ESIA) Decree with provisions on
PA9. The Recipient, through the Ministry of Planning
                                                     screening, scoping, public participation, public
and Investment (MPI), has established the public
                                                     information disclosure, assessment requirements,
investment project (PIP) review process that takes
                                                     reviewing and approval of ESIA reports, and
into account climate resilience and disaster risk
                                                     budgetary allocation for compliance monitoring.
considerations, as evidenced by Ministerial Decision
No. 0645/MPI dated 28 March 2017.
                                                     As evidenced by: Prime Minister’s Decree No 21/GOL
                                                     on Environmental Impact Assessment, dated 31
                                                     January 2019.
                                                     PA14. The Recipient (i) through the Ministry of Public
                                                     Works and Transport (MPWT), has adopted road
                                                     maintenance procedures that integrate climate
                                                     resilience and disaster risk considerations into the
                                                     planning and budgeting of PIPs, including
                                                     identification of vulnerable sections and design; and
                                                     (ii) through the National Assembly, has adopted the
                                                     legal framework for collecting and disseminating
                                                     hydrometeorological information.


                                                                                                Page 7 of 33
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Green Resilient Growth DPF (P159956)



                                                            As evidenced by: (i) Ministerial Decision No.
                                                            28025/MPWT on Climate Resilient Road Maintenance
                                                            dated 4 December 2018; and (ii) Law on Meteorology
                                                            and Hydrology No. 172/NA, dated December 2017.
Objective 3. Introduce green growth tools and principles in priority sectors.
                                                            PA19. The Recipient, through the National Assembly
                                                            and MONRE has established the legal and regulatory
PA15. The Recipient, through the Prime Minister, has
                                                            framework for integrated water resources
strengthened strictness of timber harvest
                                                            management at the national level.
management and inspection, timber transport and
trade in order to control illegal logging in infrastructure
                                                            As evidenced by: (i) Decree of the National Assembly
areas and timber harvesting, processing, and trade,
                                                            President on the Promulgation of the Law on Water
as evidenced by Order No. 15/PM dated 13 May
                                                            and Water Resources 115/POR dated June 22, 2017;
2016.
                                                            and (ii) Ministerial Instruction on Groundwater
                                                            Management 1509/MONRE, dated 21 March 2019.
                                                            PA20. The Recipient, through the Ministry of
                                                            Agriculture and Forestry (MAF), has required national
PA16. The Recipient, through the Prime Minister, has
                                                            implementation of a Timber Legality Assurance
adopted the legal framework to pilot a national park
                                                            System (TLAS) that introduces a definition of legality
reform by (i) establishing a process to upgrade the
                                                            for timber and timber products, and a methodology for
conservation standing of Nam Theun 2 (NT2)
                                                            supply chain control and verification that meets
Watershed to a national park, (ii) establishing the
                                                            relevant international standards, and mandates the
legal status of enclave communities and their access
                                                            Department of Forestry (DOF) as the body
rights to protected area resources, and (iii) adjusting
                                                            responsible for relevant international obligations and
the organizational structure of the NT2 Watershed
                                                            the Department of Forest Inspection (DOFI) as the
Management and Protection Authority (WMPA) to
                                                            implementation and enforcement body for the TLAS.
anchor its responsibilities under MAF, as evidenced
by Decree No. 122/PM dated 21 April 2017.
                                                            As evidenced by: Ministerial Instruction No. 76/MAF,
                                                            dated 12 October 2018.
PA17. The Recipient, through the National Assembly, PA21. The Recipient, (i) through the Prime Minister,
has established legal provisions (i) for the                has upgraded Nakai Nam Theun National Parks and
management, monitoring, and inspection of chemicals Protected Areas (NPA) as one of Lao PDR’s first
for minimizing health risks and promoting cleaner           national parks in line with international conservation
production as evidenced by the Law on Chemicals,            standards; (ii) through MAF, has approved a set of 7
No. 07/NA dated 10 November 2016, and                       implementing regulations for the management of
Promulgation Decree No. 202/President dated 12              national protected areas and national parks, including
November 2016, and (ii) on phytosanitary                    regulations for management planning, zoning,
management, including pest management, as                   outreach, livelihood development, land use planning,
evidenced by the Law on Plant Protection and                law enforcement, and collaborative management; and
Quarantine, No. 13/NA dated 15 November 2016, and (iii) through MAF, has established the structure,
Promulgation Decree No. 197/President dated 28              mandates, and activities of the new Protected Areas
November 2016.                                              Management Division under the Department of
                                                            Forestry, tasked with managing the system of national
                                                            parks and protected areas, taking into account
                                                            principles of effective and centralized authority,
                                                            delegated accountability, standardized and
                                                            collaborative management, benefit sharing, and


                                                                                                      Page 8 of 33
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Green Resilient Growth DPF (P159956)



                                                      community private sector partnerships for nature-
                                                      based tourism.

                                                    As evidenced by: (i) Prime Minister’s Decree No.
                                                    36/GOL establishing Nakai Nam Theun as a National
                                                    Park, dated 15 February 2019; (ii) Ministerial
                                                    Instruction No. 145/MAF adopting 7 guidelines for
                                                    managing protected areas, dated 13 February 2019;
                                                    and (iii) Ministerial Decision No 3822 on organization
                                                    and function of DOF, dated August 18th, 2017.
                                                    PA22. The Recipient, through the Prime Minister and
                                                    MAF, has established legal provisions and procedures
PA18. The Recipient, through the Prime Minister and for regulating pesticides, including licensing
MONRE, has established national air quality, water  businesses involved in import, formulation, sale and
quality, and vehicle emissions standards, including distribution of pesticides.
lead in air and water as evidenced by Decree No.
81/PM dated 21 February 2017, and Ministerial       As evidenced by: (i) Prime Minister’s Decree No.
Decision No. 0485/MONRE, dated 7 February 2017. 258/PM on Pesticide Management, dated 24 August
                                                    2017; and (ii) Ministerial Decision 238/MAF on Control
                                                    of Pesticides Businesses, dated 14 February 2019.
                                                    PA23. The Recipient, through MONRE, has regulated
                                                    standard procedures and parameters of methods for
                                                    sampling and analyzing Particulate Matter (PM) 2.5
                                                    and PM10 in air, as well as arsenic, cyanide, lead,
                                                    manganese, mercury, fecal coliform and total coliform
                                                    (as part of pathogens) in water.

                                                      As evidenced by: (i) Ministerial Instruction No
                                                      5688/MONRE on sampling and analysis of key water
                                                      quality pollutants dated 19 November 2018; and (ii)
                                                      Ministerial Instruction No 6439/MONRE on sampling
                                                      and analysis of key air quality pollutants dated 14
                                                      December 2018.



2. Assessing Relevance of Prior Actions

Objective 1. Achieve fiscal sustainability and financial sector stability.

      PA1, PA2. Fiscal consolidation and revenue mobilization. The relevance of PA1 and PA2 is
       Moderately Satisfactory.

Low revenues forced the country to make necessary public expenditures by depending on unsustainable
public debts. PA1 (i) aimed to raise revenues by eliminating tariff exemptions on fuel imports for investment
projects to reduce foregone revenues from exemptions, while PA1 (iii) revised the implementing instruction of
the Value-Added Tax (VAT) law to simplify tax filing. PA1 (iii) was taken further in GGDPO2 with the National
Assembly approving amendments to the VAT law to enable a VAT refund function (PA2 (iii)) to encourage

                                                                                                 Page 9 of 33
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Green Resilient Growth DPF (P159956)



eligible businesses to comply. The results chain linking these measures to the objective was clear. The PAs
were grounded in credible analytical work at the country level listed in annex 4 of PD 2019, which included
the Comprehensive Tax Review Report by the Ministry of Finance. On the other hand, these measures would
make only a minor contribution to the objective of fiscal stability, and were not sufficient to mobilize
substantial revenue. The prior action of eliminating tariff exemptions on fuel imports for investment projects
had a small revenue impact (ICR, page 22). Despite the VAT amendments, the enforcement of VAT law was
weak, and many eligible businesses were still out of the VAT system (ICR, page 22).

      PA1, PA3. Expenditure reduction on civil service workers. The relevance of PA3 is Satisfactory.

Both the wage bill and the civil service size were high in the country compared to regional peers. The prior
action on limiting civil servant intake (PA1 (ii)) aimed to reduce fiscal pressure by reducing the expenditure on
civil service workers. In addition, the rollout of the smart cards (PA 3 (ii) (a)) and the Personnel Information
Management System (PIMS, PA3 (ii)(b)) enabled physical verification of employment and helped to eliminate
the number of “ghost” workers. Thus, there was an explicit results chain linking the PAs to the achievement of
fiscal sustainability in objective 1. The PAs were grounded in credible analytical work at the country level
listed in annex 4 of PD 2019, which included the World Bank’s Economic Updates: recommendations on
reducing the debt-to-GDP ratio by improving public debt management. The PAs are postulated to make a
major contribution to the achievement of objective 1.

      PA3. Public financial management. The relevance of PA3 is Satisfactory.

The Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability Assessment 2019 identified some weaknesses in
procurement including the absence of a solid legal and regulatory framework and an institutional basis to
monitor and oversee government procurement. The PA on the new procurement law and its implementing
instruction (PA3 (i)) provided a legal and institutional framework for different types of procurement and
processes. These actions supported in GGDPO2 were intended to pave the way for the development of
harmonized Standard Bidding Documents (SBD). Thus, there was an explicit results chain linking the PA to
the achievement of fiscal sustainability in objective 1. The PA was grounded in credible analytical work at the
country level listed in annex 4 of PD 2019, which included the Public Expenditure Analysis Notes.

      PA4. Public debt management. The relevance of PA4 is Moderately Satisfactory.

Lao PDR was at high risk of debt distress; however, the existing presidential decree on public debt
management was inadequate to control public debts at appraisal. The PA on the new public debt
management law (PA4) provided a solid legal platform for undertaking debt management reforms and
strengthened the governance framework by requiring the Ministry of Finance (MoF) to develop and publish
debt management strategies and regular reporting on debt and risks. Additionally, the law defined the
following: (i) domestic and external debt based on currency exposure risk; (ii) the roles and decision roles for
the National Assembly, MoF, and line agencies; and (iii) each type of public debt and criteria for contracting
debt; thus, laying a basis for contracting public debt and contingent liabilities (including public guarantees and
on-lending). The PA was grounded in credible analytical work at the country level listed in annex 4 of PD
2019, which included the Public Expenditure Analysis Notes. While there was an explicit results chain linking
the PA to the achievement of fiscal sustainability in objective 1,it was implausible to postulate that this
standalone PA would be sufficient to contain debt accumulation.

      PA5. Financial sector stability. The relevance of PA5 is Satisfactory.


                                                                                                    Page 10 of 33
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Green Resilient Growth DPF (P159956)



The financial sector lacked reliable data on the financial soundness of banks or systematic tracking and
reporting. The revised Bank of Lao PDR (BOL) Law (PA5 (ii)) in 2018 strengthened good practice principles
for BOL operations. Publishing the core financial stability indicators for the banking sector such as levels of
capital adequacy (PA5 (i)) increased market transparency and allowing early detection of financial stress. A
credible results chain linking the PA to achievement of financial sector stability in objective 1 was outlined,
and the analytical underpinning was adequate. Thus, the contribution of the PA to the achievement of
financial sector stability in objective 1 is assessed to be substantial.

Objective 2. Adopt green growth planning and monitoring.

      PA6, PA10. Building the foundation for green growth planning and monitoring. The relevance of PA6
       and PA10 is Satisfactory.

One key foundational need was to get a consensus among relevant government agencies around the idea of
green growth. This was done by the National Assembly’s adoption of the 8th National Socioeconomic
Development Plan (NSEDP (PA6 (i)) which stated objectives, principles, targets, and implementation
arrangements related to green growth. Moreover, the Prime Minister established a high-level green growth
steering committee (PA6 (ii)) and approved the National Green Growth Strategy (PA10). The description of
the results chain linking the PAs to achievement of objective 2 was convincing, given the significant role that
the development plan plays in the country context. The analytical underpinning was credible. The contribution
of the PAs to the achievement of objective 2 is assessed to be substantial.

      PA7, PA11. Strengthening country instruments for cleaner and resilient green growth financing. The
       relevance of PA7 and PA11 is Satisfactory.

The Environment Protection Fund (EPF) to finance environment management activities required enhanced
governance and additional funding. This was done by creating an intergovernmental mechanism to manage
the EPF (PA7) and allowing EPF to levy wastewater discharge fees, fines, and service charges (PA11).
Additional actions included the operation of revenue and expenditure by the National Treasury System; and
the specification of eligible revenue sources to boost the transparency of the fund’s operations. There was an
explicit results chain linking the PAs to the achievement of objective 2, although the analytical underpinnings
did not provide country specific analysis. The PAs are postulated to make a substantial contribution to the
achievement of objective 2.

      PA8, PA9, PA12, and PA13. Shifting towards decision making informed by priorities for environmental
       protection and climate resilience. The relevance of PA8, PA9, PA12, and PA13 is Satisfactory.

Decision making on green issues was hampered by the absence of an environmental assessment tool and a
preference for considering only financial costs and benefits. Prior actions mandated the use of Strategic
Environmental Assessments (SEAs), which incorporated environmental and social considerations, for all
policies, programs, and strategic plans (PA8). The implementation of SEAs was further strengthened through
detailed regulations and procedures including information disclosure and public participation (PA12).
Furthermore, environmental assessment for investment project was through a Prime Ministerial decree
(PA13) that made provisions for screening, scoping, public participation, and public information disclosure
requirements. These regulations provided guidance on best practices for the applicants of investment
projects to prepare documents with environmental and social considerations. There was an explicit results



                                                                                                    Page 11 of 33
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Green Resilient Growth DPF (P159956)



chain linking the PAs to the achievement of objective 2. The PAs are postulated to make a substantial
contribution to the achievement of objective 2.

      PA9, PA14. Integrating climate residence and disaster risk considerations into public projects. The
       relevance of PA9 and PA14 is Satisfactory.

Lao PDR was increasingly affected by climate-related events and disasters, but no regulation required the
integration of climate resilience and disaster risk into the public investment project review process. The MPI
integrated climate and disaster risk issues into the public investment review process (PA9), while the MPWT
did so for road maintenance procedures (PA14). The National Assembly established the legal framework for
collecting and disseminating hydrometeorology information to support the public investment project review
process. The results chain linking the PAs to the achievement of objective 2 was mostly convincing, though
the analytical underpinnings did not provide country specific analysis. The PAs are postulated to make a
substantial contribution to the achievement of objective 2.

Objective 3. Introduce green growth tools and principles in priority sectors.

      PA19. Shifting towards integrated and sustainable water resources management and uses. The
       relevance of PA19 is Satisfactory.

Increasing competition for water uses among hydropower generation, nature-based tourism, agriculture,
drinking water, and fisheries required a new framework to ensure better services and more sustainable
resource use. A new legal and regulatory framework was introduced (PA19) for integrated water resources
management and coordination at the national level. This covered river basin and groundwater management
as well. The results chain linking the PAs to the achievement of objective 3 was convincing and supported by
the credible analytical underpinnings and incorporating lessons learned from similar operations (PD 2019,
pages 89-90). The PAs are postulated to make a major contribution to the achievement of objective 3.

      PA15, PA20. Improving forest resources management for production and conservation. The relevance
       of PA15 and PA20 is Satisfactory.

Timber resource management required better control of illegal logging as well as rational timber harvesting,
processing, and trade. An improved framework for this was introduced through a Prime Ministerial Order
(PA15). Timber management was further strengthened through a Ministerial Instruction (PA20) requiring the
implementation of a Timber Legality Assurance System (TLAS) which provided a clear definition of legality for
timber and timber products, and a methodology for supply chain control and verification that met relevant
international standards. The policy also clarified the mandates of the Department of Forestry which is
responsible for international obligations and the Department of Forest Inspection for the implementation and
enforcement of TLAS. The results chain linking the PAs to the achievement of objective 3 was convincing and
supported by the credible analytical underpinnings. The PAs are postulated to make a major contribution to
the achievement of objective 3.

      PA16, PA21. Improving livelihoods of local communities and maintaining biodiversity. The relevance
       of PA16 and PA21 is Satisfactory.

The legal status of national park and the access rights of the enclave communities to the protected area
resources were not adequately recognized. PA16 and PA21 established the legal framework for national park
reform in line with international conservation standards. These regulations provided a new governance

                                                                                                  Page 12 of 33
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Green Resilient Growth DPF (P159956)



 structure for protected areas and clarified the legal status and access rights of enclave communities. The new
 arrangements were to be applied on a pilot basis to the Nam Theun Watershed which was upgraded to the
 status of a national park. The results chain linking the PAs to the achievement of objective 3 was convincing

 and supported by the credible analytical underpinnings. The PAs are postulated to make a major contribution
 to the achievement of objective 3.

       PA17, PA22. Leveraging green growth policies to control non-point source pollution. The relevance of
         PA17 and PA22 is Satisfactory.

 The legal framework for the management of chemicals and pesticides was strengthened through two prior
 actions (PA17 and PA22). The first established legal provisions for the management, monitoring and
 inspection of chemicals as well as phytosanitary issues while the second did the same for pesticides. This
 was done to bring Lao PDR in line with good practices in these areas, with a view to minimizing public health
 risks as well as individual worker hazards. The results chain linking the PAs to the achievement of objective 3
 was convincing and supported by the credible analytical underpinnings. The PAs are postulated to make a
 major contribution to the achievement of objective 3.

       PA18, PA23. Strengthening pollution monitoring and management. The relevance of PA18 and PA23
         is Satisfactory.

 Lao’s increasing pollution of all types imposed an equivalent cost of 14.6 percent on Lao PDR’s GDP in 2017,
 according to the 2019 ASA on State of Environment in Lao PDR (PD 2019, page 92). The largest
 environmental health risk factors in Lao PDR were air pollution, lead and arsenic pollution, and inadequate
 water, sanitation, and handwashing. PA18 and PA23 supported the establishment of more stringent air
 quality and water quality standards and monitoring methodology, which aimed to reduce the high level of key
 harmful pollutants to human health, particularly PM2.5 and lead. They required the adoption of stricter
 environmental standards, which was an important signal to industries to adjust their practices to avoid non-
 compliance. The results chain linking the PAs to the achievement of objective 3 was convincing and
 supported by the credible analytical underpinnings. The PAs are postulated to make a major contribution to
 the achievement of objective 3.

 Of the 23 prior actions, 20 were rated satisfactory (5) and 3 were rated moderately satisfactory (4), leading to
 a total average rating of 4.87, and an overall relevance of prior actions rating of satisfactory.

 The relevance of design is rated satisfactory, based on the satisfactory relevance of objectives and prior
 actions.



Rating

Satisfactory

4. Relevance of Results Indicators

Rationale


                                                                                                    Page 13 of 33
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Green Resilient Growth DPF (P159956)



Pillar 1. Strengthening prospects for fiscal sustainability and financial sector stability.

Objective 1. Achieve fiscal sustainability and financial sector stability.

      RI1. Tax buoyancy (i.e., tax revenue as a share of GDP) increases. Associated with PA1 and PA2. The
       relevance of RI1 is Moderately Unsatisfactory.

The increase in the share of tax revenue in GDP is an important development outcome, but is affected by many
more factors than the prior actions, and could not realistically measure their contribution, as it was implausible
that the prior actions would lead to a significant change in overall revenue mobilization as the policy measures
undertaken covered only a small part of total revenues (ICR, para 37). The program documents also did not
clearly explain the calculation methodology and the data sources to measure the RI. The RI statement was
reworded from “Fiscal consolidation supported by higher tax revenues” in DPO1 (PD2017, page 37) to “Tax
buoyancy (i.e., tax revenue as a share of GDP) increases” in DPO2 (PD 2019, page 54). Better indicators might
have been: the value of exemptions from fuel imports, and the revenue as a share of GDP from VAT, or the
number of businesses complying with the VAT. Furthermore, although the ICR (footnote 1, page 9) reported that
the unit of measurement remained the same as tax revenues to GDP ratio, the baseline data and the target
changed from DPO1 to DPO2 without a clear explanation. DPO1 aimed to increase the share of tax revenues in
GDP from the baseline of 14.6% (FY15/16) to the target of 16.7% (FY20) (PD 2017, page 37), while DPO2
aimed to increase it from 12.4% (2016) to 12.9% (2022) (PD 2019, page 54).

      RI2. Public sector wage bill (as a percentage of GDP) decreases. Associated with PA1 and PA3. The
       relevance of RI2 is Satisfactory.

The decrease in the share of public sector wage bill in GDP adequately measured the impact of PAs on
progress towards reducing public expenditures and strengthening public financial management. On the other
hand, the program documents did not clearly explain the calculation methodology and the data sources to
measure the RI. The RI statement was reworded from “Fiscal consolidation supported by lower wage bill” in
DPO1 (PD2017, page 37) to “Public sector wage bill (as a percentage of GDP) decreases” in DPO2 (PD 2019,
page 54). Although the ICR (footnote 1, page 9) reported that the unit of measurement remained the same as
tax revenues to GDP ratio, the baseline data and the target changed from DPO1 to DPO2 without a clear
explanation. DPO1 aimed to decrease the share of public sector wage bill in GDP from the baseline of 8.4%
(FY15/16) to the target of 7.2% (FY20) (PD 2017, page 37), while DPO2 aimed to decrease it from 6.9% (2016)
to 6.2% (2022) (PD 2019, page 54).

      RI3. Capable of recording and reporting of GoL’s financial transactions consistent with the IMF-
       Government Finance Statistics Manual (GFSM) 2014 by 2022. Associated with PA3. The relevance of
       RI3 is Moderately Satisfactory.

The RI was added during DPO2 preparation. Assessing the GoL’s capacity of recording and reporting financial
transactions consistent with the IMF-GFSM2014 partially measured the impact of PA on progress towards
improving public financial management. The program document did not clearly explain the definition and the
methodology to measure the actual achievement of the RI. The ICR (page 23) reported that the relevant PA
required to revise the Chart of Accounts to be consistent with the IMF-GFSM2014.

      RI4. Percentage of central government agencies issuing tenders according to the new Public
       Procurement Law by 2022. Associated with PA3. The relevance of RI4 is Moderately Satisfactory.


                                                                                                   Page 14 of 33
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Green Resilient Growth DPF (P159956)



The RI was added during DPO2 preparation. The share of central government agencies issuing tenders in line
with the new public procurement law was mostly an adequate measure of progress towards improving fiscal
sustainability through improved public financial management. On the other hand, the program document did not
clearly explain the methodology and the data source to measure the actual achievement of the RI. At closing, it
was proved difficult to measure adherence to all aspects of the law in all tenders due to limited human and IT
system capacity (ICR, page 23).

      RI5. Public debt (as a percentage of GDP) decreases. Associated with PA4. The relevance of RI5 is
       Moderately Satisfactory.

The decrease in the share of public debt in GDP was an important development goal, but was affected by many
more factors than public debt management (including revenues and expenditures), and so was a poor measure
of the contribution of the prior actions. Although all the prior actions in the program were implemented, the
absence of a credible fiscal framework to anchor budgetary discipline hindered the achievement of the RI (ICR,
para 38). The program document did not specify the methodology regarding whether to include contingent
liabilities to measure the achievements of the RI. The ICR (page 23) noted that public debt data was revised at
various points during implementation and the public debt ratio to GDP varied depending on whether guarantees
were included or not.

      RI6. Public reporting of compliance with regulations of the Capital Adequacy Ratio, by type of banks.
       Associated with PA5. The relevance of RI6 is Moderately Satisfactory.

The public reporting of compliance with regulations on the capital adequacy ratio was a key component of
financial stability indicator and would contribute to an early detection of financial stress (ICR, para 22). On the
other hand, in practice, disaggregating the capital adequacy ratio by type of bank was proved to be difficult and
such data was not available by 2022 (ICR, page 24).

Pillar 2. Consolidating green growth principles across the national development strategy.

Objective 2. Adopt green growth planning and monitoring.

      RI7. Disclosure of M&E results of the green growth priorities established in the National Green Growth
       Strategy, as part of the public consultation process of the 9th NSEDP (2021–2025). Associated with PA6
       and PA10. The relevance of RI7 is Satisfactory.

Publishing the M&E results towards achievement of the green growth priorities was a direct measure of the
results of the PAs. Credible data was available to measure achievement of the target.

      RI8. Increase in number of revenue sources of the Environment Protection Fund (EPF). Associated with
       PA7 and PA11. The relevance of RI8 is Moderately Satisfactory.

The increase in number of revenue sources was mostly adequate to measure the impact of PAs on progress
towards achieving the outcome of strengthening green growth financing, although the volume of revenue for the
EPF could have been a more comprehensive indicator. Credible data was available to measure achievement of
the target.




                                                                                                     Page 15 of 33
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Green Resilient Growth DPF (P159956)



      RI9. Disclosure of annual financial audit of the EPF. Associated with PA7 and PA11. The relevance of
       RI9 is Satisfactory.

The disclosure of annual financial audit was an adequate measure on the impact of the PAs on progress
towards achieving objective 2. Credible data was available to measure achievement of the target.

      RI10. Number of Strategic Environmental Assessments (SEAs) undertaken for public policies, programs,
       and strategic plans. Associated with PA8 and PA12. The relevance of RI10 is Moderately Satisfactory.

The number of SEAs captured only a basic level of the impacts of the PAs on progress towards achievement of
objective 2. While it would likely not have been feasible given the program timelines to capture the extent to
which the findings of the SEAs on environmental and climate priorities were incorporated in public policies, a
better indicator might have incorporated some quality measures on SEAs. Credible data was available to
measure achievement of the target.

      RI11. Share of investment projects in the mining, energy, and transport sectors that require an
       Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) (Group 2 Projects listed in Ministerial Agreement
       No. 8056/MONRE 2013), with complete disclosure of relevant information (that is, screening,
       scoping, impact assessment, and approval), through the integrated database and public information
       platform, prior to approval. Associated with PA13. The relevance of RI11 is Satisfactory.

The share of projects that conducted and published ESIAs in the sectors with potential negative environmental
impacts was adequate to measure the impact of PA on progress towards achieving objective 2. Credible data
was available to measure achievement of the target. Assessment of the indicator on ESIA for investment
projects in mining, energy and transport sectors was possible through regular monitoring by the Ministry of
Natural Resources and Environment (MONRE) (ICR, para 35).

      RI12. Share of approved road maintenance projects with climate resilience and disaster risk
       considerations envisaged in the Annual Road Maintenance Plan and Budget that are verified by technical
       audits. Associated with PA9 and PA14. The relevance of RI12 is Satisfactory.

The share of road maintenance projects verified by technical audits as having incorporated climate and disaster
considerations mostly measured the impact of the PAs on progress toward achievement of the targeted
outcome. Credible data was available to measure achievement of the target.

Pillar 3. Incorporating green growth in selected sectors.

Objective 3. Introduce green growth tools and principles in priority sectors.

      RI13. Number of river basins that establish the minimum flow requirements set out in their respective
       River Basin Plan. Associated with PA19. The relevance of RI13 is Satisfactory.

The number of river basins with minimum flow requirements is adequate to measure the impact of PA on
progress towards achievement of the targeted outcome. The target reflects the complex process required to
establish minimum flow requirements, involving both basin planning and regulatory actions (PD 2019, para 108).
Reliable data was available to measure achievement of the target.



                                                                                                  Page 16 of 33
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Green Resilient Growth DPF (P159956)



      RI14. Increase in number of hectares within Production Forest Areas (PFAs) with certified Sustainable
       Forest Management (SFM) operations based on Lao PDR regulations. Associated with PA15 and PA20.
       The relevance of RI14 is Satisfactory.

The increase in the coverage of PFAs with certified operations on SFM was adequate to measure the impact of
PAs towards achieving sustainable timber production. Credible data was available to measure achievement of
the target.

      RI15. Number of national parks established where progress in reaching management objectives is at
       least moderately satisfactory, as measured by the Management Effectiveness Tracking Tool (METT).
       Associated with PA16 and PA21. The relevance of RI15 is Satisfactory.

The number of national parks with at least moderately satisfactory METT scores adequately measured the
impact of PAs towards achieving the outcome. Credible data was available to measure achievement of the
target.

      RI16. Number of inspections by Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry (MAF) of pesticide sellers for
       compliance with pesticide regulations per year. Associated with PA17 and PA22. The relevance of RI16
       is Unsatisfactory.

The number of inspections by the MAF of pesticide sellers partly measured the impact of PAs on reducing
banned and prohibited pesticides in the market. The RI did not specify geographical area and type of business
to be targeted for the inspections. As a result, most of the inspections occurred in Vientiane and provinces next
to Vientiane and focused on registered pesticide wholesalers (ICR, page 29). Inspectors faced challenges with
the retailers as they were not registered with the Department of Agriculture (ICR, page 29). Additionally, the data
source for the RI was vague in the PD. At program closing, data on actual inspections were not available and
the ICR team had to rely on the number of inspectors recruited and their average inspection load to assess
achievement (ICR, para 52). The project task team mentioned that the result indicator for the prior actions to
leverage green growth policies to control non-point source pollution (policy track 3.3) could have been made
stronger if there were sufficient time and policy dialogue with the government (TTLs’ response to IEG’s
questionnaire provided during a meeting and by email, hereafter, TTL response).

      RI17. Number of Priority Pollution Watch Sites (PPWSs) for which monitoring reports (including at least
       PM2.5, arsenic, lead, and pathogens concentrations) are updated and publicly disclosed annually.
       Associated with PA18 and PA23. The relevance of RI17 is Moderately Unsatisfactory.

The RI would have adequately measured the impact of PAs on strengthening pollution monitoring and
management had it been feasibly implemented. However, sources for data to calculate the RI were vague in the
PD. At program closing, the RI could not be monitored and the ICR (page 30) instead counted the number of
provinces covering PPWSs that updated monitoring reports and submitted them to the Pollution Control
Department (PCD) at the MONRE for disclosure. However, no data was available regarding whether the
monitoring reports would be published annually (ICR, page 30).

      RI18. Percentage of legally imported paint brands offering unleaded paint in the national market.
       Associated with PA18 and PA23. The relevance of RI18 is Moderately Unsatisfactory.

The percentage of unleaded paints in legally imported paints was partially adequate to measure the impacts of
PAs on achieving objective 3. The indicator narrowly focused on the lead content in paints while the relevant

                                                                                                    Page 17 of 33
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Green Resilient Growth DPF (P159956)



PAs targeted a broader concept of pollution monitoring and management for multiple pollutants. Additionally, the
PD did not specify sources of data to calculate the RI. The endline data for the RI was collected by sampling
paints in the market (ICR, page 31). While a reasonable approach, it provided the end-line data that was slightly
different from what the RI originally intended to measure.

Of the 18 indicators, 8 were rated satisfactory (5), 6 were rated moderately satisfactory (4), 3 were rated
moderately unsatisfactory (3), and 1 was rated unsatisfactory (2), leading to a total average rating of 4.17, and
an overall relevance of indicators rating of moderately satisfactory.

Table 2. Results Indicators (RIs), the Prior Actions (PAs), baseline, target values, actual change in RI
relative to target and RI achievement rating.

                                                                              Actual
                                                                              Change in Most Recent
RI Description                           Baseline Target
                                                                 Actual       RI        Value       RI
[assigning a     Associated RI           [including [including
                                                                 Value as of Relative Available [if Achievement
number to each PA(s)        Relevance units and units and
                                                                 Target Date to         not target  Rating
RI]                                      date]      date]
                                                                              Targeted date]
                                                                              Change
Objective 1. Achieve fiscal sustainability and financial sector stability.
                                                                              Actual
RI1.                                                             9.6% of
                                                                              value
                                         12.4% of                GDP
                                                                              showed a
Tax buoyancy                             GDP                     (preliminary
                                                    12.9% of                  negative
(i.e., tax       PA1, PA2 MU             (2016)                  estimate                           Negligible
                                                    GDP (2022)                change
revenue as a                                                     from MOF
                                                                              compared
share of GDP)                                                    as of March
                                                                              to the
increases                                                        2022)
                                                                              baseline.
                                                                 6.0% of
RI2. Public
                                         6.9% of                 GDP
sector wage bill
                                         GDP                     (preliminary 129% of
(as a                                               6.2% of GDP
                 PA1, PA3 S              (2016)                  estimate     targeted              High
percentage of                                       (2022)
                                                                 from MOF change
GDP)
                                                                 as of March
decreases
                                                                 2022)
RI3. Capable of
recording and
reporting of
GoL’s financial                                                               Target
                                         No
transactions     PA3        MS                      Yes (2022) Progressing partially                Modest
                                         (2016)
consistent with                                                               realized
the IMF-
GFSM2014 by
2022
RI4.             PA3        MS           0%         100% (2022) 0%            0% of                 Negligible
Percentage of                            (2016)                               targeted
central                                                                       change


                                                                                                    Page 18 of 33
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Green Resilient Growth DPF (P159956)



government
agencies
issuing tenders
according to
the new Public
Procurement
Law by 2022
                                                         Public debt
                                                         was at       Public
RI5. Public                          58.5% of
                                                         76.6% of     debt
debt (as a                           GDP
                                              57.9% of   GDP (2021) increased
percentage of PA4          MS        (2016)                                                  Negligible
                                              GDP (2022) and is       compared
GDP)
                                                         projected to to the
decreases
                                                         rise to 79% baseline.
                                                         in 2022.
                                                         Capital
RI6. Public
                                                         adequacy
reporting of
                                                         ratio
compliance                           Not      At least
                                                         reported on Target
with regulations                     reported regulatory
                 PA5       MS                            quarterly    partially              Modest
of the Capital                       (January minimum
                                                         basis at the realized
Adequacy                             2017)    (2022)
                                                         aggregate
Ratio, by type
                                                         sector level
of banks
                                                         (2022).
Objective 2. Adopt green growth planning and monitoring.
RI7. Disclosure
of M&E results
of the green
growth
priorities
established in
the National
                                     No                               Target
Green Growth PA6, PA10 S                      Yes (2022) Yes (2022)                          Substantial
                                     (2017)                           realized
Strategy, as
part of the
public
consultation
process of the
9th NSEDP
(2021–2025)
RI8. Increase
in number of                                                          100% of
revenue          PA7, PA11 MS        3 (2017) 5 (2022)   5 (2022)     targeted               Substantial
sources of the                                                        change
EPF




                                                                                            Page 19 of 33
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Green Resilient Growth DPF (P159956)



RI9. Disclosure
                                                                      100% of
of annual                            No
                 PA7, PA11 S                  Yes (2022)   Yes (2022) targeted                Substantial
financial audit                      (2017)
                                                                      change
of the EPF
RI10. Number
of SEAs
                                                                      200% of
undertaken for
                 PA8, PA12 MS        0 (2017) 1 (2022)     2 (2022)   targeted                High
public policies,
                                                                      change
programs, and
strategic plans
RI11. Share of
investment
projects in the
mining, energy,
and transport
sectors that
require an
ESIA (Group 2
Projects listed
in Ministerial
Agreement No.
8056/MONRE
2013), with
                                              70% of
complete                                                              143% of
                                              Group 2      100%
disclosure of PA13         S         0 (2017)                         targeted                High
                                              projects     (2022)
relevant                                                              change
                                              (2022)
information
(that is,
screening,
scoping, impact
assessment,
and approval),
through the
integrated
database and
public
information
platform, prior
to approval.
RI12. Share of PA9, PA14 S           0 (2017) 50% of      100%, of    100% of                 Substantial
approved road                                 approved    which 50% targeted
maintenance                                   road        verified by change
projects with                                 maintenance audits
climate                                       projects    (2022)
resilience and                                (2022)
disaster risk
considerations
envisaged in

                                                                                             Page 20 of 33
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Green Resilient Growth DPF (P159956)



the Annual
Road
Maintenance
Plan and
Budget that are
verified by
technical audits
Objective 3. Introduce green growth tools and principles in priority sectors.
RI13. Number
of river basins
that establish
the minimum
                                                                              0% of
flow
                 PA19      S          0 (2017) 1 (2022)         0 (2022)      targeted              Modest
requirements
                                                                              change
set out in their
respective
River Basin
Plan
                                                                                Another
                                                                                152,043
RI14. Increase                                                                  hectares are
in number of                                                                    under review
hectares within                                                                 for
PFAs with                                                                       certification
certified                                                                       (2022).
                                                             99,607
Sustainable                             10,949 230,000                 43% of   However,
                PA15,                                        hectares
Forest                      S           hectares hectares              targeted the           Negligible
                PA20                                         (December
Management                              (2017)   (2022)                change government
                                                             2021)
(SFM)                                                                           discontinued
operations                                                                      the
based on Lao                                                                    certification
PDR                                                                             after the
regulations                                                                     program
                                                                                closure
                                                                                (2023).
RI15. Number PA16,          S           0 (2017) 2 – Nakai   2 (2022)  100% of                Substantial
of national      PA21                            Nam Theun             targeted
parks                                            and Nam Et-           change
established                                      Phou Louey
where progress                                   (2022)
in reaching
management
objectives is at
least
moderately
satisfactory, as
measured by


                                                                                                   Page 21 of 33
               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
               Green Resilient Growth DPF (P159956)



    the
    Management
    Effectiveness
    Tracking Tool
    (METT)
    RI16. Number
    of inspections
    by MAF of
    pesticide                                                                   100% of
                    PA17,
    sellers for                     U          0 (2017) 140 (2022)   140 (2022) targeted                 Modest
                    PA22
    compliance                                                                  change
    with pesticide
    regulations per
    year
                                                                                 133% of
    RI17. Number
                                                                                 targeted
    of PPWS for
                                                                                 change.
    which
                                                                     4 provinces However,
    monitoring
                                                                     covering    it remains
    reports
                                                                     PPWSs       to be
    (including at
                                                                     updated     seen
    least PM2.5, PA18,
                                    MU         0 (2017) 3 (2022)     and         whether                 Modest
    arsenic, lead, PA23
                                                                     submitted these
    and pathogens
                                                                     reports for reports
    concentrations)
                                                                     disclosure would be
    are updated
                                                                     (2022)      updated
    and publicly
                                                                                 and
    disclosed
                                                                                 disclosed
    annually
                                                                                 annually.
    RI18.
    Percentage of
    legally
                                                                    98%       98% of
    imported paint PA18,
                                    MU         0 (2017) 100% (2022) (December targeted                   Modest
    brands offering PA23
                                                                    2021)     change
    unleaded paint
    in the national
    market


  Rating

  Moderately Satisfactory

   5. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
EFFICACY_TBL




                                                                                                        Page 22 of 33
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Green Resilient Growth DPF (P159956)




OBJECTIVE 1
Objective
Achieve fiscal sustainability and financial sector stability. PA 1-5. RI 1-6.

Rationale
Theory of Change (ToC) of the objective 1 postulated that the prior actions including (i) eliminating tariff
exemptions on fuel imports for investment projects and (ii) revising the Value-Added Tax (VAT) law would
results in outputs/intermediate outcomes including a reduction in foregone revenues from exemptions and
increasing enrollment of eligible businesses to the VAT system, contributing to the outcome of tax revenues
mobilized. The ToC also postulated that the prior actions such as limiting civil servant intake and rolling out
the Personnel Information Management System would result in improved management of the size and cost of
the civil service managed, resulting in decreased expenditure on the public service. The ToC also postulated
that the prior actions such as (i) establishing the new law on procurement management and (ii) recording and
reporting the Government’s financial transactions consistent with the IMF-GFSM2014 would result in
outputs/intermediate outcomes including issuance of tenders following the new law and revision of the Chart
of Accounts, contributing to strengthened public financial management. The ToC also postulated that
approving the public debt management law would result in establishment of a legal framework to control
contingent liabilities, contributing to a reduction in public debt. The ToC also postulated that the prior
actions including (i) revising the Bank of Lao PDR (BOL) law and (ii) publishing financial soundness indicators
(FSIs) including the capital adequacy ratio would result in outputs/intermediate outcomes including
improved BOL operation and increased market transparency increased, contributing to reduced financial
risks. The above outcomes were expected to contribute to achieve the objective on fiscal sustainability and
financial sector stability.

Critical assumptions included that: (i) the risk of occurrence of external shock on macroeconomic stability is
low; (ii) tax expenditures through exemptions and lack of VAT enrollment were major drivers of poor domestic
revenue mobilization; (iii) the institutional capacity to implement the new public debt management law was
adequate; (iv) poor public debt management especially for contingent liabilities was the main driver of lack of
fiscal sustainability; and (v) lack of transparency was a major cause of financial sector instability.

Outputs/Intermediate Outcomes (ICR, paras 32-40 and annex 1):

      RI 3. The Government made some progress in recording and reporting financial transactions
       consistent with the IMF-GFSM2014; however, the revision of the Chart of Accounts (COA) was not
       completed by program closing. In May 2023, the Ministry of Finance approved 6 of the 7 new
       segments to be piloted in the government financial information system plus, while the 7th segment,
       economic one, is still being prepared by the IMF (TTL response). The achievement of the RI is rated
       modest.
      RI 6. The Bank of Lao started to publish the Capital Adequacy Ratio (CAR) on quarterly basis at the
       aggregate sector level but did not achieve the target of disaggregating the CAR by type of bank. The
       Government decided not to proceed with disaggregating financial soundness indicators until the
       restructuring of two distressed state-owned banks is completed (ICR, page 24). The achievement of
       the RI is rated modest.

Outcomes (ICR, paras 32-40 and annex 1):



                                                                                                   Page 23 of 33
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Green Resilient Growth DPF (P159956)




      RI 1. Tax buoyancy (i.e., tax revenue as a share of GDP) did not increase to the target of 12.90
       percent as postulated. In contrast, it decreased from the baseline of 12.40 percent to the actual of
       9.60 percent. While the last two years of the operational series were affected by the COVID-19
       pandemic, the steady decline since 2016 suggested that the prior actions were not strong enough to
       offset other forces acting upon tax revenues (ICR, page 22). The achievement of the RI is rated
       negligible.
      RI 2. Public sector wage bill (as a percentage of GDP) decreased from the baseline of 6.9 percent to
       the actual of 6.0 percent, achieving the target of 6.2 percent. The wage bill was successfully contained
       by: (i) the drastic decrease in new staff intake from more than 10,000 in 2013-14 to less than 1,300 in
       2022; and (ii) the use of the same wage multiplier since 2017 (ICR, page 23). The achievement of the
       RI is rated high.
      RI 4. The share of central government agencies issuing tenders according to the new Public
       Procurement Law did not change from the baseline of 0 percent, making no progress towards the
       target of 100 percent. The Government endorsed tools for the implementation of the Public
       Procurement Law, conducted user training, and completed the Public Procurement website to monitor
       tenders using the new tools (ICR, page 23). Line ministries have started uploading information on the
       website, but it is an ongoing process and not fully complete yet (TTL response). The achievement of
       the RI is rated negligible.
      RI 5. Public debt (as a percentage of GDP) did not decrease to from the baseline of 58.5 percent to
       the target of 57.9 percent as postulated. On the contrary, the public debt (excluding guarantees) ratio
       increased from 46.8 percent in 2016 to 79 percent (projected) in 2022 (ICR, page 24). The ICR (page
       24) listed some factors that contributed to the increase, such as a continued high fiscal deficit during
       the program period, a higher proportion of commercial borrowing, and a recent sharp depreciation of
       the Kip. Furthermore, the impacts of COVID-19 were mostly felt through lower revenue, and hence a
       higher fiscal deficit and debt levels. The economic impact of COVID offset any modest gains in
       revenue mobilization that could be expected from the implementation of program measures (ICR, para
       37). On the spending side, COVID-related spending accounted for less than 0.1 percent of GDP since
       the start of the pandemic, which was one of the lowest levels in the world according to the IMF
       COVID-19 database (TTL response). The achievement of the RI is rated negligible.

One RI on the public sector wage bill was highly achieved. On the other hand, achievements of two RIs were
modest and three RIs were negligible. Thus, the achievement of objective 1 was moderately unsatisfactory.



Rating
Moderately Unsatisfactory



OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Adopt green growth planning and monitoring. PA 6-14. RI 7-12.

Rationale


                                                                                                Page 24 of 33
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Green Resilient Growth DPF (P159956)



Theory of Change (ToC) of the objective 2 postulated that the prior actions including adopting the 8th
NSEDP, establishing a high-level steering committee, and approving the National Green Growth Strategy
would result in various improvements monitored by the strategy’s monitoring and evaluation system,
strengthening the foundation for green growth planning and monitoring. The ToC also postulated that the prior
actions such as creating an intergovernmental mechanism to manage the EPF and allowing the EPF to levy
wastewater discharge fees, fines and service charges would expand its revenue sources of the EPF, and this
along with improved transparency from disclosing the annual audit would contribute to strengthening of
country instruments for green growth. The ToC also postulated that the prior actions on (i) preparing and
implementing the Strategic Environmental Assessments (SEAs) for public interventions and (ii) integrating
climate and disaster risks into the public investment review process and road maintenance procedures would
result in outputs including the compliance to environmental regulations and the awareness on climate and
disaster risks increased, contributing to enhanced decision making that was better informed by environmental
priorities. The above outcomes were expected to contribute to achieving the objective on green growth
planning and monitoring.

Critical assumptions included that: (i) establishing regulations and procedures to integrate climate
considerations into public projects would adequately induce behavioral changes in the government
agencies to change their priorities in decision making processes; and (ii) the EPF’s capacity to manage the
increased revenue sources and implement activities would be sufficient.

Outputs/Intermediate Outcomes (ICR, paras 32-40 and annex 1):

      RI 7. M&E results of the green growth priorities established in the National Green Growth Strategy
         were disclosed as part of the public consultation process of the 9th NSEDP (2021–2025), meeting the
         target. The achievement of the RI is rated substantial.
        RI 8. The number of revenue sources of the EPF increased from the baseline of 3 to 5, achieving the
         target of 5. The five sources available to the EPF were listed in the ICR (page 44). Regarding the
         amounts of revenues mobilized from these sources were: US$7.12 million in 2018, US$10.89 million
         in 2019, and US$7.91 million in 2020, according to the EPF report dated June 2021 (TTL response).
         No revenue from the payment for ecosystem and the Global Climate Fund (GCF) yet, as the EPF is in
         the process of developing regulation to mobilize fund from the payment for ecosystem and being
         accredited for GCF (TTL response). The achievement of the RI is rated substantial.
        RI 9. Annual financial audit of the EPF was disclosed. The achievement of the RI is rated substantial.
        RI 10. Two SEAs were undertaken for the Hydropower Sector Strategy and the National Green
         Growth Strategy, meeting the target of two SEAs for public policies, programs, and strategic plans.
         The achievement of the RI is rated high.
        RI 11. 100 percent of category 2 investment projects (88 projects in total) in the mining, energy, and
         transport sectors required an ESIA with complete disclosure of relevant information through the
         integrated database and public information platform prior to approval, exceeding the target of 70
         percent. The achievement of the RI is rated high.
        RI 12. 50 percent of approved road maintenance projects with climate resilience and disaster risk
         considerations envisaged in the Annual Road Maintenance Plan and Budget were verified by technical
         audits, meeting the target of 50 percent. All road maintenance projects incorporated climate resilience
         and disaster risk measures; however, only a half of these projects completed technical audits by the
         time of the ICR (ICR, page 46). The governmental procedures to reflect climate considerations in



                                                                                                 Page 25 of 33
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Green Resilient Growth DPF (P159956)



       public projects were helped by the establishment of a legal framework for collecting and disseminating
       hydrometeorology information (ICR, para 26). The achievement of the RI is rated substantial.

Achievements of two RIs were high, and that of four RIs were substantial. Thus, the achievement of objective
2 was satisfactory.



Rating
Satisfactory



OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
Introduce green growth tools and principles in priority sectors. PA 15-23. RI 13-18.

Rationale
Theory of Change (ToC) of the objective 3 postulated that the prior actions including introducing the new
legal and regulatory framework for integrated water resources management and coordination at the national
level would enable the development of River Basin Plans that incorporated minimum flow requirements for
environmental flows, strengthening the integrated and sustainable water resources management and uses.
The ToC also postulated that the prior actions including (i) establishing a Prime Ministerial Order and a
Ministerial Instruction on timber resource management and (ii) establishing the legal framework for national
park reform would enable the implementation of the Timber Legality Assurance System (TLAS) and the
clarification of legal status and access rights of enclave communities in the governance structure for protected
areas, improving forest resources management for production and conservation. The ToC also postulated
that the prior actions including establishing legal provisions for the management, monitoring, and inspection
of chemicals, phytosanitary issues, and pesticides would improve monitoring and control of non-point source
pollution. The ToC also postulated that the prior actions including establishing the legal framework on air
quality and water quality standards and monitoring methodology and would enhance monitoring of the
pollution levels in PPWSs and the lead levels in imported pesticides, strengthening pollution monitoring and
management. The above outcomes were expected to contribute to achieving the objective on green growth
tools and principles in priority sectors.

Critical assumptions included that: (i) the enclave communities would have adequate capacities to use their
legal rights for protected areas; and (ii) the government agencies would have sufficient financial and human
resources to continue monitoring the air and water qualities and inspecting of imported pesticides after
program closing.

Outputs/Intermediate Outcomes (ICR, paras 32-40 and annex 1):

      RI 13. No river basin completed River Basin Plans with the minimum flow requirements established in
       the plans, not meeting the target of one river basin. Eight river basin management plans (RBMP) with
       the value of minimum flow requirements were developed and likely to be approved by the end of 2022
       by the Minister (ICR, page 46). The achievement of the RI is rated modest.


                                                                                                 Page 26 of 33
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Green Resilient Growth DPF (P159956)




      RI 14. PFAs with certified Sustainable Forest Management (SFM) operations based on Lao PDR
         regulations increased from the baseline of 10,949 hectares (ha) to 99,607 ha, not meeting the target
         of 230,000 ha (43 percent of the target). According to the project team, after the operations were
         closed, the government has decided to suspend the certification as the government shifted its strategy
         to developing a national standard instead. The achievement of the RI is rated negligible.
        RI 15. Two national parks were established, where their management objectives were rated
         satisfactory by the Management Effectiveness Tracking Tool, meeting the target of two national parks
         with their management objectives rated at least moderately satisfactory. The new arrangements were
         to be applied on a pilot basis to the Nam Theun Watershed which was upgraded to the status of a
         national park. On the other hand, the emergence of potential development projects and
         mining activities in and around protected areas and national parks generated concerns over the
         effectiveness of conservation efforts (ICR, para 54). The achievement of the RI is rated substantial.
        RI 16. The Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry (MAF) conducted 140 inspections of pesticide sellers
         for compliance with pesticide regulations per year, meeting the target of 140 inspections per year. On
         the other hand, the data used to measure the achievement of RI faced some limitations in their
         coverage, as described in section 4. Additionally, there have been recent complaints of health effects
         and pollution of land and water resources due to elevated use of pesticides and other agrochemicals
         (ICR, page 30), which implied that the policy reforms on pesticides inspection were insufficient to
         prevent the pollution. The achievement of the RI is rated modest.
        RI 17. Monitoring reports for four provinces (Vientiane, Bolikhamxay, Savannakhet and Champasack)
         covering Priority Pollution Watch Sites (PPWSs) with parameters including PM2.5, arsenic, lead, and
         pathogens concentrations were updated, only partially meeting the target of 3 PPWSs updating and
         publicly disclosing reports with the above parameters annually. At the time of the ICRR, the reports
         are not disclosed in website of the Ministry of Natural Resources and Environment annually, except for
         PM2.5 which is published daily in the website covering 7 provinces (TTL response). Although the
         government adopted stringent standards for ambient air quality and key interventions to reduce
         exposure to lead and other harmful pollutants, environmental health and pollution management were
         not given appropriate priority, thus environmental agencies were unable to monitor pollutant
         discharges to ensure the national standards (ICR, para 54). The achievement of the RI is rated
         modest.
        RI 18. 98 percent of imported paints in the market selected through sampling contained less lead
         elements than the standard, almost achieving the target of 100 percent. The 2019 PCD report
         assessed 150 paint brand samples in the market and reported that, of 95 imported paint brands in the
         sample, only two exceeded the standard of 90 ppm (ICR, page 30). The non-compliant cases could be
         attributed to old stocks or illegal imports (ICR, page 30). The achievement of the RI is rated modest,
         largely due to the limited scope of the indicator.



One RI on national park management was substantially achieved. On the other hand, the achievements of
three RIs on pesticides inspections, pollution monitoring, and lead paints inspections were modest. The
achievements of RIs on river basin management plans and PFAs were negligible. Thus, the achievement of
objective 3 was moderately unsatisfactory.




                                                                                                Page 27 of 33
                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                      Green Resilient Growth DPF (P159956)




                  Rating
                  Moderately Unsatisfactory




OVERALL EFF TBL OLD




Overall Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
Rationale

The efficacy of objective 1 is rated moderately unsatisfactory. The achievement of objective 2 is rated
satisfactory. The efficacy of objective 3 is rated moderately unsatisfactory. Overall, the achievement of
objectives is rated moderately satisfactory, based on the harmonized guideline between OPCS and IEG.



Overall Efficacy Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

6. Outcome

Rationale

The PDO was relevant to the Government and Bank strategy for the Lao PDR. The prior actions had
appropriate analytical underpinnings and were appropriate first steps along the results chain for realizing the
intended objectives. The DPF series made substantial progress in terms of establishing a sound legal
framework to enable the country to further follow the green growth path. The results indicators were adequate to
measure the pillars’ achievements and could be verified, except for some indicators for objectives 1 and 3. The
relevance of prior actions is rated satisfactory as prior actions made substantial contribution to the achievement
of outcomes in general. The low achievements of objective 1 on achieving macroeconomic stability and
objective 3 on introducing green growth tools and principles in priority sectors were mostly compensated by the
satisfactory achievement of objective 2 on adopting green growth planning and monitoring across the national
development strategy. By achieving objective 2, the DPF operations made solid contribution on implementing
the government's strategies to enhance green growth to address key development challenges described in
section 3.a. Thus, the overall outcome is rated moderately satisfactory.


a. Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

7. Risk to Development Outcome


                                                                                                   Page 28 of 33
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Green Resilient Growth DPF (P159956)




Macroeconomic risk. Many of the macroeconomic vulnerabilities identified at appraisal further intensified; in
particular, the debt stock and the servicing burden were high at program closing (ICR, para 53). The decrease in
fiscal deficit in the recent years were driven by expenditure compression given that growth was much lower on
average than five years ago (ICR, para 53). To mitigate the risk, the Bank agreed with the GOL to continue a
dialogue on debt management under the auspices of the Sustainable Development Finance Policy (SDFP)
framework.

Government ownership/commitment risk. There was a potential risk that the legal framework and
administrative process improved by the operational series might not be replicated and strengthened across a
wide range of natural resource management concerns (ICR, para 54). To mitigate the risk, in the forestry sector,
the Bank prepared the Policy Note on Sustainable Forest Management to suggest that all relevant government
agencies share the same understanding of national commitments to international conventions, instruments and
agreements, and reflect in their strategy documents commonly agreed objectives and definitions (ICR, para 54).

Environmental risk. The GOL’s policy direction regarding coal-fired power plants might have potential negative
impacts on the environment and the sustainability of development outcomes on green growth (ICR, para 54).
Additionally, the institutional capacity strengthening at local government levels, which were often at the interface
of environmentally sensitive actions, remained to be challenges (ICR, para 54).




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Bank Performance – Design

Rationale

The World Bank staff drew on lessons from the previous DPF series in the country, the Poverty Reduction
Support Operation (PRSO), and other World Bank financed environmental DPF to design the specific policy
actions for this DPF series, as described in detail in the PD 2017 (para 34). This DPF series was based on the
World Bank Group’s experience on providing support to the country’s green growth agenda for about two
decades through a multi-sector portfolio of investment and technical assistance, as shown in the PD 2017 (table
5, page 28). This DPF series adequately drew on consultations with government ministries and agencies,
development partners, and Bank staff from different sectors, which resulted in contributions of other
development partners on the macroeconomic dialogue and the green growth policies (ICR, paras 47-48). The
analytical underpinnings of the operations were generally strong, and the series included a large number of prior
actions that had significant relevance. The prior actions included the passing of laws and regulations, not merely
intermediate steps along the way to doing so.

On the other hand, the risk identification and mitigation at appraisal were not adequate, especially for the macro
pillar (pillar 1) (ICR, para 46). According to the ICR (para 46), “the assessment of the adequacy of the
macroeconomic policy framework and projections turned out to hinge on overly optimistic assumptions about the
authorities’ ability to address accumulated fiscal and external imbalances with the prior actions in the DPOs,
particularly at the time of DPO2 appraisal when the macroeconomic condition had clearly deteriorated.” The
prior actions under pillar 1 were not adequate to achieve the macroeconomic stability as envisaged at appraisal



                                                                                                     Page 29 of 33
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Green Resilient Growth DPF (P159956)



(ICR, para 46). Furthermore, the M&E design and arrangements were not adequate. Some indicators were
infeasible to measure the contribution of the prior actions in a credible manner, as described in section 4.

The quality of Bank performance at the design stage, thus, is rated moderately satisfactory.



Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

b. Bank Performance – Implementation

Rationale

The stakeholder and donor coordination were adequate. Throughout the operational series, the Bank maintained
a constructive dialogue with a range of government counterparts and development partners to facilitate
implementation (ICR, para 51). The World Bank’s task team followed up regularly with the government team and
brought technical assistance as needed, including in the areas of tax administration, public financial
management, debt management and financial sector stability (ICR, para 51). Complementary IPF and ASA
instruments supported sectoral reforms under the green growth pillar and the progress towards achievements of
the RIs on river basin planning and pollution monitoring and management (ICR, para 60). On the other hand, the
DPF series did not identify or resolve the unavailability of credible data for the RIs on revenues, public debt, and
pesticides inspection (ICR, para 51). Moreover, at appraisal of the second operation, the changes in
macroeconomic risks were not adequately identified. The PD 2019 (para 13) noted that “robust dialogue
on economic management continues to mitigate macroeconomic risk,” even though the trends of revenues and
public debt were off track since 2016 (ICR, para 51 and table 3 in page 21). The tracking of progress was
disrupted by the absence of formal supervision missions after May 2019 and the lack of ISRs for the second
operation recorded in the Bank’s Operation Portal (ICR, para 51). The change in the Bank’s task team
leadership might explain these missed opportunities (ICR, para 51).

The quality of Bank performance at the implementation stage, thus, is rated moderately satisfactory.



Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

c. Overall Bank Performance

Rationale

The DPF design was built on specific lessons and experience accumulated from of the World Bank’s prior
support in the environmental sector in the country. The stakeholder and donor coordination were adequate from
the preparation stage throughout implementation. On the other hand, some shortcomings in the program design
described in section 8.a. were not adequately addressed during implementation, negatively affecting the


                                                                                                     Page 30 of 33
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Green Resilient Growth DPF (P159956)



monitoring of progress toward achievement of targets, especially for objective 1. Overall, the Bank performance
is rated moderately satisfactory.


Overall Bank Performance Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

9. Other Impacts

a. Social and Poverty

Positive effects. At appraisal, the Poverty and Social Impact Assessment noted that several of the prior actions
under pillars 2 and 3 were likely to have direct benefits for low-income communities; however, no specific
impacts were assessed at program closing (ICR, para 41). The ICR envisaged that the prior actions under the
green growth pillar were likely to have potential positive effects to the poor and vulnerable groups (ICR, para
42), but did not report any actual impact observed at program closing.

Negative effects. At appraisal, the PD 2017 (pages 66-67) and the PD 2019 (pages 81-82) identified that the
prior actions on timber harvest management and the national park reform might potentially cause short-term
closure of logging and processing operations and loss of jobs and decreases in livelihoods and incomes of local
communities reliant on non-sustainable resource extraction. Relevant mitigation measures were stated in the
PDs. At program closing, no information was provided whether the mitigation measures were implemented, and
the potential risks were mitigated. However, the program documents did not identify potential negative effects
from reducing expenditure on civil service workers, or from the potential for reducing water use for agriculture or
other purposes. Nor did it identify or assess the potential for stricter pollution standards to increase costs.



b. Environmental

Positive effects. At program closing, the Country Environmental Analysis (CEA) published in 2021 (page 4)
reported that the DPF series “contributed to the adoption of policy reforms that already represent important
steps in confronting Lao PDR’s priority environmental challenges.” The CEA described positive effects of the
policy reform, which was supported by the DPF series and their prior actions, presented opportunities to address
the priority environmental challenges (see the ICR [para 43] for details). No specific positive environmental
effects that were plausibly attributable to the operations were reported (TTL response).

Negative effects. At appraisal, the PD 2017 (page 74) identified that the prior action on fiscal consolidation
might cause potential constraints to adequately staff key environmental management agencies. At program
closing, no information was provided whether this risk was mitigated. Moreover, the ICR (page 30) mentioned
about “recent complaints of health effects among banana plantation workers and pollution of land and water
resources due to elevated use of pesticides and other agrochemicals.”



c. Gender


                                                                                                    Page 31 of 33
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Green Resilient Growth DPF (P159956)



The ICR (para 42) mentioned only potential positive effects of the DPF series to women as part of a larger
discussion on potential effects to the poorest and most vulnerable groups. No actual impact specific to women
were reported.



d. Other

The ICR (para 45) reported that the European Union (EU), Finland, France, Germany, Hungary, Ireland,
Luxembourg, and Switzerland, committed an estimated EUR 550 million in support of a green and inclusive
economy, human capital development, and good governance, within the framework of the 9th NSEDP (see
details in ICR, annex 7). The DPF series supported strengthening the NGGS to present a strong vision with
substantial actions and government vision, which resulted in paving the way for other actors such as the EU to
provide support (ICR, para 45).



10. Quality of ICR

Rationale

The ICR presents a coherent account of the program that flows logically. The quality of analysis is adequate.
The lessons in the ICR are supported by the evidence and findings of the ICR. The lessons focus on what can
be derived from experience with the operation and clearly presented what should be done differently in the
future to improve impact. The ICR presents a sufficient and credible evidence based on critical information to
support the achievements reported, except for objective 1 as described in sections 4 and 5. The report followed
most of the ICR guidelines and methodology. The World Bank’s task team/ICR team provided supplemental
information on the operation in response to IEG’s request. In sum, the quality of ICR is rated substantial.


a. Rating

Substantial

11. Ratings
                                                                               Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                   IEG
                                                                               Disagreement/Comments
                                Moderately
Outcome                                              Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
                                Moderately
Bank Performance                                     Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
Relevance of Results
                                ---                  Moderately Satisfactory
Indicators
Quality of ICR                  ---                  Substantial


12. Lessons

                                                                                                 Page 32 of 33
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Green Resilient Growth DPF (P159956)




The ICR (paras 56-60) presented four lessons. Two of them are presented below rephrasing as these might be
relevant for the future operations aiming to achieve macroeconomic growth and environmental resource
management and protection.

Relatively weak actions on revenue mobilization and debt management may be insufficient to address
broader issues of fiscal sustainability. The debt-related concern had been signaled at the time of appraisal of
both the first and second operations in the DPF series. In each case, debt sustainability analysis had led to an
assessment of the country being at high risk of debt distress. However, while the risk was recognized, the
measures devoted to mitigating it turned out to be incommensurate with the scale of the risk. While the COVID-
19 exacerbated macroeconomic difficulties starting in 2020, the underlying challenge of unsustainable debt
dynamics predated the pandemic. The ICR (para 57) suggested a list of potential fiscal and debt management
actions to be considered in the future similar operations, while noting that these actions would require strong
government commitment to undertake macro-fiscal reforms.

Engaging high-level government officials can ensure successful delivery of the green part of the
agenda. Such engagement was reflected in the 8th NSEDP and the NGGS which set out goals, principles,
strategies, measures, and mechanisms to deliver on the agenda. The policy matrix for each DPO was
developed in close coordination with line ministries and was endorsed by the Prime Minister. Similar high-level
engagement was reflected in the role of the MPI. The cross-sectoral NSEDP platform led by MPI appears to be
an effective model to support dialogue, coordination, monitoring, and reporting of policy reforms. The inclusion of
the DPO policy dialogues into the 8th NSEDP review process, and later on into the 9th NSEDP process,
enhanced the participation and commitment of line ministries and avoided the risk of individual policy actions
being watered down.

IEG draws the following additional lesson from this operation.

Designing outcome indicators that are too high a level can cause a missed opportunity to credibly
measure the contribution of the prior action. The ICR (para 37) noted: “Indicator #1 (tax revenue to GDP)
was too ambitious to be substantially affected by the policy measures undertaken, namely, the elimination of
some tariff exemptions and the rationalization of some VAT procedures, as these only covered a small part of
total tax revenues.” The results indicator on the overall share of public debt had the same problem, in that debt
was driven by revenue and expenditure, and was not able to capture the effectiveness of improvements in public
debt management. In these cases, the RI was not able to measure the contribution of the prior action, because
the indicator would be affected by many other factors.


13. Project Performance Assessment Report (PPAR) Recommended?

No




                                                                                                    Page 33 of 33
