     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     WEE-RDP (P164443)



                                                                              Report Number: ICRR0023335

1. Project Data



 Project ID                              Project Name
 P164443                                 WEE-RDP

 Country                                 Practice Area(Lead)
 Afghanistan                             Agriculture and Food


 L/C/TF Number(s)                       Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-D3840,TF-A8443                     30-Jun-2023                                          27,464,925.10

 Bank Approval Date                     Closing Date (Actual)
 28-Sep-2018                            30-Jun-2023

                                        IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           25,000,000.00                                 75,000,000.00

 Revised Commitment                            39,530,888.78                                 14,530,888.78

 Actual                                        27,464,925.10                                 14,530,888.78




 Prepared by               Reviewed by                 ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Maria Shkaratan           Christopher David           Avjeet Singh                   IEGSD (Unit 4)
                           Nelson




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) was to increase social and economic empowerment of poor rural
   women in selected communities.

   There was no change to the PDO during implementation.




                                                                                               Page 1 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     WEE-RDP (P164443)



   For the purposes of this ICR review, the objective will not be broken into parts but will be assessed as one
   PDO. This is because the objectives of economic and social empowerment under this Project are
   interconnected, as reflected in the ICR’s ToC.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   1. Original components:

   Component 1 – Community Mobilization and Institution Development (cost at appraisal: US$30.0
   million; actual cost: US$8.14 million) - aimed to increase social empowerment of rural women by
   mobilizing them into community institutions built by the Project. Women’s self-help groups (SHGs) were to
   be the core community institutional framework, which were then expected to be federated into Village Level
   Savings Associations (VLSAs). From these, community-level enterprise groups (EG) were expected to
   emerge and, in turn, be aggregated into producer associations (PAs). The project planned to create a total
   of 40,000 SHGs, 5,000 VSLAs, 5000 EGs, and 500 PAs. Given the socio-cultural context in Afghanistan,
   the option of having up to 20 percent male SHGs was retained.

   Component 2 – Access to Finance (cost at appraisal: US$39.0; actual cost: US$3.02 million) - aimed
   to enable the sustainability of the community institutions and to promote their direct linkages to financial
   service providers including monetary financial institutions (MFIs) and commercial banks. The focus was on
   strengthening the “demand side” by creating women's savings groups built on mutual trust and respect.
   Women’s groups were to be prepared to use MFIs. Another focus was on ensuring the financial and
   operational sustainability of VSLAs and the MFIs’ and commercial banks’ incentives to enable rural
   women’s access to financial services.

   Component 3 - Enterprise Development and Market Linkages (cost at appraisal: US$18.0 million;
   actual cost: US$0.12 million) – financed goods based on the business needs of the female-led enterprises
   in order to support viable economic activities, leveraging private sector investments and promoting
   economies of scale. This would be reinforced by technical assistance (TA). The outcome would be
   increased productivity and competitiveness, which would in turn improve females’ job opportunities and
   contribute to their economic empowerment.

   Component 4: - Project Management (cost at appraisal: US$13.0 million; Actual cost: US$7.09
   million) - financed management and oversight of the Project at national and provincial levels.

   2. Changes in components and indicators during implementation:



                                                                                                    Page 2 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     WEE-RDP (P164443)



   There was no change to the components, or PDO indicators, or intermediate indicators during
   implementation.

   The Project underwent one Level 2 restructuring, approved on June 30, 2021, following the Government
   request to change the Implementation Agency from Ministry of Rural Rehabilitation and Development
   (MRRD) to the Ministry of Women Affairs (MoWA).



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project Cost: The appraisal estimate was US$100.0 million, and the actual project cost (the amount
   disbursed at closure) was US27.5 million (ICR, page ii). The amount reported as disbursed at closure is
   below the total component cost at closure, which is stated as US$18.37 million (ICR, page 40). The
   difference equals US$9.13 million. The ICR reports that the outstanding balance remaining in the project’s
   designated account at closure was US$9.5 million, and it was expected to cover the outstanding liabilities.
   (ICR, page 21)

   Project Financing: The project was financed by an International Development Association (IDA) grant
   (US$25.0 million at appraisal and US$12.9 million at closure) and an Afghanistan Reconstruction Trust
   Fund (ARTF) grant (US$ 75.0 million at appraisal and US$14.5 million at closure).

   Borrower/Recipient contribution: There was no Borrower contribution.

   Changes in project financing due to the June 2021 restructuring: Disbursement projections were revised
   considering implementation progress, past disbursements, and implementation challenges. The funds were
   reallocated across disbursement categories. The revised total Project financing was US$39.5 million,
   consisting of the IDA funding for US$25.0 million (no change from the original amount) and the ARTF
   funding of US$14.5 million (a reduction from the original amount of US$75 million).

   Suspension and funds cancellation. Following the takeover of the government on August 15, 2021, the
   World Bank paused its disbursements under the project, and subsequently, disbursements under IDA
   financing and ARTF grant for the project were suspended. The implementation of activities on the ground
   was thereby discontinued.

   Project Dates: The project was approved on September 28, 2018, and became effective on October 23,
   2018. The original closing date was June 30, 2023. Due to the collapse of the government in August 2021
   and the following political turmoil, the WBG’s country portfolio, including the project, was suspended on
   February 17, 2022, and then phased out.

   Reverse Split Evaluation – Due to the collapse of the government in Afghanistan, this evaluation will
   undertake a reverse split evaluation approach as approved by OPCS.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale


                                                                                                   Page 3 of 14
                       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                       WEE-RDP (P164443)



Country context: At project approval and throughout implementation, Afghanistan was experiencing
economic stagnation and deterioration, an increasing conflict, and deepening internal political
fragmentation. Average annual GDP growth fell to 2.5 percent between 2015-2020, below the rate of
population increase. The impact of COVID-19 was significant and led to a two-percent economic
contraction and a sharp increase in poverty. An estimated 60-70 percent of the population lived in poverty
at the end of 2020. The collapse of the government in August 2021 triggered a further economic crisis and
a withdrawal of most international aid.

Relevance to the national priorities at approval: The PDO was relevant to the country's conditions and well-
aligned with national priorities, specifically to the Afghanistan National Peace and Development Framework
2017-21, which included four pillars: governance and state effectiveness, social capital, and nation building,
economic growth and job creation, and poverty reduction and social inclusion. Under development
priorities, the Framework states that the “first objective is to promote sustainable job creation,” that “a
growth-focused development strategy is worthwhile only if it is inclusive and leads to improved welfare and
effective poverty reduction,” and that national policies and program will be designed to address extreme
inequities that have been observed and aim at equitable development and social balance (page 14). These
priorities are reflected in the objective of this Project to increase the social and economic empowerment of
poor rural women. The PDO was also aligned with the objectives of the country’s Women’s Economic
Empowerment National Priority Program (WEE-NPP), launched on March 8th, 2017, and aimed to build
poor women’s capacity to strengthen the economy of their households, communities, and the entire nation.

Relevance to the WBG’s assistance Strategies at approval: The World Bank Group’s Country Partnership
Framework (CPF) for fiscal years 2017-2020, discussed by the Board on October 27, 2016 (Report
#108727-AF). The CPF was organized around three pillars: (i) building strong and accountable institutions;
(ii) supporting inclusive growth; and (iii) expanding and deepening social inclusion (Country Partnership
Framework (CPF), 2016). Both the CPF and the Bank's Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD, 2016)
pointed out the extreme fragility and high risk of operating in Afghanistan. The Project contributed to all
three CPF pillars through its special emphasis on promoting women's economic empowerment.

Relevance at the time of the government takeover (August 2021). The PDO remained relevant to the
national priorities and the WBG’s Assistance strategies until the takeover in August 2021. The project was
fully consistent with the Performance and Learning Review priorities, which expanded the FY2016-20 CPF
for two additional years to cover FY21 and FY22. These priorities were fully consistent with the Government
strategy.

The relevance of objectives is rated high due to its full alignment with the country strategy and government
priorities at appraisal and up to the suspension of the WBG’s country program due to the August 2021
government takeover.


Rating Relevance TBL




Rating
High


4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)



                                                                                                    Page 4 of 14
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  WEE-RDP (P164443)


EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               To increase social and economic empowerment of poor rural women in selected communities.

               Rationale
               The theory of change (ToC), developed for the PAD, showed a direct, logical causal chain from inputs to
               outputs and further to outcomes. There were two result chains. In the first results chain, increased social
               empowerment of poor rural women in selected communities would be achieved by mobilizing them into such
               institutions as SGs and VSLAs, which would include both poor and non-poor women, thus facilitating equal
               involvement, solidarity, and mutual support, and ultimately creating social platforms for inclusive economic
               development. In the second results chain, the said social platforms would be leveraged to access financial,
               political, and economic capital (services, markets, and financial institutions), thus leading to the economic
               empowerment of poor rural women.

               The ToC clearly presented the project's logic and captured the cause-effect relationship among inputs,
               outputs, and PDO outcomes. The complicated links from the outputs to the PDO outcomes were clearly
               presented and corresponded to the logic of Project design. The ToC has two shortcomings. First, it does not
               include the intermediate outcomes, and therefore, it is not clear from the ToC how the outputs would lead to
               the achievement of the Project’s objectives, and how the outputs would be applied to solve the issues to be
               addressed by the Project. For example, the ToC states that the PDO outcomes would be measured by the
               number of Project beneficiaries, but it is unclear how exactly they would benefit from the listed outputs.
               Second, the ToC does not include the assumptions that have to be in place for the interventions to lead to the
               achievement of the TOC’s outputs and outcomes.

               Outcomes:

               The Original Project made significant progress with reaching most of the PDO targets and many of the
               intermediate indicator targets by its closure. The ICR reports that on June 30, 2021, two years prior to the
               planned closure, only one PDO indicator had not been reached yet, but the Project was on track to achieving
               it on time. At the same time, the Project’s performance with respect to the rest of the PDO indicators was
               exceptionally good, and all were already exceeded by June 30, 2021. (ICR, page 9, page 11)

               The following results were achieved with respect to the PDO indicators by actual Project closure:

               1. The Project directly benefited 772,792 people (including 455,756 women) by reaching them with financial
               services, exceeding the original target of 450,000 people (including 350,000 women).

               2. The share of female SHG members from poor or vulnerable households was 84.9 percent, as compared to
               60 percent originally targeted.

               3. The share of female EGs/PAs with an increase in real sales value was 11.4 percent, compared to the
               original target of 60 percent. The ICR reports that reaching this target relied upon the completion of several
               key assessments, which were underway. The assessments included market studies, evaluation of market
               demand, and identification of sources of cheaper raw materials and markets for EGs’ products. The ICR
               states that the Project would reach this target by the planned closure, based on the progress made.



                                                                                                                  Page 5 of 14
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   WEE-RDP (P164443)



Outputs:

1. Community mobilization. Based on the significant progress made under this component, the Project was
on track to achieving results by the planned closure, but no targets were reached by actual closure.
Specifically: (i) the share of households with at least one woman in an SHG was 64 percent at closure, while
the target was 70 percent; (ii) the share of SHGs federated into VSLAs was 58 percent, as compared to the
target of 80 percent; and (iii) the female SHGs engaged in social activities was 38 percent, as compared with
the original target of 70 percent. Overall, with regards to social empowerment, the Project supported the
formation of over 48,000 SHGs with 564,000 active members (ICR, page 10) (there was no target associated
with this output).

2. Access to finance. Progress with reaching the targets under this component differed by indicator but no
targets were achieved by actual closure. There was significant progress towards the following two targets: (i)
net aggregate savings mobilized amounted to US$10.8 million, compared to the target of US$15.0 million;
and (ii) loans were taken by 102,045 female members of SHG/VSLAs, compared to the target of 150,000.
However, there was little or no progress in reaching the following targets: (i) 9,423 SHGs and 494 VSLAs
received grants, while the targets were, correspondingly, 36,000 and 4,500; (ii) no VSLAs achieved
operational self-sufficiency by closure, while the target was 30 percent.

3. Market linkages. Based on significant progress under this component, the Project was on track to the
expected results by the planned closure, but no targets were achieved by actual closure. Specifically: (i) job
interventions benefited 19,156 people (out of which 18,221 were female), while the target was 30,000 (out of
which 25,000 would be female); (ii) the share of the EGs/PAs having established business partnership and
linkages with private sector firms/SMEs was 19 percent, compared to the target of 30 percent; and (iii) the
indicator of participating females engaging in income-generation activity (the target of 28 percent was
determined after appraisal but not in relation to the restructuring) was not estimated at closure, as the
evaluation survey was still ongoing, but the ICR reports that the rates were very high (ICR, page 32). Under
this component, US$2.9 million was disbursed as Seed Capital Grant, benefiting 97,835 participants in 912
VSLAs and 8,910 SHGs. Further, loans were provided to the SHG members, and 76 percent of the total
amount lent had been repaid by Project closure. Also, loans were provided to the VSLAs members, and 23
percent of the total amount lent had been repaid by Project closure. The loans were used to address
household safety net issues, develop income-generating activities, start enterprises, and increase the
sustainability of businesses. The Project also aimed at building partnerships between the SHGs/VSLAs and
MFIs/commercial banks. While initial discussions were held, no loans had been issued by Project closure
since the EGs were not able to meet collateral/guarantee requirements. The ICR reports that additional work
on strengthening EGs could not have been achieved due to the early closure of the Project. (ICR, page 12).

Overall, most of the expected PDO outcomes were achieved by the Project (ahead of time), except for the
indicator measuring the increase in sales value by female EGs/PAs. However, the Project was expected to
reach this target by closure, based on the progress made. The Project also made significant progress towards
its output targets across the three areas of interventions (community mobilization, access to finance, and
market linkages).

The Original Project efficacy rating is Substantial. Most of the PDO outcomes were exceeded, and the Project
was on track to reach all targets by the planned closure.




                                                                                                  Page 6 of 14
                                 Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                 WEE-RDP (P164443)




                              Rating
                              Substantial


                              OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
                              Revised Objective
                              To increase social and economic empowerment of poor rural women in selected communities.

                              Revised Rationale
                              Please see the discussion of the ToC under the Original Project.

                              For this review, the period after Revision includes the time after the government takeover on August 2021.
                              This is because the Revised Project became effective on June 30, 2021, less than two months before the
                              takeover, and there was not enough time to make progress against the new activities and the revised
                              targets.

                              Outcomes:

                              None of the targets were revised at restructuring. The progress the Project made after the takeover was not
                              possible to monitor. The project’s achievements after the government takeover on August 15, 2021, are
                              assessed as unsustainable due to a continued deterioration of the treatment of women’s rights in the country
                              as of the time of this ICR review.

                              The Revised Project efficacy is Negligible because no additional progress was made or measured since the
                              restructuring and due to a high likelihood that the previous achievements would become unsustainable after
                              the takeover.



                              Revised Rating
                              Negligible


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            For the Original Project, efficacy is Substantial.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial

                  OBJR1_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
                                                                                                                               Page 7 of 14
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      WEE-RDP (P164443)



  For the Revised Project, efficacy is Negligible. The sustainability of the Project achievements after the
  takeover is unlikely and could well go backwards.



  Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating                         Primary Reason
  Negligible                                                 External shock


 5. Efficiency
At appraisal, economic analysis was conducted based on the data from a completed similar World Bank project,
the Afghanistan Rural Enterprise Development Program (AREDP), and the economic internal rate of return
(EIRR) was estimated at 27.3 percent.

The EIRR was estimated using a cost-benefit analysis conducted by sub-project type (the types of economic
activities/enterprises to be financed by the Project). The Project EIRR is the average of the sub-project EIRRs.
The types of sub-projects to be used in the economic analysis were derived based on a very detailed and
thorough examination of the AREDP’s outcomes because it was not possible to have an ex-ante list of the
actual sub-projects due to the demand- and market-driven nature of the Project (the sub-projects would be
defined during Project implementation by the beneficiaries, based on their experience and considering market
analysis). The derived activities included agriculture, carpet-making, the food industry, handicraft, livestock, and
poultry. In estimating the benefits, the economic analysis involved defining and categorizing production
categories and estimating annual cash flows from each of them. On the cost side, the estimates were made
conservatively and included the seed money provided to EGs, loans extended from VSLAs and SGs to EGs,
and all other project costs. A 10-percent discount rate was used; constant June 2018 prices were used; and the
realization of full benefits of the EGs was assumed within three years of their establishment.

At closure, no economic analysis was conducted, considering the circumstances under which the Project was
cancelled (government takeover and the phasing out of the WBG portfolio in the country) and the insufficient
data for such analysis. Considering that the Project outcomes are likely to be unsustainable, as discussed in the
Efficacy section of this review, the ex-ante EIRR is not expected to be realized.

Administrative efficiency. The ICR reports that the cost per direct beneficiary of the Project was only 6.4 percent
of that of the AREDP project. This is because of the lessons learned and the capacity developed under the
AREDP. (ICR, page 13) The ICR also reports that Project’s efficiency improved based on the support of the
ARTF Third Party Monitor (TPM), who undertook field surveys in the Project areas and informed the
management about implementation challenges, supporting a timely acknowledgment of the red flags and the
subsequent adjustment of Project implementation. (ICR, page 22)

Efficiency is rated Modest, given that the expected EIRR is unlikely to remain, and the overall sustainability is
very unlikely.


Efficiency Rating
Modest



                                                                                                       Page 8 of 14
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      WEE-RDP (P164443)



a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?              Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      87.00
Appraisal                                                  27.30
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      0
ICR Estimate                                                0
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Under the original project, Relevance of objectives is High, Efficacy is Substantial and Efficiency is Modest, thus
the Outcome rating is Moderately Satisfactory (a value of 4). Under the revised project which is the period
following the government takeover, Relevance remains High, but Efficacy is Negligible, Efficiency is Modest and
thus the Outcome rating is Unsatisfactory (a value of 2).

Thus, the overall rating is (0.28x4)+(0.72x2) = 2.56 rounds to 3 = Moderately Unsatisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Unsatisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The ICR reports that the threat to the sustainability of the project achievements under the Interim Taliban
Administration (ITA) is High. Considering the nature of project interventions, the new political situation, and
the ITA views on gender reforms, the project gains are likely to be unsustainable. Moreover, security is a
continued risk in Afghanistan, and change in political administration in the country has resulted in increasing
uncertainty. Fragility has increased, exacerbating vulnerabilities of the rural communities in the country. (ICR,
page 23)




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The ICR reports that a high-quality Project preparation was based on lessons learned from several other
  relevant projects, including the Citizens’ Charter Afghanistan Project (CCAP), the Afghanistan Rural
  Enterprise Development Program (AREDP), and the Citizens’ Charter program; the in-depth analytical
  work; and a risk assessment and mitigation. The analytical work that informed the Project design included
  the study “Status of Community Based Saving Promotion Institutions in Afghanistan”, which was


                                                                                                      Page 9 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     WEE-RDP (P164443)



  undertaken by the Afghanistan Microfinance Association, and the study “Women and the Economy:
  Lessons Learned on Operational Approaches to Women’s Economic Empowerment in Afghanistan”,
  commissioned by the World Bank and the Government. (ICR, page 19, 21)



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The ICR reports that the Bank undertook at least two implementation support missions per year. These
 missions ensured that progress was properly tracked, while issues were identified early enough and quick
 corrective measures were taken. The FM system was adequate throughout implementation and the quality
 of financial reporting was satisfactory. The Project benefited from the support of the ARTF Third Party
 Monitor (TPM). The TPM undertook field surveys including in WEE-RDP project areas and helped to
 understand various implementation issues/challenges and informed the management about the overall
 performance of projects on the ground, which turned out to be a significant help in a timely identification of
 the issues and the subsequent adjustment of Project implementation.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 Overall, the Project's RF adequately reflected the Project interventions and was sufficiently linked to the
 PDO. All indicators were quantitative, time-bound, attributable to the Project, and had baselines and
 targets. There were several gender indicators (which is to be expected considering the nature of the
 project). The RF extensively measured the Project’s outputs and outcomes, was very detailed, and covered
 all areas of Project investments.

 The RF, however, had a deficiency: three of the five PDO indicators did not sufficiently reflect the Project’s
 PDO and were essentially output level indicators, while several of the intermediate RF indicators were, in
 fact, outcome level indicators. Specifically, the PDO indicator 2 – “Women SHG members from poor or
 vulnerable households” – is an output indicator reflecting the achievements of the first step of the social
 mobilization process the Project supported. The PDO indicator 4 – “Beneficiaries reached with financial
 services” – is also an output indicator reflecting the provision of access to finance and not the benefits to
 the participating population from using it (the latter would be a project-level outcome). While the PDO
 indicators 1 and 2 – “Number of Direct Beneficiaries (including: female) - are articulated at the outcome
 level, there is no explanation as to what kind of benefits are being implied, making this indicator sound like

                                                                                                    Page 10 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     WEE-RDP (P164443)



 counting the number of population reached by the Project. It was possible to conclude, on the basis of the
 RF data, that these are Project participants who were reached with financial services, which makes the
 PDO indicator 1 a repetition of the PDO indicator 4 (which is an input indicator). Only PDO indicator 5 –
 “Percentage of women EGs/PAs showing increase in real value of sales” – is a Project-level outcome
 indicator measuring the achieved economic empowerment of the participating women.

 The ICR reports that indicator targets were set cautiously given risks identified during preparation
 (difficulties in mobilizing women’s groups, women’s mobility issues, trainings for women were difficult in
 Taliban occupied areas, and objections to women’s empowerment). The M&E system used a computerized
 web-based Management Information System (MIS) developed under AREDP and upgraded to ensure
 accurate and verified information. A community-based process monitoring system was also established at
 the village level to ensure the involvement of CDC leaders, SGs members and VSLAs representatives and
 direct feedback from communities. The project was under the purview of the ARTF third party monitoring
 mechanism to provide external validation and insights. (ICR, page 18)



b. M&E Implementation
  The ICR reports that M&E implementation was taken very seriously by the client, and adequate human
  and financial resources were deployed for its implementation. Using MIS data, progress against the
  results framework was reported on a quarterly basis and made available on the Project’s website. All
  reports on Project’s achievements were discussed and vetted during implementation support missions
  and regular field visits. These validation methods ensure reliability of the results reported through the
  M&E system. The Project was under the purview of the ARTF third party monitoring mechanism to
  provide external validation and insights. (ICR, page 18)



c. M&E Utilization
  The ICR reports that throughout implementation, the Project routinely used information from the M&E
  system for operational decisions and to refine the implementation strategy and adopting the Project to
  achieve lagging targets. The assessment and information collected through the M&E system helped the
  Government and World Bank teams to provide adequate and timely implementation support on many
  issues including, but not limited to reallocation of funds, procurement, and financial management issues.
  For example, to improve the quality of data collection for the M&E system, the team revised Member
  Registration and Village Economic Profile and the methodology for Well-Being Analysis in non-Citizen’s
  Charter areas. (ICR, page 19)



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards


                                                                                                   Page 11 of 14
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    WEE-RDP (P164443)



  Environmental Safeguards. The Project was classified as Category B and triggered the Environmental
  Assessment Policy (OP/BP 4.01) and Pest Management (OP 4.09). The Project prepared an Environmental
  and Social Framework (ESMF) and used it to screen environmental and social risks, incorporating feedback
  from stakeholder consultations and translating it into local languages. The ESMF was publicly disclosed and
  had the necessary provisions to prepare required safeguards mitigation measures, including site specific
  Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs) and checklists to effectively address risk-related
  issues during project implementation. In addition to this, a Pest Management Plan was prepared, consulted,
  translated, and publicly disclosed.

  Social Safeguards. The sub-projects activities under the Project were not expected to have major adverse
  social impacts. Systematic involvement of the local communities mitigated any potential negative social
  impacts, and corresponding mitigation measures were included in the ESMPs. Citizen Engagement enabled
  an effective two‐way interaction between citizens and the government; it included: (i) effective consultations;
  (ii) establishment of a functional grievance redress mechanism (GRM); (iii) community participatory
  monitoring (CPM) through social audits and other tools; and (iv) interactions between beneficiaries, NGOs
  and the government. (ICR, page 19-20)

  The ratings for the safeguards were Satisfactory for the first half of the implementation (September 2019-
  November 2020) and Moderately Satisfactory in the second half of implementation (October 2021 –
  November 2022).




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management (FM). The ICR reports that the Project’s FM was designed with prior identification of
  FM risks and effective mitigating measures. During preparation, the project developed an FM plan to
  ensure that the Project Implementation Unit (PIU) would have the capacity to implement the project. The
  Project complied with the relevant financial covenants and ensured regular and timely submission of
  financial reports and annual audits. The Project design required the establishment of the MIS as a
  precondition for the disbursement of the community grants, and the condition was met. The change of the
  implementing agency from MRRD to MOWA significantly affected disbursements. While this change was
  approved in June 2021, the government had shifted the responsibility for implementation from MRRD to
  MoWA earlier, thereby creating legal constraints for disbursement, affected the flow of community grants.
  (ICR, page 20)

  A review of project’s expenditures suggested that the value of undocumented expenditures incurred before
  the project’s disbursements suspension date was approximately US$7.0 million, and the outstanding
  balance remaining in the project’s designated account was US$9,523,105. This amount was expected to
  cover the outstanding liabilities, and the balance was to be refunded to the Bank. (ICR, page 20-21)

  Procurement. The ICR reports that the procurement system was adequately designed, with prior
  identification of risks and mitigating measures. The main procurement packages were related to
  contracting Facilitating partners (FPS), which were completed during the project implementation period,
  and there were no reported cases of mis-procurement and the PIU conducted procurement activities in line
  with agreed World Bank procedures. (ICR, page 21)



                                                                                                   Page 12 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     WEE-RDP (P164443)




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                   IEG
                                                                                Disagreements/Comment
                               Moderately           Moderately
Outcome
                               Unsatisfactory       Unsatisfactory
Bank Performance               Satisfactory         Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                 Substantial          Substantial

Quality of ICR                 ---                  Substantial


12. Lessons

The following lessons are based on the ICR, with minor adjustments. They can be used in the FCV
context beyond Afghanistan.

    1. Community Development Councils (CDCs) can play a significant positive role in achieving
       social mobilization. The Project collaborated with the preceding CCAP project, and the
       platform of CDCs from the project was utilized to promote SGs and VSLAs. The experience
       of the CCAP with social mobilization tools (like well-being analysis, social and resource
       mapping, leaking pot analysis, women’s mobility analysis, etc.) was utilized to jumpstart the
       implementation of the Project. As a result, the Project’s targets related to women
       beneficiaries and mobilization of women into women's self-help groups were exceeded two
       years before the planned Project closure.
    2. Working with MFIs and banks upfront can be a key tool in promoting access to finance for
       project beneficiaries. One of the key weaknesses of past CSPI models in Afghanistan was
       that they were not able to link to formal financial institutions, which was critical for the
       sustainability of the porjects’ achievements. Without it, a longer-term access to formal
       institutional financing as well as financial sustainability of the SHGs and VSLAs would not be
       achieved. Under the Project, a VSLA maturity and sustainability analysis was conducted and
       maturity index developed, and memoranda of understanding (MOUs) with the Microfinance
       Investment Support Facility for Afghanistan (MISFA) and two of the leading state-owned
       banks were signed. This allowed women’s institutions to establish a direct up-front
       relationship with formal financial institutions, which could pave the way for longer-term
       engagements in the future as well as the delivery of other financial products to them.
    3. In an FCV context, effective cross GP collaboration contributes to leveraging global
       experiences and best practices to provide strong technical and implementation support to the
       client. The Project was designed and implemented jointly by a number of Global Practices
       including Agriculture and Food; Finance, Competitiveness, and Innovation (FCI); and Social

                                                                                                  Page 13 of 14
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       WEE-RDP (P164443)



         Development. This cross-sectoral GP collaboration was very important both at the design
         and implementation stages where the Agriculture and Food GP benefited from the support
         and Social Development in all activities related to social empowerment and from the support
         of FCI in the area of economic empowerment. This synergy and fruitful cross-GP
         collaboration led to significant results on the ground.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provides an informed and evidence-based analysis, good justification of the PDO relevance; links
evidence to analytical conclusions; and informs about the rational for the decisions regarding the ratings. The
ICR has internal consistency across the dimensions of project evaluation. The lessons learned are linked to the
narrative and the ratings and are useful for operations in the FCV countries.

In addition, the overview, context and articulation of the design features for the project are extremely well made
and there is strong analytical engagement with the FCV nature of the intervention and how it builds on other
work in the country.

However, the ICR could have provided a more detailed analysis of Project efficacy, going beyond the PDO
indicators and informing the reader about the progress the Project had made with regards to the intermediate
indicator targets. Also, it would be helpful if the ICR elaborated on how the Project exceeded most of its PDO
targets while not reaching any of the related intermediate indicator targets. On a related note, the ToC had
some deficiencies, missing the intermediate outcomes and not presenting assumptions for the ToC to support
PDO achievement. Despite these shortcomings, the overall quality of the ICR is substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                    Page 14 of 14
