     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     WARFP AF Guinea, Sierra Leone & Liberia (P126773)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0023281

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P126773                                     WARFP AF Guinea, Sierra Leone & Liberia

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Western and Central Africa                  Environment, Natural Resources & the Blue Economy


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-D0390,IDA-D0400                         15-Dec-2020                                         36,532,380.08

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 16-Mar-2015                                 28-Feb-2022

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            22,000,000.00                                                0.00

 Revised Commitment                             22,000,000.00                                                0.00

 Actual                                         20,859,688.69                                                0.00




 Prepared by                  Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Katharina Ferl               Avjeet Singh                 Christopher David Nelson       IEGSD (Unit 4)




 P131327_TBL
 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P131327                                     West Africa - Mauritania Fish. APL (SFP) ( P131327 )



 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
                                                                                                    15672691.39

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 16-Mar-2015

                                                                                                    Page 1 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     WARFP AF Guinea, Sierra Leone & Liberia (P126773)




                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                       Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                                        0.00                                    7,000,000.00

 Revised Commitment                                         0.00                                    7,000,000.00

 Actual                                                     0.00                                    5,871,041.06




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Project Appraisal Document (PAD) (p. 1) and the Financing Agreement of April 17, 2015 (p.
   6), the Project Development Objective (PDO) was “to strengthen governance and management of targeted
   fisheries and improve handling of landed catch at selected sites.” The Global Environmental Objective (GEO)
   of the West African Region Fisheries Program Series of Projects was the same as the PDO.

   For the ICR Review, the PDO was unpacked as follows:

          i. Strengthen governance of targeted fisheries;
         ii. Strengthen the management of targeted fisheries; and
        iii. Improve the handling of landed catch at selected sites.

   In January 2017, the project received Additional Financing (AF) for US$10 million. The validation does not
   require a split rating since revisions to the PDO indicators generally expand the project's scope (i.e.,
   expanding an indicator’s coverage to include new participating countries or increasing ambition). At the same
   time, changes to component activities adjusted the implementation to the client’s needs and priorities. Some
   revisions to the PDO indicators were made to make them more realistic and feasible to measure without
   narrowing the project scope.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  05-Jan-2017

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No


                                                                                                     Page 2 of 22
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    WARFP AF Guinea, Sierra Leone & Liberia (P126773)



d. Components
  Component 1: Strengthening Good Governance and Sustainable Management of the Fisheries
  (appraisal estimate US$10.4 million; AF US$3.30 million, actual US$11.29 million): This component
  included four subcomponents:

  Subcomponent 1.1: Developing the legal and operational policy and strengthening the institutional capacity
  to enable sustainable management of fisheries resources (long-term agenda);

  Subcomponent 1.2: Strengthening the vessel registration systems for accurate assessment and effective
  control of fishing capacity (short-term agenda);

  Sub-component 1.3: Introducing new fisheries management schemes in target fisheries, segments, or
  communities to align fishing capacity and effort to sustainable catch levels, which is pursued in parallel with
  development and implementation of fisheries management plans (medium-term agenda); and

  Subcomponent 1.4: Strengthening the system of fisheries-related data collection, compilation and
  management, and dissemination and communication in a transparent manner (long-term agenda).

  Component 2: Reducing Illegal, Unreported and Unregulated Fishing (appraisal estimate US$3.02
  million, AF US$1.62 million, actual US$3.23 million): This component financed strengthening fisheries
  Monitoring, Control and Surveillance (MCS) systems by reducing Illegal, Unreported, and Unregulated (IUU)
  fishing activities that threatened the sustainable management of fish resources. The component was also to
  provide legal assistance aimed at strengthening the alignment of the national fisheries legislation with the
  United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS), particularly Article 73, whereby any foreign
  vessels and crews detained in the Exclusive Economic Zone was to be immediately released upon posting
  a reasonable bond, and the flag state of the vessel is immediately notified. Mauritania did not have this
  component as the fisheries surveillance program was already funded.

  Component 3: Increasing Contribution of the Fish Resources to the Local Economy (appraisal
  estimate US$9.18 million; AF US$4.03 million, actual US$14.01 million): This component was to
  increase the benefits derived from fish caught in the Exclusive Economic Zones (EEZs) of the countries in
  particular by investing in infrastructure and institutional capacity that enable improved handling of landed
  fish and reduction of postharvest losses.

  Component 4: Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation, and Regional Coordination
  (appraisal estimate US$6.40million, AF US$1.05 million, actual US$7.40 million): This component was
  to finance project implementation and regional coordination within the West Africa Regional Fisheries
  Program (WARFP), ensuring that regular monitoring and evaluation was conducted, and the results were
  fed back into decision making and project management.

  When the project received AF on January 5, 2017, the following activities were added to the project:

        Guinea: Financing of US$5 million was added to deepen institutional and regal reforms (on the
         national, regional, and communal level), build the physical and human capacity of local fishing
         communities to manage and monitor assigned fisheries areas and local businesses as well as
         further invest in surveillance capacities.




                                                                                                    Page 3 of 22
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    WARFP AF Guinea, Sierra Leone & Liberia (P126773)



        Liberia: Financing of US$1 million was added to advance existing management efforts for targeted
         fisheries, further build up the Community Management Associations (CMA) model and strengthen
         local monitoring and surveillance.
        Sierra Leone: Financing of US$4 million was added to support community-led fisheries
         management, regulatory and institutional reform, and improve fisheries monitoring.
        Regional level: AF was to enhance the coordination between the WARFP countries and support the
         utilization of IW-LEARN as a platform for sharing results and knowledge.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost: The project was estimated to cost US$40.05 million. Actual cost was US$36.62 million.

  Financing: The project was financed by two grants for US$12.0 million (of which US$10.9 million was
  disbursed) and US$10.0 million (US$9.8 million disbursed), and four grants by the Global Environment
  Facility (GEF): i) TF-19089 (US$7.0 million of which US$5.87 million disbursed); ii) TF- A3532 (US$1.0
  million, which fully disbursed); iii) TF-A3533 (US$4.0 million of which US$3.9 million disbursed); and iv) TF-
  A3530 (US$5.0 million of which US$4.9 million disbursed).

  Borrower Contribution: The Borrowers were to contribute US$1.05 million. According to the Bank team
  (April 20, 2023), all expected funding in Guinea materialized (US$0.5 million) and 60 percent of
  planned funding in Mauritania (US$600,000). Mauritania’s planned in-kind contribution of US$1 million did
  not materialize due to resource constraints at the Implementing Agency.

  Dates: The project received AF and was restructured five times:

        On January 5, 2017, the project received AF from the GEF for US$10.0 million to add Liberia and
           Sierra Leone to the project, acting as a bridge to Phase II for these two countries since they had
           been participating in WARFP Phase I Series of Projects (SOP)-A1 and were preparing their
           participation in SOP-A2. Also, interventions in Guinea, Liberia, and Sierra Leone were scaled up.
          On February 28, 2018, the project was restructured to extend the closing date for TF0A3532 for
           Liberia by 12 months from March 1, 2018, to March 1, 2019, due to a significant delay in
           implementation caused by elections and a government transition.
          On April 30, 2019, the project was restructured to i) change in components and cost, ii) change in
           Results Framework to modify the wording of several PDO and intermediate outcome indicators, iii)
           reallocate between disbursement categories and iv) change in disbursement estimates.
          On July 11, 2020, the project was restructured to i) extend the closing date by nine months from
           March 1, 2021, to December 31, 2021, to address the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic in Sierra
           Leone; ii) realign activities and the Results Framework with actual progress in collaboration and
           CMAs capacity.
          On August 28, 2020, the project was restructured to extend the closing date by 12 months for
           Guinea and Mauritania from December 31, 2020, to December 31, 2021, to mitigate the impacts of
           the COVID-19 pandemic on project implementation.
          On December 6, 2021, the project was restructured to extend the closing date for Sierra Leone and
           Mauritania by two months from December 31, 2021, to February 28, 2022, to ensure the completion
           of civil works, which had been delayed due to the COVID-19 pandemic.


                                                                                                   Page 4 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     WARFP AF Guinea, Sierra Leone & Liberia (P126773)




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Regional/Sector Context: Ocean waters off the coast of West Africa offer some of the world's richest
fishing grounds, but most commercially important fish stocks were already fully exploited or overexploited.
At appraisal, more than 1.6 million tons of fish were legally captured in West African waters yearly, with an
estimated wholesale value of US$2.5 billion. As in many other developing coastal and island nations, weak
fisheries governance and management contributed to overcapacity, Illegal, Unreported, and Unregulated
(IUU) fishing, dissipation of resource rent, and depletion of fish resources.

Previous Bank experience: A healthy ocean and sustainable fisheries sector were key for achieving the
Bank’s strategic goals of ending extreme poverty within a generation and boosting shared prosperity in a
sustainable manner in coastal and island client countries. Ocean waters off West Africa offered some of the
richest fishing grounds in the world. In 2009, to ensure the productivity of this resource, the Bank approved
a nine-country, multi-phase series of projects (SOPs), the West Africa Regional Fisheries Program
(WARFP). The development objective of the multi-phase WARFP, collectively, was to sustainably increase
the overall wealth generated and captured by West African countries through better management of coastal
fisheries. Implementation began in 2010 with Cabo Verde, Liberia, Senegal, and Sierra Leone as the first
group of countries in the Program. Subsequently, Guinea-Bissau and Ghana joined the Program in 2011
and 2012. Mauritania and Guinea were the 7th and 8th countries, respectively, joining this program. Given
the absence of physical borders in the ocean scape, improved governance and management in one
country's waters could potentially result in undesired practices and outcomes in the less-regulated waters of
neighboring countries. Therefore, complete regional coverage was needed to achieve the full benefit of the
interventions at the regional level. The Bank had a deep ongoing engagement in the region, which allowed
the Bank to bring locally-adapted best practices to the project and replicate the results achieved under the
earlier investments.

Alignment with the Bank’s Strategy: The objectives of the project were in line with the Bank’s most recent
Country Partnership Framework (CPF) (FY18-23) for Guinea, which focused on boosting agricultural
productivity and economic growth, including fisheries through climate-smart practices, improving access to
markets and the business environment of markets towns, and promoting economic diversification. The
project's objectives also aligned with the Bank’s most recent CPF for Liberia (FY19-24), which aims to
enhance fishery value chains to increase productivity and output in the fishery sector. Furthermore, the
project's objectives aligned with the Bank’s most recent CPF for Mauritania (FY18-23), which aims to
increase the local share of production value in the fishery sector. Finally, the project's objectives were also
in line with the Bank’s most recent CPF for Sierra Leone (FY21-26), which aims to increase revenue from
fish resources and boost productivity in the fishery sector to diversify the economy.

The project's objectives also supported the Bank’s engagement in the region as stated in the “Western &
Central Africa Region Priorities 2021-2025,” which aims to create opportunities for growth and poverty
reduction by boosting agricultural productivity and value chains. Also, the Bank’s Blue Economy
Development Framework recognizes the significant potential of the marine and freshwater ecosystem’s
contribution to achieving the SDGs and delivering smart, sustainable, and inclusive growth globally. The



                                                                                                    Page 5 of 22
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      WARFP AF Guinea, Sierra Leone & Liberia (P126773)



               project also supported the updated (2020) Africa Regional Integration and Cooperation Strategy for the
               FY2023 period, which noted the need for the management of shared natural resources.

               Taking everything together, the relevance of the objective was High.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Strengthen governance of targeted fisheries

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change: The project’s theory of change assumed that project activities such as introducing new
                             fisheries management schemes, including community-based schemes, strengthening the vessel registration
                             system, and data collection, compilation, and dissemination, as well as developing the legal and operational
                             policy foundation and introducing rules of resource use were to result in outputs such as new fisheries
                             management schemes being introduced, vessel registration system strengthening as well as data collection,
                             compilation and dissemination and a legal and operational policy foundation being developed. These outputs
                             were to result in the outcome of strengthened governance of targeted fisheries. The project assumed that
                             introducing rules of resource use and management were to result in reduced pressure on fish resources. The
                             theory of change and how project activities were to lead to outputs and outcomes was adequate and logical.

                             The project made the following assumptions for all three objectives: i) allocation of secure fishing rights will
                             incentivize responsible fishing practices; ii) regional harmonization of fisheries data and regulation will reduce
                             IUU fishing and support conservation of stocks; and iii) interventions in the post-harvest sector potentially
                             influence behavior in the harvest sector.

                             According to the Bank team (May 30, 2023), even though all three objectives were relevant across the four
                             countries, not all PDO and intermediate indicators applied to all countries since countries were at different
                             stages in terms of readiness and joined different activities for different periods.

                             Fisheries Policy and Strategic Framework

                                        In Guinea, even though there was no indicator to measure the strengthened policy aspects, the ICR
                                         notes that the project supported the new Fisheries Strategy and Investment Plan (along with
                                         PROBLUE funding), which was validated in July 2022, complemented by institutional reform of the
                                         Ministry of Fisheries, Aquaculture, and Maritime Economy (MPAEM). The MPAEM now supports
                                         developing and evaluating annual fisheries management plans based on scientific advice and
                                         supervision by equipped MPAEM departments at both central and decentralized levels.

                                                                                                                                 Page 6 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   WARFP AF Guinea, Sierra Leone & Liberia (P126773)




     In Mauritania, the Project supported the finalization and evaluation of the implementation of the
      previous sector strategy (2015-19) and the preparation of the new strategy for managing and
      sustainable and integrated development of maritime fisheries for 2020-2024. The 2015-19 Strategy
      introduced ambitious reforms in fisheries management, moving from the previous capacity-centered
      approach to a focus on sustainable catch limits (fishing quotas), with the 2020-24 Strategy being in
      continuation of 2015-19. The project achieved the target of the Ministry of Fisheries submitting a
      proposal for institutional and functional reform to the cabinet, which was then implemented in law in
      July 2015 (IR1.3). The target of revised regulations integrating i) access management and ii) securing
      fishing rights was also achieved (IR1.4).
     In Liberia, targeted support has improved key elements of the institutional arrangements governing
      fisheries. Amendments to the legal text of the National Fisheries and Aquaculture Act enabled an
      institutional reform process, which established the National Fishery and Aquaculture Authority as an
      autonomous agency with a dedicated budget and authority to design the fisheries management
      framework
     In Sierra Leone, the target of appropriate regulations integrating i) access management and ii)
      securing fishing rights being submitted was achieved. The project supported the preparation and
      submission of the Fisheries and Aquaculture Act of 2018, Fisheries and Aquaculture Regulations of
      2019, FAO Ports States measures, and the National Plan of Action for IUU fishing.
     At the regional level, a new Strategic Plan 2019-23 for Sub-Regional Fisheries Commission (CSRP)
      activities was developed. The CSRP supported countries in their effort to reform national fisheries
      policies and regulatory and institutional frameworks by mobilizing high-level expertise and facilitating
      knowledge exchange through the organization of study tours, etc.

Fisheries Management Plans

     In Guinea, a fishery management plan was developed, achieving the target of one plan being
      developed. However, the plan could not be validated during the last quarter of 2021 due to the political
      situation.
     In Liberia, the target of one fishery management plan being developed was not achieved. The project
      delivered a draft national shrimp fishery management plan based on a shrimp fishery stock
      assessment. The draft management plan had been shared but not approved at project closing.
     In Mauritania, two fishery management plans (octopus and meagre) were developed, not achieving
      the original target of three plans but exceeding the revised target of one plan. The indicator was
      revised in April 2019 as the focus changed to octopus fisheries. The target value was reduced from 3
      to 1, focusing only on a revised octopus plan. The ICR notes that not all implementation measures of
      these two plans have been enforced yet by regulatory instruments; the level of implementation of the
      management plans is still limited.
     In Sierra Leone, two fishery management plans were developed, achieving the target of two plans
      being developed. Also, a Joint Monitoring Committee (JMC) operational plan was developed,
      achieving the target of developing such a plan.

Strengthen vehicle registration system:

     In Guinea, 84 percent of fishing vessels were registered, not achieving the target of 100 percent. The
      outcome was assessed by the number of registered vessels divided by the number of vessels
      surveyed.


                                                                                                 Page 7 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   WARFP AF Guinea, Sierra Leone & Liberia (P126773)




      In Mauritania, 66 percent of fishing vessels were registered, not achieving the target of 100
       percent. The indicator was defined as a measure of the country's preparedness for controlling fishing
       efforts in each segment; it was assessed by the number of registered vessels divided by the number
       of vessels identified in the census.

Strengthen Fisheries Management Schemes (PDO#2)

      In Guinea, seven secure fishing rights in the small-scale segment in a participatory, transparent, and
       scientific manner were allocated, exceeding the target of three fishing rights (PDO#2). A target value
       of 3 was established based on a point system: one point for the legal establishment of a community
       association, one point for the adoption of a co-management plan, and one point for the
       implementation of key measures of the plan relating to the management of fishing efforts such as the
       number of vessels, area closure, biological rest, and fishing gear.
      In Liberia, the target of allocating one secure fishing right in the small-scale segment in a
       participatory, transparent, and scientific manner was not achieved.
      In Mauritania, the target of three individual quotas being distributed to all segments in a participatory,
       transparent, and scientific manner was not achieved. The publication of the criteria and data based on
       which quotas are being allocated is still lacking. In the artisanal segment, secure fishing rights through
       specialized individual licenses could not be accomplished due to the incomplete registration of all
       canoes in the small-scale segment.
      In Sierra Leone, the target for allocation of secure fishing rights was dropped due to limited capacity
       at the community level, and the artisanal segment remains open access.

Strengthened data collection, analysis, and dissemination (PDO#1)

      In Guinea, 83 percent of fisheries data was published regularly and made publicly accessible,
       achieving the target of 83 percent. The indicator was designed as a measure of governance
       improvement with respect to transparency. It was based on six locally adapted variables i) a list of
       valid vessel licenses in the industrial segment (monthly); ii) a list of artisanal fishing boats (annually);
       iii) a list of infractions in the industrial segment (monthly); iv) fees from the licenses (every trimester);
       v) fees collected under fishing agreements (annually), and vi) fees from infractions (annually). Only
       variable (v) on fees collected on fishing agreements is not fulfilled because no fisheries agreement
       has entered into force.
      In Liberia, despite no explicit indicator, the project supported information recording, digitalization, and
       management, particularly of the industrial trawlers’ observer reports.
      In Mauritania, 100 percent of fisheries data was published regularly and made publicly accessible,
       exceeding the target of 83 percent.
      In Sierra Leone, Sierra Leone has cumulatively disclosed 75 percent of data on key variables and
       made it publicly accessible, not achieving the target of 100 percent. The ICR notes (page 43),
       however, that the data on the key variables are not regularly published.

All the countries made substantial progress in strengthening the policy framework and planning for fisheries
management and improved data collection, analysis, and dissemination. There were moderate shortcomings
in achieving the targets for vessel registrations and the allocation of secure fishing rights.




                                                                                                      Page 8 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   WARFP AF Guinea, Sierra Leone & Liberia (P126773)



Overall, the achievement of the objective of 'strengthened governance of targeted fisheries' is Substantial,
with moderate shortcomings.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Strengthen management of targeted fisheries

Rationale
Theory of Change: The project’s theory of change assumed that project activities such as developing and
implementing strategies for monitoring, controlling, and surveilling for IUUs as well as activities already stated
under the first objective to create an enabling environment for reducing IUU fishing, were to result in outputs
such as strategies for monitoring, controlling and surveilling for IUUs being developed, and an enabling
environment for reducing illegal, unreported, and unregulated fishing being created. These outputs were to
result in the outcome of strengthened management of targeted fisheries. The project assumed that enforcing
resource use and management rules would reduce pressure on fish resources. The theory of change and
how project activities were to lead to outputs and outcomes was adequate and logical.

Surveillance (PDO#4):

      In Guinea, the number of hours that the satellite-based surveillance system for industrial fishing
       vessels by the national fisheries surveillance agency was functional increased from eight hours in
       2015 to 24 hours per day in 2021, achieving the target of being functional 24 hours. The days per year
       where surveillance patrol was carried out increased from 80 days in 2015 to 122 days in 2021, not
       achieving the target of 200 days. 184 days per year, surveillance of patrol of artisanal fishing boats
       was carried out, exceeding the target of 96 days. Also, the percentage of fishing vessels inspected by
       the national fisheries surveillance agency for compliance with national regulations increased from 25
       percent in 2015 to 85 percent in 2021, exceeding the target of 80 percent.
      In Sierra Leone, all licensed industrial fishing vessels were installed with functional VMS and
       observers on board, achieving the target of 100 percent. The number of days per year where
       surveillance patrol was carried out decreased from 80 days in 2017 to 14 days in 2022 due to damage
       to the vessel propellers and partly due to a failure to appoint vessel officers and crew. As a result, the
       target of 240 days was not achieved. Also, the percentage of fishing vessels inspected by the national
       fisheries surveillance agency for compliance with national regulations increased from 35 percent in
       2017 to 40 percent in 2022, not achieving the target of 70 percent.

Oversight (PDO#3):

      In Guinea, the number of fishing vessels operating in the exclusive economic zones did not exceed
       the ceiling established for each segment, thus achieving the target of not doing so. Each country's
       target ceiling was set individually based on the estimated capacity at appraisal. In Guinea, the ceiling
       values established were: i) 10,000 canoes in the artisanal segment and ii) 85 vessels in the industrial


                                                                                                    Page 9 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   WARFP AF Guinea, Sierra Leone & Liberia (P126773)



       segment (equal to the number of licenses). A target for the coastal segment was added in April 2019
       to account for the growing number of advanced artisanal canoes equipped with an engine (Pêche
       Artisanale Avancée, PAA). The ceiling for the PAA segment was set at 150 boats. The outcome in the
       artisanal segment was assessed based on the number of registered vessels in year 5. At closing,
       8,862 artisanal canoes were operating in the EEZ, of which 7,011 were registered and 1,851 were
       non-registerable dugout canoes. The number of registered advanced artisanal canoes (PAA) was 70.
       The outcome in the industrial segment was inferred from the number of fishing licenses in annual
       equivalence.
      In Mauritania, the number of fishing vessels operating in the exclusive economic zones exceeds the
       ceiling established for each segment. In Mauritania, the ceiling values established were: i) 7,661
       canoes in the artisanal segment, ii) 261 boats in the coastal segment, and iii) 245 vessels in the
       industrial segment (equal to the number of licenses). The artisanal and coastal segment outcome was
       assessed based on the number of registered boats and the unknown dormant capacity (canoes and
       boats inactive for 30 days or more). According to the December 2019 IMROP (Mauritanian Insitute for
       Oceanographic Research and Fisheries) survey, the canoe fleet consisted of 4,014 active and 3,430
       inactive canoes for 7,444 canoes. Meanwhile, the Framework Survey Report of July 2020 counted
       5,253 active canoes and 2,317 inactive for 7,570 canoes. In either case, the number of canoes
       operating in the EEZ was under the ceiling established. However, there were 257 active and 130
       inactive boats in the coastal segment, according to the December 2019 IMROP survey, while the
       Framework Survey Report of July 2020 counted 233 active canoes and 200 inactive. In either case,
       the number of boats operating in the EEZ was above the established ceiling. The outcome in the
       industrial segment was inferred from the number of fishing licenses in annual equivalence, i.e., 245
       licenses issued in 2020 and equal to the ceiling established. Overall, the number of vessels operating
       in the EEZ did not exceed the ceiling in two out of three segments.
      In Sierra Leone, the target of fishing vessels operating in the exclusive economic zones not
       exceeding the ceiling established for each segment was achieved. In Sierra Leone, the baseline in
       2017 was 114 fishing vessels in the industrial segment. According to the latest list of licensed vessels
       from September 2021 published on the Ministry’s website, a total of 92 vessels were operating in the
       EEZ of which 78 were fishing vessels, 11 supply vessels, and three carriers. According to the ICR (p.
       71), no official target for Sierra Leone was added to project documents, but the PMU tracked the
       indicator.

The targets for enhancing surveillance were met in Guinea, but there were shortcomings in Sierra Leone.
There were no indicators for Mauritania and Liberia. Due to the technological equipment and operational
support for surveillance activities, several fishing vessels operating in the EEZs did not exceed the ceiling
established based on sustainable levels of harvest and associated fishing capacity in Guinea, Mauritania
(except for the coastal segment), and Sierra Leone, thereby achieving the targets. In the artisanal segment,
while certain management aspects were improved, fisheries as a whole remain open to access throughout
the region. The ICR did not provide any information on Liberia on this PDO aspect.

Overall, the achievement of the objective of 'strengthened management of targeted fisheries' was Substantial
with moderate shortcomings.



Rating
Substantial


                                                                                                 Page 10 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   WARFP AF Guinea, Sierra Leone & Liberia (P126773)




OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
Improve handling of landed catch at selected sites

Rationale
Theory of Change: The project’s theory of change assumed that project activities such as investing in
physical infrastructure to facilitate proper fish handling related to the landing platform, fencing, sanitation,
storage, and market access were to result in outputs such as physical infrastructure to facilitate proper fish
handling being invested in. This output was to result in the outcome of strengthened handling of landed catch
at selected sites. The project assumed that investments in the post-harvest subsector in the fisheries
industries would influence the behavior in the harvest sector. The theory of change and how project activities
were to lead to outputs and outcomes was adequate and logical.

Outputs:

      In Guinea and Liberia, one integrated fish handling site was operational, achieving the target of one
       site being operational in each country. In Guinea, “operational” was defined as i) ice is available and
       accessible; ii) water and electricity are available; iii) waste is properly managed; iv) user fees are
       collected in a transparent manner; and v) a landing dock is functional. In Liberia, “operational” was
       defined as ice being available and accessible.
      In Mauritania, the target of one integrated fish handling site being operational was not achieved.
      In Sierra Leone, the target of 15 smoke overs being installed was not achieved.

Improved handling of landed catch (PDO#5):

      In Guinea, 58 metric tons of all landed fish were processed according to improved hygiene conditions,
       achieving the revised target of 30 metric tons. The indicator was revised in April 2019 to track changes
       in marketable volumes as measured by the total actual volume of processing capacity in accordance
       with improved hygiene conditions. The revised target with a value of 30 metric tons was not clearly
       defined. However, the ICR (p. 50) defined it as a daily value of 30 tons of smoking capacity, the
       primary type of processing at Koukoudé. Also, the original target was measured in “percentage,”
       making an assessment of the achievement of the original target (70 percent) impossible
      In Liberia, the ICR notes that the capacity at the Robertsport landing cluster has been strengthened.
       Equipped with a proper ice machine, cold storage, weighing scales, and energy-efficient smoking
       ovens, the Robertsport landing cluster became fully functional under this project, and operational
       budget support ensured daily site management. However, a CMA site management plan could not be
       completed as planned, partly due to weak support from the National Fisheries and Aquaculture
       Authority (NaFAA), without which operational and financial management of the site lacks
       sustainability.
      In Mauritania, 30 metric tons of all landed fish were processed according to improved hygiene
       conditions, achieving the revised target. The target of this indicator was also revised in April 2019, and
       the target of 30 metric tons was not clearly defined, as stated above for Guinea. According to the Bank
       team (May 30, 2023), increased processing capacity was achieved through infrastructure
       improvements at the existing fish landing site (1st tranche of rehabilitation work). However, the output
       of one integrated site with a wastewater treatment plant built adjacent to the existing site (2nd tranche
       of rehabilitation work) could not be completed before the project closing.

                                                                                                  Page 11 of 22
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                WARFP AF Guinea, Sierra Leone & Liberia (P126773)




                                  In Sierra Leone, the ICR notes that the progress towards finalizing the cluster of landing sites at
                                    Konakridee stalled. Still, post-project implementation arrangements have been made with a partner
                                    donor agency to finalize the physical investments needed, including cool chain facilities, smoking
                                    ovens, water supply, and sanitary facilities. The ICR notes that at the time of the ICR, construction is
                                    nearly complete, and it is expected that the activities will contribute to post-harvest loss reduction and
                                    enable fishers to sell their products at higher prices.

                            Beneficiaries (PDO#6) - (for the whole project)

                                  In Guinea, 52,304 people benefitted from the project, not achieving the original target of 190,000
                                   beneficiaries and exceeding the revised target of 32,000 beneficiaries. 30 percent of the beneficiaries
                                   were female, not achieving the original target of 66 percent and exceeding the revised target of nine
                                   percent. The indicator was revised in April 2019 to include only the direct beneficiaries that the PIU
                                   could trace and verify, and the target was adjusted to 32,000 beneficiaries, of which 9 percent would
                                   be women. The revised target included beneficiaries at the administration level, co-management sites
                                   (fishermen, processors, wholesalers, etc.), and registered boats (owners and fishermen).
                                  In Mauritania, 54,904 people benefitted from the project, not achieving the original target of 255,000
                                   beneficiaries and exceeding the revised target of 50,000. Six percent of the beneficiaries were female,
                                   not achieving the target of 30 percent.

                            Based on the evidence provided, the project made progress towards improved handling of landed catch in
                            Guinea and Mauritania, even though the ICR notes that the revised targets were not clearly defined. There is
                            partial evidence of increased processing capacity from infrastructure investments in Liberia and Sierra
                            Leone. There is also a lack of comprehensive data on beneficiaries, including in the post-harvest sector for
                            these countries. Overall, the achievement of the objective of 'improved handlig of landed catch in selected
                            sites' is assessed to be Modest.



                            Rating
                            Modest


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            While the project made progress on all aspects of the PDO, there were some shortcomings as detailed
                            above. Also, there was partial evidence on certain indicators for some countries even if the PDO aspects was
                            applicable e.g. improved handling of landed catch, project beneficiaries, etc. The achievement of the first two
                            objectives was Substantial while achievement of the third objective was Modest. The overall efficacy is rated
                            as Substantial with moderate shortcomings.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating


                                                                                                                                Page 12 of 22
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      WARFP AF Guinea, Sierra Leone & Liberia (P126773)



  Substantial



5. Efficiency
Economic efficiency:

The PAD (p. 23) conducted an Economic analysis to evaluate the expected benefits mainly resulting from the
activities in Component 1 in Mauritania and Guinea. The analysis developed quantitative bioeconomic models.
Also, in both countries, different scenarios of fishing efforts were developed based on expected situations with
and without project interventions, where it was assumed that the project was to reduce the fishing effort relative
to the levels without the project. The bioeconomic models were used to relate the assumed fishing effort levels
to the expected fish population and catch levels. At the same time, expected lower fishing effort levels due to
project interventions implied lower fishing costs. Cost reduction was also estimated based on available
information. The simulated catch levels were used to calculate expected fishing revenue, from which, combined
with estimated fishing cost, obtained the expected net revenue from fishing.

The assessment was applied to the octopus fishery in Mauritania and the aggregate fishery (of all species) in
Guinea. Using a discount rate of 20 percent, the analysis calculated cumulative net revenue of US$201 million in
Mauritania and US$23.3 million in Guinea during the initial five years. The PAD (p. 23) stated that the analysis
results for Mauritania were potentially overestimated due to restrictive model assumptions and a lack of
reliable cost data. However, the analysis did not include potential benefits from other fisheries or other project
components, which was likely to result in an underestimation of the analysis. Also, the benefits for Guinea
were likely to be underestimated since potential benefits from other project components were not included in the
analysis. Taking everything together, these analyses indicate that the project was a worthwhile investment.
When the project received AF in 2017, the Bank team did not update the economic analysis conducted at
appraisal.

The ICR (p. 27) reviewed the assumptions the analysis in the PAD made and found that the basic premises of
the analysis were not sufficiently met to allow for a meaningful ex-post analysis. The ICR stated that without
careful analysis of the causal direction in the dynamic interaction between fishing effort, harvest, and stock size,
it would be premature to conduct an economic analysis to assess how project activities impacted catch and
revenue levels without first assessing that those improved as a result of abundance rather than
overexploitation.

According to the ICR (p. 26), the activities under components 1 and 2 through an increase in public revenues
due to: i) fishing licenses, ii) fines levied for illegal fishing activities, and iii) revenues associated with the
successful reduction of illegal fishing such as through partnership agreements. In Guinea, fees for fishing
increased from US$5 million in 2016 to US$10 million in 2018. Almost 75 percent of these fees are related to
fishing licenses and permits alone. This increase is compared favorably with an overall project investment in this
area of US$5 million.

Also, in Sierra Leone, activities under component 2 increased revenues collected by 25 percent from US$8
million in 2017 to US$11 million in 2019. Finally, Mauritania was able to secure the continuation of the EU
Sustainable Partnership Agreement due to project activities.

Operational efficiency:


                                                                                                      Page 13 of 22
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      WARFP AF Guinea, Sierra Leone & Liberia (P126773)



The project experienced several implementation delays as a result of procurement and financial management
issues as well as a high staff turnover within the Bank (eight different Task Team Leaders throughout
implementation) and locally (as a result of elections and government transition in Liberia) as well as lack of
engagement by different PIUs. The project was extended by a total of 26 months.

Given the lack of robust economic analysis and implementation delays, the overall Efficiency is rated as Modest.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     0
 Appraisal                                                 0
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     0
 ICR Estimate                                              0
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of the objective was High given the alignment of the PDO with the Bank’s CPFs for Mauritania,
Liberia, Sierra Leone, and Guinea, as well as "Western and Central African Regional Priorities 2021-2025". The
project also built on the ongoing engagement in the Region. The efficacy of two objectives was rated as
Substantial and one as Modest. The overall Efficacy was Substantial with moderate shortcomings. The
Efficiency rating was Modest. Taking everything together, the project’s overall outcome rating is Moderately
Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The risks to development outcomes can be classified into the following categories:

Political stability and government commitment: Countries in the region are politically fragile and
vulnerable to unrest. Frequently changing governments and priorities as well as power vacuums, can
negatively impact the outcomes achieved under the project. Also, there is a co-dependence among coastal
countries in this sector, with the success of one country greatly depending on the commitment of neighboring

                                                                                                   Page 14 of 22
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      WARFP AF Guinea, Sierra Leone & Liberia (P126773)



countries. According to the ICR (p. 39) states need to make continued efforts to empower communities to
manage well-defined areas and fisheries. As a result, political stability and government commitment is
critical for ensuring the sustainability of project outcomes.

Financing: The project’s outcomes most at risk are those requiring the highest levels of financing. For
example, according to the ICR (p. 39) ongoing data collection and annual research campaigns require large
investments. Also, to improve vessel registration and licensing systems, sufficient resources for updating and
enforcing them will be needed. Finally, while certain regional activities such as the regional dashboard are
currently being funded by the EU there will be a need to identify more long-term funding. However, given the
tight fiscal space all the countries in the region are facing, this will be challenging.

Technical capacity: The project was able to strengthen the governments’ capacity for fisheries
management and governance as a result of various project activities such as adopting new or revised legal
and regulatory instruments, as well as developing and implementing new management plans. However,
frequent replacement of staff and the need for continuous training of staff at fisheries monitoring centers and
surveillance operations will pose a risk to capacity built if there is lack of financing of training activities.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  According to the ICR (p. 34) the project was based on a diagnostic of the development challenges and
  priorities of the region. Also, according to the PAD (p. 14) the project was built on lessons learned from
  several national and regional projects. Some of the key lessons considered included the following: i) need
  for an effective management system of access to fisheries resources; ii) need for sequencing of project
  activities to achieve desired results is important in case of complex design; iii) need to mobilize the
  appropriate level of expertise to adequately support fisheries governance reform processes; and iv) need
  to set up a well-functioning M&E system. The project design built on prior analytical work such as the
  2014 study on "Transitioning towards Inclusive Green Growth in Mauritania" and the 2008 World Bank
  report, "The Main Results and Recommendations for the Fisheries Sector".

  According to the PAD (p. 22) the Bank team identified relevant risks and rated “institutional capacity for
  implementation and sustainability” and “fiduciary” risks High. When the project was approved, project
  readiness was advanced and operational risks to safeguards, procurement, and Financial Management
  were all adequately mitigated. All legal covenants and requirements for effectiveness were met, and
  effectiveness was declared three months after Board approval.

  The Bank team did not identify the risk of cancelling the next phase of the WARFP. According to the ICR
  (p. 33) this decision resulted in a large disappointment especially in Liberia and Sierra Leone which
  affected collaboration between the PCUs and the Bank team and also had a negative impact on the
  regional momentum and the role of the RCU in steering regional dialogue and harmonization.

  The Results Framework had some shortcomings (see section 9a for more details). Also, the
  implementation arrangements for the performance-based management approach were too complex
  hampering its effectiveness. Also, according to the ICR (p. 32) capacity control of the small-scale
  segment was too ambitious and none of the countries were able to implement segment-wide capacity

                                                                                                     Page 15 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     WARFP AF Guinea, Sierra Leone & Liberia (P126773)



  control of the artisanal fleet as a result of a lack of local engagement due to misaligned incentives
  (Mauritania), incomplete registration of canoes (Guinea and Mauritania) and a lack of political will (Sierra
  Leone). As a result, the segment remained open access and is in many cases the main culprit in terms of
  overfishing.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 According to the ICR (p. 33) the Bank team conducted proactive supervision adapted to the needs of each
 country. Up to the Mid-Term Review (MTR) in 2018 candid Bank reporting showed that the project
 experienced slow implementation progress, low disbursement levels, poor project coordination, weak
 financial management, and lengthy procurement procedures. The Bank addressed these issues by
 refocusing the scope of activities. For example, in Mauritania the project started to only focus on octopus
 and in Guinea to focus on the artisanal sector. These measures resulted in higher project efficiency. The
 ICR (p. 33) stated that the project could have benefitted from more realistic ratings for development
 objective and implementation progress, especially for Sierra Leone.

 According to the ICR (p. 33) the project experienced a high turnover of Task Team Leaders (TTLs) with a
 total of eight TTLs throughout implementation.

 The Bank team restructured the project five times and obtained AF to add Liberia and Sierra Leone to the
 project as well as increase the scope of project interventions.

 The ICR (p. 33) stated that transition arrangements were adequate for infrastructure investments, but
 project activities related to budget and operational support such as for surveillance patrols in Sierra Leone
 lacked transition arrangements to local and financial resources to ensure continuity. In Guinea, the Bank
 team was able to obtain PROBLUE funding in 2020 to follow-up with key activities and sustain project
 outcomes. In Liberia, the Bank is preparing a follow-on project to build on the outcomes achieved under
 this project. However, according to the ICR (p. 38) the countries were disappointed by the Bank’s decision
 to abandon the programmatic approach, which in some cases undercut planned activities. Especially, in
 Sierra Leone the decision deteriorated the relationship between the Bank and the government and
 impacted Bank supervision.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

                                                                                                    Page 16 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     WARFP AF Guinea, Sierra Leone & Liberia (P126773)




a. M&E Design
 The objective of the project was specified. Also, the theory of change and how key activities and outputs
 were to lead to the intended outcomes was sound and reflected in the Results Framework. PDO indicator
 #5, relating to post-harvest loss, was revised due to a lack of baseline data and capacity to practically
 implement weighting of landed catch and sales. The intermediate outcome indicators were inadequate to
 measure the implementation progress of certain activities including alternative livelihoods activities in
 Guinea (and later in Sierra Leone), stocks assessment, and some regional activities conducted by the
 CSRP.

 According to the ICR (p. 30), a modality with disbursement-linked indicators (DLIs) was designed to
 motivate performance and management of results. Due to the DLI constraints in the Financing Agreements,
 which required third-party audit reports accompanied by a detailed review of expenditures incurred under
 the Eligible Expenditure Program, the DLI modality needed early restructuring. This resulted in a long delay
 for the first-year disbursement and led to replacing the DLI modality with a more straightforward
 Performance Based Contract.

 An assessment of M&E capacity in Guinea and Mauritania was conducted during project preparation. The
 assessment showed weak capacity for conducting monitoring activities due to a lack of experience and
 administrative infrastructure. Three key challenges were identified: i) lack of validation of field-level data; ii)
 incomplete datasets and inconsistent reporting; iii) under-utilization of data in decision-making and policy
 formulation. The project addressed this by providing capacity-strengthening activities.

 According to the PAD (p. 19), M&E at the regional level was to be performed by the CSRP, which was also
 responsible for coordinating M&E activities in the two countries with the respective fisheries ministries and
 assisted by the PIUs. The CSRP was also to provide technical backstopping to the countries on M&E,
 apply the data quality assurance mechanism already in place for other WARFP countries, conduct
 data collection, and foster cross-country learning. The RCU was responsible for coordinating in-country
 M&E activities with respective fisheries ministries.



b. M&E Implementation
  The project’s Results Framework was revised four times during project restructuring to modify the
  wording of several PDO and intermediate outcome indicators, to add a few outcome targets for Guinea,
  Liberia, and Sierra Leone. In April 2019, the Results Framework was revised to measure the direct
  beneficiaries that could be directly tracked and verified, as the original indicator included co-beneficiary
  livelihoods throughout the value chain. The revised target included beneficiaries at the administration
  level, co-management sites (fishermen, processors, wholesalers, etc.), and registered boats (owners and
  fishermen). However, when the project received AF in 2018, outcome targets were limited to specific
  indicators. However, even if not all indicators were applicable for all countries, given that countries were
  at different stages of readiness, there was still a lack of context-specific indicators to measure all the
  PDO aspects. The beneficiaries data was reported only for two out of the four countries.

  According to the ICR (p. 35), countries submitted semi-annual and annual reports consolidated into
  project-level progress reports. Performance-Based Contracts data collected by countries was reviewed




                                                                                                         Page 17 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     WARFP AF Guinea, Sierra Leone & Liberia (P126773)



  by a third-party verifier, which offered an additional layer of transparency and validation of the M&E data
  collected.

  According to the Bank team (April 21, 2023), national fisheries agencies produced much of the M&E data
  needed to report on project indicators and recorded them as official statistics for each participating
  country. Annual third-party verification reports for Performance-Based Contracts added an additional
  layer of validation of the M&E data collected to track implementation progress.



c. M&E Utilization
  According to the ICR (p. 35), M&E data was routinely used to inform project management and decision-
  making. Also, the Results Framework identified key implementation challenges, such as reaching the
  artisanal fleet segment in connection with vessel registration or completing investments at landing sites.
  In addition, the project’s M&E activities strengthened the national capacity for M&E and informed
  national decision-making. Also, the project introduced new transparency standards. According to the
  ICR (p. 36), vessel registries and sector revenues were published in the press and online in Guinea and
  Mauritania, data that was never published before.

  The Bank team also stated that M&E sustainability is likely post-project closing for two main
  reasons. First, the indicators were official government statistics collected, compiled, and published by
  the ministries/agencies overseeing fisheries. To that extent, the project did rely on national systems,
  with the PIUs accessing and reporting (subsets of) official data. Second, the project sought
  to support increased access and transparency on information, culminating with Mauritania joining the
  Fisheries Transparency Initiative (FiTI) during project time and Guinea being in the process of joining.

  Given shortcomings in M&E in terms of lack of context-specific outcome and intermediate outcome
  indicators for adequate reporting on all aspects of the PDO for all countries and lack of adequate
  integration of country-level indicators/targets during implementation/AF, the overall M&E quality rating is
  Modest.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as category B and triggered the Bank’s safeguard policies OP/BP 4.01
   (Environmental Assessment), OP/BP 4.04 (Natural Habitats), OP/BP 4.11 (Physical Cultural Resources),
   OP/BP 4.12 (Involuntary Resettlement), and OP10.00, paragraph 12 related to the project in situations of
   urgent need of assistance or capacity constraints (which was applied to Guinea).

   The ICR (p. 36) stated that the project prepared Environmental and Social Management Frameworks
   (ESMFs) to assess the Environmental and Social (E&S) risks and identify measures to address these risks.
   Also, the project developed Resettlement Policy Frameworks (RPFs) and Resettlement Action Plans

                                                                                                    Page 18 of 22
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    WARFP AF Guinea, Sierra Leone & Liberia (P126773)



  (RAPs), which complied with the Bank’s policies and the respective countries’ regulations. Even though the
  project did not include any activities that affected critical natural habitats, the project conducted E&S
  assessments and measures to protect, maintain, and rehabilitate natural habitats. Also, even though project
  activities did not affect critical physical and cultural resources, the project conducted E&S assessments and
  measures to protect, maintain, and rehabilitate these resources. In each project country, there was at least
  one E&S safeguard specialist.

  According to the ICR (p. 36), the project complied with the triggered safeguard policies throughout
  implementation and was consistently rated Satisfactory. However, the operations portal showed that the
  consistent Safeguard rating was Moderately Satisfactory.




b. Fiduciary Compliance


  Financial Management and Procurement:

  Overall, the project remained in compliance with fiduciary requirements throughout implementation. Over
  the lifetime of the project, both financial management and procurement were rated Moderately Satisfactory.
  The safeguards and fiduciary compliance by country are discussed below.

  Guinea:

        Financial Management was Satisfactory, and no significant shortcomings were noted.
        Procurement performance was Satisfactory, and the project's contracting processes were
         conducted in an overall satisfactory manner. The Procurement Plan (PPM) and STEP system were
         regularly updated and detailed planning for the implementation of the latest activities exists.

  Mauritania:

        Financial Management was Satisfactory throughout implementation. However, the project
         experienced an issue with some works delivered after the closing date of February 28, 2022, and
         the withdrawal application related to these expenses (US$ 466,135.25) which were considered
         ineligible for payment under the financing was deleted. As a result, there was no ineligible
         expenses at the project’s closing date.
        Procurement was Moderately Satisfactory. The project faced several procurement related
         challenges including awarding of some contracts was subject to significant delays in relation to the
         deadlines planned in the project's procurement plan. Also, difficulties were encountered in the
         application of archiving procurement documents and the dual procedure of the World Bank and the
         Public Procurement Code, which new reforms resulted in confusion and conflicts in the roles of
         the different actors in the procurement cycle. The Bank team addressed these issues by putting in




                                                                                                 Page 19 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     WARFP AF Guinea, Sierra Leone & Liberia (P126773)



           place a rigorous monitoring system for the execution of contracts, and a system of archiving
           procurement documents.

   Sierra Leone:

          Financial Management was Satisfactory throughout implementation.
          Procurement was Moderately Satisfactory. Sierra Leone portfolio had five procurement activities
           planned during the entire project life, only two activity contracts were signed, and one activity was
           completed. Two were still under implementation based on the information available in STEP at the
           time the ICR was written. The project experienced some significant issues in the purchase of patrol
           boats including determination of technical specifications, market approach, delays in procurement
           process and delivery of the boats. Also, there was also a problem of coordination between the
           procurement agent, which was project fiduciary management housed in the ministry of finance and
           the PIU in the ministry of fisheries that contributed to delays in decision making and approval
           processes.

   Liberia:

          Financial Management was Moderately Satisfactory. There were some challenges in the execution
           of the budgets. Also, the PMU did not have sufficient staff to perform the internal audits as there
           was initially only one internal auditor. Eventually, the PMU recruited more staff.
          Procurement was Moderately Satisfactory. During implementation, the procurement of the majority
           of contracts was delayed. due to low level of both technical and procurement capacity on the
           project. There were significant delays on preparation of TORs, evaluation of CVs, and proposals,
           and award of contracts.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   NA



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
                                Moderately
Outcome                                               Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
                                Moderately
Bank Performance                                      Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
                                                                                 Shortcomings in adequacy of
Quality of M&E                  Substantial           Modest                     country level indicators/targets
                                                                                 to measure the outcomes and

                                                                                                    Page 20 of 22
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       WARFP AF Guinea, Sierra Leone & Liberia (P126773)



                                                                                progress on all aspects of the
                                                                                PDO.
Quality of ICR                   ---                  Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR (p. 40-41) included several lessons learned:

        Fisheries management reforms require a medium to long-term horizon given the need
         to engage with multiple stakeholders and address behaviors that are deeply routed in
         tradition and often related to the poorest segment of the population. The design of this
         project was too ambitious in some areas such as in controlling capacity and access in the
         small-scale segment resulting in not being able to build a broad consensus on effective
         fisheries management, demonstrate results, and develop viable models. Since there will not
         be a follow-on project, there is a high risk of putting the project outcomes at risk.
        Community Management Associations (CMAs) are an effective mechanism for
         introducing new harvesting rules, local surveillance, enhancement measures and local
         site monitoring to recover fish stocks and sustain fisheries productivity in managed
         fishing areas. This project was able to establish or strengthen CMAs. The next step will
         require defining access modalities for artisanal fishermen outside the community and
         improving coordination among various CMAs sharing resources.
        Performance based management linked to disbursements can be a critical tool to
         provide incentives for a swift implementation, but it is important to allow for a smooth
         application. In this project, the effectiveness of the tool was impacted by the complexity of
         implementation arrangements due to issues such as i) complicated processes related to
         indicator definition, measurement, success metrics, and allocation of proceeds making
         implementation and monitoring difficult for PIUs; ii) contracting independent verifiers made
         coordination between the RCU and the two PIUs challenging; iii) backloading of technical
         audits towards the later years for cost reasons left limited time and space for recipients to
         use the funds and apply corrective measures to improve performance; iv) pre-defined
         program of eligible activities left little possibility for adjustments; and v) requirement of
         a specific RCU-contracted financial audit which was deemed not necessary in retrospect
         given the regular annual audit of financial statement.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provided an adequate overview of project preparation and implementation of a complex multi-country
operation. The ICR was sufficiently outcome-driven and candid about implementation issues. The ICR provided
useful annexes on the activities and results achieved by each country. In a few instances, the evidence

                                                                                                  Page 21 of 22
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      WARFP AF Guinea, Sierra Leone & Liberia (P126773)



provided was inadequate to assess all four countries on all PDO aspects. There was an inconsistency between
the safeguards rating reported in the ICR and the actual safeguards rating.

Taking everything together, the ICR’s quality rating is Substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                    Page 22 of 22
