     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     First Resilience Operation (P162104)



                                                                                Report Number: ICRR0023315

1. Program Information



 Country                                    Practice Area (Lead)
 Samoa                                      Macroeconomics, Trade and Investment

 Programmatic DPF

 Planned Operations                          Approved Operations
 2                                           2

 Operation ID                                Operation Name
 P162104                                     First Resilience Operation




 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                 Total Financing (USD)
 IDA-D2420                                  31-Dec-2018                                          5,097,312.00

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 31-Oct-2017                                31-Dec-2018
                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                             Co-financing (USD)

 Original Commitment                             5,000,000.00                                             0.00

 Revised Commitment                              5,000,000.00                                             0.00

 Actual                                          5,097,312.00                                             0.00




P165928_TBL
 Country                                    Practice Area (Lead)
 Samoa                                      Macroeconomics, Trade and Investment

 Operation ID                               Operation Name
 P165928                                    Second Resilience DPO with a Cat-DDO ( P165928 )




                                                                                                 Page 1 of 30
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     First Resilience Operation (P162104)




 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                   Total Financing (USD)
 IDA-D2420,IDA-D3980,IDA-D3990              30-Nov-2021                                            13627351.91

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 29-Nov-2018                                30-Nov-2021

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                               Co-financing (USD)

 Original Commitment                            13,700,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                             13,700,000.00                                               0.00

 Actual                                         13,627,351.91                                               0.00



 Prepared by                  Reviewed by                 ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Antonio M. Ollero            Judyth L. Twigg             Jennifer L. Keller              IEGEC




2. Program Objectives and Pillars/Policy Areas
EVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives

The programmatic First and Second Samoa Resilience Development Policy Operation consisted of a
development policy operation (first operation) and a disaster risk management development policy operation with
a catastrophe deferred drawdown option (Cat DDO) (a contingent financing line that provides immediate liquidity
to countries to address shocks related to natural disasters and/or health-related events) (second operation).

The program development objectives of the programmatic series were:

1. To strengthen Samoa's macroeconomic and financial resilience.
2. To enhance Samoa's resilience to the effects of climate change and natural hazards.
3. To reduce Samoa’s vulnerability to non-communicable diseases and to address shocks from health-related
events.

The Cat DDO was subsumed at appraisal into the second program objective. The contingency financing was
to be drawn down after a “natural catastrophe” that resulted in a "Proclamation of Emergency," with "natural
catastrophe" defined as an emergency due to "cyclones, volcanic eruptions, tsunami, floods, earthquakes, high
winds, and seasonal droughts." As the Cat DDO proceeds were used instead for a measles outbreak and the
COVID-19 pandemic, this ICR Review assigns the Cat DDO to the third objective, with the language expanded to
include "to address shocks from health-related events."


b. Pillars/Policy Areas


                                                                                                   Page 2 of 30
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     First Resilience Operation (P162104)



The programmatic series had three policy areas, organized around strengthening Samoa's resilience to three
major risks: macroeconomic and macro-financial, climate change and natural hazards, and health and non-
communicable diseases.

Strengthening Macroeconomic and Financial Resilience supported reforms to expand the
government revenue base, reduce probable disruptions to remittance flows, and improve access to finance. The
reforms would help the government consolidate public finances and build fiscal buffers to respond to future
external shocks, while securing the access of households and firms to remittances and finance to support
consumption and investment.

Enhancing Resilience to the Effects of Climate Change and Natural Hazards supported reforms to reduce
the country's vulnerability to the major long-term threats posed by climate change and natural disasters. The
reforms would build on previous work to strengthen the coordination of climate and natural hazard resilience
activities. A Cat DDO, originally included in this component, would provide emergency financing to help the
government respond to a natural catastrophe. The contingency financing would be available for a standard
drawdown period of three years, renewable once for a maximum six years, taking the government's access in
quick-disbursing disaster contingent financing to around US$18 million or over 2 percent of gross domestic
product (GDP).

Reducing Vulnerability to Non-Communicable Diseases and Addressing Shocks from Health-Related
Events supported reforms to reduce the country's vulnerability to the long-term threat posed by non-
communicable diseases as well as an emergency due to health-related shocks. The reforms would focus on
legislation and excise taxation to discourage the consumption of alcohol, tobacco, salty food products, and
sugary food products and would include administrative measures to improve the procurement and the inventory
management of pharmaceuticals in a bid to lower drug costs. The Cat DDO was shifted to this component to
help the government address a measles outbreak in 2019 and the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020.


c. Comments on Program Cost, Financing and Dates

Program Cost and Financing. The first operation was estimated to cost SDR 3.6 million (US$5 million
equivalent) and was financed by a development policy grant of the same amount from the International
Development Association (IDA) to the Independent State of Samoa. The grant was fully disbursed (US$5.097
million equivalent). The second operation was estimated to cost SDR 9.9 million (US$13.7 million equivalent)
and was financed by an IDA development policy grant of SDR 3.6 million (US$5 million equivalent) and an
IDA disaster risk management development policy grant with a Cat DDO of SDR 6.3 million (US$8.7 million
equivalent). The up-front grant was fully disbursed (US$5.009 million equivalent). The contingent grant was
disbursed in two tranches: US$3.5 million to support the emergency response to the measles outbreak
(December 2019) and US$5.1 million to support the response to the COVID-19 pandemic (March 2020). The
differences in the US$ equivalents at appraisal and at closing were due to changes in the SDR/US$ exchange
rate.

Dates. The first operation was approved on October 31, 2017, became effective on December 19, 2017, and
closed as scheduled on December 31, 2018. The second operation was approved on November 29, 2018,
became effective on February 7, 2019, and closed as scheduled on November 30, 2021.




                                                                                                 Page 3 of 30
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     First Resilience Operation (P162104)



3. Relevance of Design

a. Relevance of Objectives

 Binding Constraints. This programmatic series focused on building resilience to three major risks that
 posed critical constraints to Samoa's development goals.

       Macroeconomic and Macro-Financial Risks. A succession of major shocks to Samoa’s narrowly-
        based economy in the decade before this programmatic series strained public spending and raised
        the public debt, even as revenues remained reliant on overseas budgetary support grants. Recent
        efforts at fiscal consolidation reduced the fiscal deficit to 1.9 percent of GDP by FY17 (from 5.3
        percent in FY14), and public debt to 52.3 percent of GDP (from 57.8 percent in FY15). However, more
        sustained fiscal reforms were needed if public finances were to be strengthened to address downside
        risks to the economy, including by broadening the tax base, improving tax compliance, and enhancing
        expenditure control (IMF, Staff Report for the Samoa 2018 Article IV Consultation). In this small island
        economy, migration and remittances were vital drivers of growth, with remittance inflows providing a
        key source of household income and averaging some 18 percent of annual GDP. Remittances were
        mainly channeled through money transfer operators, which faced losing correspondent banking
        relationships with foreign banks, a risk that in turn was partly attributable to concerns about the
        country's compliance with international anti-money laundering and combating the financing of
        terrorism (AML/CFT) requirements (Alwazir et al, 2017, Challenges in Correspondent Banking in the
        Small States of the Pacific, IMF Working Paper 17/90).
       Climate Change and Natural Disaster Risks. Samoa was highly exposed to negative effects from
        climate change and natural hazards, including floods, droughts, tropical cyclones, storm surges,
        earthquakes, and tsunami. The National Action Plan for Disaster Risk Management, 2017-2020
        aimed to integrate disaster risk management into all sectors of the economy, including
        by strengthening the multi-hazard early warning system, addressing climate and disaster risks
        to coastal areas and flood plains, and revising the building code and construction standards to
        reduce damage from cyclonic winds and earthquakes. To address emergency financial needs after a
        natural disaster, Samoa had previously participated in the World Bank Pacific Catastrophe Risk
        Assessment and Financing Initiative (a pilot insurance program), the IDA Pacific Resilience Program
        (the contingency emergency response component), and the Asian Development Bank Regional
        Contingent Financing Risk Pool.
       Health and Non-Communicable Disease Risks. According to the Systematic Country Diagnostic for
        Eight Small Pacific Island Countries – Priorities for Ending Poverty and Boosting Shared Prosperity,
        the high prevalence of non-communicable diseases posed high human and economic costs to the
        Pacific Island countries. In Samoa, non-communicable diseases accounted for more than half of all
        premature deaths. A strategy to address non-communicable diseases, adopted jointly by the region's
        governments in 2014 as the NCD Roadmap Report, recommended four common
        approaches: strengthened tobacco control, including an excise duty on tobacco products of at least 70
        percent of the retail price; policies to reduce consumption of food and drink products directly linked
        to obesity, heart disease, and diabetes, especially salt and sugary drinks; improved efficiency and
        impact from existing health spending by reallocating resources to targeted primary and secondary
        prevention of non-communicable diseases, including better drug prices; and an enhanced evidence
        base for better investment planning and program effectiveness




                                                                                                   Page 4 of 30
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     First Resilience Operation (P162104)



Country Development Priorities. The program development objectives were consistent with the
government’s priorities as identified in the Strategy for the Development of Samoa 2016/17-2019/20 –
Accelerating Sustainable Development and Broadening Opportunities for All. The first objective, to strengthen
macroeconomic and financial resilience, was consistent with the strategic outcome "macroeconomic
resilience" under the economic development pillar (priority area 1). Reforms to boost revenue, manage risks
to remittance flows, and improve access to finance would build on previous reforms to revenue
administration, debt management and policy, and the payments system. The second objective, to increase
resilience to the effects of climate change and natural hazards, was consistent with the strategic
outcomes "environmental resilience" and "climate and disaster resilience" under the environment pillar
(priority area 4). Reforms to strengthen the resilience of new single-story residential housing, improve the
management of key infrastructure assets, including roads, and enhance the resilience of local communities
and ecosystems would mainstream climate resilience activities across many sectors. The third objective, to
reduce vulnerability to non-communicable diseases, was consistent with the strategic outcome "a healthy
Samoa" under the social pillar (priority area 2).



Bank Group Strategy. The program development objectives were aligned with the Bank Group strategy in
Samoa, among eight small Pacific Island countries, articulated in the Regional Partnership Framework for
Kiribati, Republic of Nauru, Republic of the Marshall Islands, Federated States of Micronesia, Republic of
Palau, Independent State of Samoa, Kingdom of Tonga, Tuvalu, and Vanuatu, FY17-FY21. The program
objectives and prior actions were aligned with the third of four focus areas of the partnership framework,
"protecting incomes and livelihoods," including through strengthening resilience to natural disasters and
climate change and addressing non-communicable diseases, as well as the fourth focus area, "strengthening
the enablers of growth and opportunities," including by strengthening macroeconomic management,
improving connective infrastructure, and addressing prevailing knowledge gaps. With the strategy document
advocating a scale-up of IDA-18 allocations, the program objectives and prior actions were aligned with two
IDA themes: (i) "governance and institutions" (IDA special theme 5), with this series addressing domestic
revenue mobilization issues and responses to illicit financial flows, and (ii) "climate change" (IDA special
theme 3), with this series supporting measures to enhance resilience to climate change and natural disasters.


b. Relevance of Prior Actions

Rationale



The programmatic series supported 14 prior actions.

 Prior Actions for the First DPO                       Prior Actions for the Second DPO
 Objective 1 - To strengthen Samoa's macroeconomic and financial resilience
 PA1. The Recipient has: (a) through its Cabinet,      PA2. The Recipient, through its Cabinet, has
 approved the recommendations from the 2016-17         approved recommendations to simplify the capital
 Revenue Review, including: (i) increases to non-tax gains tax regime and facilitate the collection of
 fees and charges; (ii) the cessation of income tax    capital gains taxes, as evidenced by Cabinet
 holidays and the tourism tax credit scheme; (iii) the approval of the capital gains tax recommendations


                                                                                                 Page 5 of 30
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    First Resilience Operation (P162104)



removal of several income tax exemptions; and (iv) in FK(18) 37, dated October 24, 2018, and the
an increase in the income tax-free threshold; as      Ministry for Revenue's "Strengthening the Capital
evidenced by Cabinet approval of submission           Gains Tax in Samoa" report dated August 23, 2018.
PK(17) 792 at its meeting FK(17) Special 05, dated
May 24, 2017; (b) included these changes in the
Recipient's approved budget for financial year
2017/2018, as evidenced by Cabinet approval of
submission PK(17) 793 at its meeting FK(17)
Special 05 dated May 24, 2017, and the
2017/18 Budget Address by Hon. Sili Epa Tuioti,
Minister of Finance, Government of Samoa, dated
May 30, 2017; and (c) amended the Income Tax Act
as necessary to implement recommendations
from the 2016-17 Revenue Review, as evidenced by
the Income Tax Amendment Act.
PA3. The Recipient, through its Cabinet, has          PA4. The Recipient, through its Parliament, has
approved and published a national strategy            amended the Money Laundering Prevention
to mitigate money laundering and terrorism financing Amendment Act 2018, which enhances the
risks, as evidenced by: (a) Cabinet approval of       Recipient's compliance with anti-money laundering
submission PK(16) 2115 at its meeting FK(16) 44, and countering terrorist financing international
dated December 07, 2016; (b) the "Samoa Anti-         standards, as evidenced by the Money Laundering
Money Laundering and Counter Terrorist                Prevention Amendment Act 2018.
Financing ("AML/CTF") National Strategy 2016-
2020" prepared by the Samoa Financial Intelligence
Unit and Money Laundering Prevention Authority;
and (c) publication of the abovementioned national
strategy on the Recipient's Central Bank of
Samoa webpage
<https://www.cbs.gov.ws/index.php/banking-
system/amlfiu/nationalstrategy-2016/>, accessed
September 2017.
PA5. The Recipient, through its Ministry of
Commerce, Industry, and Labour, has: (a)
commenced the Personal Property Securities Act, as
evidenced by the Minister for Commerce, Industry,
and Labour's notice nominating February 27, 2017
as the commencement date in accordance with
Section 1(2) of the Personal Property Securities Act;
and (b) launched the Personal Properties Securities
Registry, to improve access to finance by allowing
movable property to be used as collateral for loans,
as evidenced by the Ministry of Commerce, Industry,
and Labour website
<https://www.businessregistries.gov.ws/> accessed
September, 2017.
Objective 2 - To enhance Samoa's resilience to the effects of climate change and natural hazards



                                                                                               Page 6 of 30
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    First Resilience Operation (P162104)



PA6. The Recipient, through its Cabinet, has        PA7. The Recipient, through its Cabinet, has
approved amendments to the national building        approved Guidelines for the Application of the
codes and standards which will improve climate      National Building Code, which will help to
resilience, and which incorporate provisions        strengthen new single-story residential housing
for disability access, as evidenced by Cabinet      against climate-related risks and earthquakes, as
approval of submission FK(17) 1077 at its meeting   evidenced by the Cabinet approval of the
FK(17) 27 dated July 26, 2017, and the National     Guidelines for the Application of the National
Building Code.                                      Building Code in FK(18) 35, dated October 10,
                                                    2018.
PA8. The Recipient, through its Cabinet             PA9. The Recipient, through its Cabinet, has
Development Committee, has approved the             approved the Samoa Infrastructure Asset
recommendations contained within the Vulnerability Management Strategy, to help the life-cycle
Assessment and Climate Resilient Roads Strategy, management and resilience of public infrastructure
which set out the priority investments necessary to to climate and disaster risks, as evidenced by the
improve the resilience of the roads network         Cabinet approval of the Samoa Infrastructure
and provide guidelines for maintenance              Asset Management Strategy in FK(18) 22 dated
requirements and engineering standards, as          July 11, 2018.
evidenced by the letter from the
Cabinet Development Committee Secretariat to the
Land Transport Authority dated August 21, 2017,
regarding the Cabinet Development Committee
Meeting 2017/03, and the Vulnerability Assessment
and Climate Resilient Roads Strategy.
                                                    PA10. The Recipient has: (i) through its Cabinet,
                                                    approved Community Integrated Management
                                                    Plans to strengthen the resilience of all 41 districts
                                                    to the impacts of climate change and natural
                                                    disasters, as evidenced by the Cabinet approval of
                                                    the Community Integrated Management Plans in
                                                    FK(18) 28 dated August 22, 2018; and (ii) made
                                                    these plans publicly available, as evidenced by the
                                                    availability of the Community Integrated
                                                    Management Plans on the Recipient's Ministry of
                                                    Natural Resources and Management website
                                                    <https://samoa-data.sprep.org/dataset/community-
                                                    integrated-management-plans>.
Objective 3 - To reduce Samoa’s vulnerability to non-communicable diseases and to address
shocks from health-related events.
PA11. The Recipient has: (a) introduced excise      PA12. The Recipient, through its Cabinet, has
duties for sugary and salty products to improve     approved the Alcohol Control Bill, to minimize
health and nutrition outcomes and reduce the        harmful effects from the consumption and abuse of
incidence of non-communicable diseases,             alcohol, as evidenced by the Alcohol Control Bill
as evidenced by the Excise Tax Rates Amendment and the Cabinet approval of the Alcohol Control Bill
Act 2016, and (b) through its Cabinet, approved an in FK(18) 32, dated September 12, 2018.
annual increase in excises on alcoholic and
sweetened beverages and on tobacco of 3 percent
and 5 percent respectively over the next three (3)


                                                                                                   Page 7 of 30
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    First Resilience Operation (P162104)



years, as evidenced by Cabinet approval of
Submission PK(17) 792 at its meeting FK(17)
Special 05, dated May 24, 2017 and the Excise Tax
Rates Amendment Act 2017.
PA13. The Recipient, through its Cabinet, has      PA14. The Recipient, through its Ministry of
approved framework contracts for the procurement Finance, has approved the introduction of an
of pharmaceuticals, to increase the efficiency and integrated, computerized inventory management
reduce the cost of procurement, and ensure access system for pharmaceuticals, to boost the efficiency
while reducing waste, as evidenced by Cabinet      of medicines procurement and help prevent stock-
approval of Submission PK(17) 1024 at its meeting outs and reduce wastage, as evidenced by the letter
FK(17) 25, dated July 5, 2017, and the Recipient's from the Acting Chief Executive Officer of the
tender documents titled "Government of Samoa       Ministry of Finance confirming the approval by the
Tender Documents; Issued on February 27, 2017 for Ministry of Finance for the introduction of the
Procurement of Medicines (Goods and Related        pharmaceutical inventory control management
Services Tender No. 2017/18)."                     system dated October 11, 2018.



Objective 1 - To strengthen Samoa's macroeconomic and financial resilience

     PA1 and PA2 consisted of measures to broaden the revenue base, which would strengthen
      macroeconomic resilience. Samoa had increased domestic revenues from 23 percent of GDP in FY12
      to 27 percent of GDP in FY17 following comprehensive tax policy and administration reforms over five
      years, including better compliance with and improved collection of income taxes, excise taxes, and
      the value added tax on goods and services.
     PA1 would raise the personal income tax thresholds (from Samoan tala (SAT) 12,000 to SAT 15,000
      for the personal tax-free threshold and from SAT 20,000 to SAT 25,000 for the 20-percent threshold),
      remove several income tax exemptions (including for churches and pastors), discontinue income tax
      holidays (for businesses), discontinue the tourism tax credit scheme, and increase non-tax fees and
      charges (and index them to inflation). Tax concessions and exemptions had eroded the tax base in
      Samoa and their removal was recommended by the “2016-17 Revenue Review,” which aimed to
      identify reforms to broaden the tax base and improve tax collection. The measures would be
      approved by the Cabinet, included in the approved FY17/18 Budget, and enacted as part of the
      Income Tax Amendment Act of 2017. The changes to the personal tax thresholds could raise SAT
      14.1 million (0.6 percent of GDP) in 2017/18, increasing to SAT 31 million by 2019/20 (1.3 percent of
      GDP); the removal of tax exemptions and concession, SAT 3 million in FY18 (0.1 percent of GDP);
      and the increase in non-tax fees and charges, SAT 5.6 million in FY18 (0.2 percent of GDP). The
      measures would be complemented by boosting the compliance capacity of the revenue bodies and
      strengthening the audit requirements on high-turnover firms. The relevance of PA1 is rated highly
      satisfactory.
     PA2 would simplify the capital gains tax regime and facilitate the collection of capital gains
      taxes. Capital gains tax laws were previously difficult to implement in Samoa, including that there was
      a three-year exemption period in which assets held longer for three years were not subject to the
      tax. The reforms follow the recommendations of the 2018 Ministry of Finance report "Strengthening
      the Capital Gains Tax in Samoa." Capital gains realized within three years of an asset being
      purchased would hence be taxed at 27 percent (they were previously not taxable), with the cost basis
      subject to an indexation adjustment. This prior action would also require that the capital gains tax be
      paid before the asset can be registered in the name of the new owner (i.e., before the stamp duty is

                                                                                                 Page 8 of 30
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
First Resilience Operation (P162104)



  paid), resolving a previous discrepancy in the stamp duty law and ensuring that the capital gains tax
  can be collected in practice. There was no precise estimate of the marginal contribution of the capital
  gains tax reform to incremental revenues, although the “2016-17 Revenue Review” anticipated that a
  2 percent increase in tax compliance rate from among all tax compliance measures including the
  capital gains tax reform would increase revenues by 0.5 percent of GDP. The relevance of PA2 is
  rated highly satisfactory.
 PA3 and PA4 consisted of sequential measures to mitigate money laundering and terrorism financing
  risks, which posed dangers to remittance flows and correspondent banking operations. Remittances
  were 18 percent of GDP, four-fifths of which were channeled through money transfer operators. Nine
  of the 12 operators had lost at least one correspondent banking relationship since 2013 owing to
  changing profitability trends and risk patterns. The operators faced further closure risks if
  correspondent banking operations were strained as a result of the country’s failure to comply with
  international AML/CFT requirements, a risk that the IMF considered highly likely and of high impact
  (IMF, Staff Report for the Samoa 2017 Article IV Consultation and Staff Report for the Samoa 2018
  Article IV Consultation).
 PA3 would require the Cabinet to approve and publish, through the Central Bank of Samoa, the
  "Samoa Anti-Money Laundering and Counter Terrorist Financing National Strategy, 2016-2020,"
  prepared by the Samoa Financial Intelligence Unit of the Central Bank of Samoa and the Money
  Laundering Prevention Authority. It was expected that implementation of the strategy would improve
  Samoa’s overall level of technical compliance with the Financial Action Task Force (FATF) Standards,
  as determined by the Asia/Pacific Group on Money Laundering and documented in its Mutual
  Evaluation Reports. Samoa had improved its compliance rating over the past decade, but significant
  shortcomings remained. The Strategy, covering the next four years, would focus on, among others,
  the supervisory and regulatory framework for the offshore sector, risk-based AML/CFT supervision of
  banks and money transfer operators, and strengthening of the Samoa Financial Intelligence Unit. The
  prior action would help maintain correspondent banking relationships with foreign banks, thereby
  securing access to remittances and strengthening financial resilience. The relevance of PA3 is rated
  satisfactory.
 PA4 would require Parliament to pass the Money Laundering Prevention Amendment Act of
  2018. Following the adoption of the Strategy, the legislation would enhance Samoa’s compliance with
  international AML/CFT standards. The law criminalizes money laundering and terrorism financing,
  sets out the obligations of financial institutions to conduct due diligence of customers, and
  requires financial institutions to report large cash transactions. The prior action would help maintain
  correspondent banking relationships with foreign banks, thereby securing access to remittances and
  strengthening financial resilience. The relevance of PA4 is rated satisfactory.



 PA5 would implement the Personal Property Securities Act, passed into law in 2013, and launch the
  Personal Property Securities Registry. The Personal Property Securities Act created security interests
  in movable property, established priority rules among competing interests in movable property,
  established a public filing office (where notices of security interests would be filed and made publicly
  available for inspection), simplified and expedited enforcement against collateral when debtors
  defaulted, and repealed the Chattels Transfer Act of 1975 and other laws. The Registry would provide
  the electronic means for filing and providing notices of security interest and liens, a service that would
  better enable the use of movable property as collateral for loans. Prior to the enactment of the
  Personal Property Securities Act and the creation of the Personal Property Securities Registry,
  access to loan finance was constrained by the use only of immovable assets (land and buildings) as

                                                                                                Page 9 of 30
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    First Resilience Operation (P162104)



      collateral for loans. Globally, assets of the average small and medium enterprise (SME) consisted, 22
      percent, of real estate and, 78 percent, of movable property. In a loan collateral system that favored
      land and buildings, access to finance for SMEs was constrained by their thin real estate holdings. In
      Samoa, only 20 percent of land was registered (and hence eligible as loan collateral), highlighting the
      even greater importance of movable property in obtaining credit. The passage of the Act and the
      launch of this Registry would expand access to loan finance by enabling and facilitating the use of
      movable assets as collateral to loans, thereby improving access to finance and strengthening financial
      resilience. The relevance of PA5 is rated satisfactory.

Objective 2 - To enhance Samoa's resilience to the effects of climate change and natural hazards

     The sequential measures PA6 and PA7 aimed to improve the resilience of buildings, including
      houses, to climate and disaster risks, while PA8 and PA9 aimed to improve the resilience of public
      infrastructure, including roads, to climate and disaster risks. Samoa is highly exposed to natural
      hazards such as tropical cyclones, earthquakes, tsunamis, droughts, and floods. In September 2009,
      two large earthquakes and a tsunami in the southern Pacific Ocean adjacent to the Kermadec-Tonga
      subduction zone destroyed 20 villages on Upolu Island, killed 143 people, displaced 5,274 people,
      and caused damages worth 22 percent of GDP (World Bank, Samoa Post-Disaster Risk Assessment
      Following the Earthquake and Tsunami of 29 September 2009). Cyclone Evan in December 2012
      destroyed physical assets across all sectors of the economy and caused damages and losses worth
      28 percent of GDP (World Bank, Samoa Post-Disaster Risk Assessment Cyclone Evan 2012). Other
      recent events have also harmed Samoa, though their effects and impact have not been quantified in
      the same detail as those for the 2009 earthquakes and tsunami and for Cyclone Evan.
     PA6 would require the Cabinet to approve the new National Building Code of 2017, which would
      entirely replace the National Building Code of 1992 and update construction standards (including for
      demolition, site preparation, and maintenance) and performance requirements for buildings,
      structures, and sites. The new Code would include two new sections that addressed environmental
      risks: the first on Climate Change Adaptation (Section H), and the second on Natural Disaster
      Resilience (Section J). The new sections would provide for standards, “deemed-to-satisfy provisions,”
      “acceptable solutions,” and performance requirements to adapt to rising air temperature, more intense
      rainfall, more frequent cyclones, increase in hailstorms, a rise in sea level, increase in humidity,
      decrease in humidity, and increase in deforestation. The adaptations would include, among others,
      appropriate placement of buildings on sites, earthworks that minimize the impacts of storm water,
      energy efficient building materials, renewable energy, passive solar design, green roofs, and designs
      that reduce greenhouse gas emissions. The relevance of PA6 is rated satisfactory.
     PA7 would require the Cabinet to approve the Guidelines for the Application of the National Building
      Code. The Guidelines would govern the implementation of the new National Building Code for one-
      story residential housing, focusing on construction standards and performance requirements that
      served climate change adaptation and natural disaster resilience. To help strengthen enforcement
      (many structures in the past were constructed without building permits), the Ministry of Works,
      Transport, and Infrastructure would field inspectors at every construction site to verify conformity to
      building permits approved under the new law and its implementing regulations. The relevance of
      PA7 is rated satisfactory.
     PA8 would have the Cabinet Development Committee approve the recommendations of the
      Vulnerability Assessment and Climate Resilient Roads Strategy, drafted earlier by the Land Transport
      Authority with support from the Enhancing the Resilience of the West Coast Road Project. The
      Strategy, which serves as a medium- to long-term framework for priorities, provides guidelines for
      road engineering standards and maintenance requirements, selects priority activities and investments

                                                                                                Page 10 of 30
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
First Resilience Operation (P162104)



  necessary to improve the resilience of the roads network to climate and disaster risks, particularly to
  storms and floods, and commits funds for an improved and cost-effective road maintenance
  regime. The Committee approval would ensure that the recommendations were backed by a whole-of-
  government commitment (the Ministry of Works, Transport and Infrastructure, the Ministry of
  Resources and Environment, and the Ministry of Finance, apart from the Land Transport Authority). A
  successor Bank operation, the Samoa Climate Resilient Transport Project, approved for 2019-2025,
  would finance the design and construction of key projects – the West Coast Road between Malua and
  Faleola, the East Coast Road, the Afega Bridge, and the Lano Ford Crossing. The project would also
  support updates to the Vulnerability Assessment and Climate Resilient Roads Strategy and other
  planning tools. The relevance of PA8 is rated satisfactory.
 PA9 would have the Cabinet approve the Samoa Infrastructure Asset Management Strategy. The
  Strategy would improve the life-cycle management of public infrastructure and strengthen the
  resilience of public infrastructure to climate and disaster risks by supporting 12 infrastructure asset
  management “improvement initiatives”: (1) a management support contract for aviation infrastructure;
  (2) expansion of the computerized maintenance management system; (3) a health sector asset
  collection and lifecycle cost analysis; (4) a road condition monitoring and renewals program; (5) an
  asset valuation for roads and bridges; (6) a geographic information system (GIS) data consolidation
  and sharing platform; (7) a pipe renewals program for the Apia (the capital city) central business
  district; (8) implementation of water security and disaster resilience mitigation measures; (9) a review
  of heavy vehicle charges; (10) a recommendation for improvements to the road asset management
  system; (11) the preparation of an asset management plan for buildings; and (12) the capture of
  central business district assets for the GIS. The 12 initiatives were selected for the extent to which
  they advanced the priorities set in the National Infrastructure Strategic Plan and how they addressed
  key challenges faced by the infrastructure agencies in the face of climate and disaster risks. They
  would form the next generation of infrastructure asset management “improvement initiatives” following
  the completion of similar sub-projects under the Infrastructure Asset Management Project in 2006 and
  the Second Infrastructure Asset Management Project in 2014 (both were Bank projects). The
  Government would apply for financing from multilateral and bilateral donors to implement several of
  these “improvement initiatives.” The relevance of PA9 is rated satisfactory.
 PA10, an institutional capacity building measure, aimed to create a platform for the government and
  local communities to collaborate in identifying climate and disaster risks and implementing solutions
  that addressed these risks. The Cabinet would approve Community Integrated Management Plans
  (CIMPs) – compiling solutions to climate- and disaster-related risks in agriculture, water,
  infrastructure, and livelihoods – for the country’s 41 districts and have the Ministry of Natural
  Resources and Management publish and disseminate the Plans widely. The CIMPs update the old
  Coastal Infrastructure Management Plans prepared by the Infrastructure Asset Management Project
  for 15 districts and by Second Infrastructure Asset Management Project for 26 districts (both were
  Bank projects). The CIMPs feed recent data obtained from elevation maps, light detection and
  ranging (lidar) satellite systems, and flood models (many previously not available or dated) onto risk
  maps. Structured as five- to ten-year framework plans, the CIMPs offer solutions at the district and
  village levels to address the impacts of climate change – including coastal erosion from storm surge,
  saltwater intrusion into freshwater ponds, and inland floods into major river basins and coastal areas –
  on infrastructure, natural and biological resources, livelihood sources, and village governance
  structures. The CIMPs would be prepared at the local level by district and village representatives in
  collaboration with the Government, reviewed and approved at the national level by the Climate
  Resilience Steering Committee (of all ministers and heads of state-owned enterprises), and
  subsequently used to guide planning, development, and land use decisions by the local communities,
  the government, and other entities. The value of the CIMPs would depend on their actual use by

                                                                                             Page 11 of 30
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    First Resilience Operation (P162104)



      public and private planners and project developers: (a) at the local level – the participation of district
      and village representatives in the planning process provide reasonable assurance that they would
      apply to local projects; (b) at the national level – the review and approval of the plans by the Cabinet-
      level Climate Resilience Steering Committee provide a reasonable degree of commitment that the
      CIMPs would apply to national projects; and (c) for donor-assisted projects (for Bank projects at least)
      – the CIMPs will help inform investment choices made under the Pilot Program for Climate Resilience,
      the Adaptation Fund, and the Strategic Climate Fund, according to the Bank team. The relevance of
      PA10 is rated satisfactory. –

Objective 3 - To reduce Samoa’s vulnerability to non-communicable diseases and to address shocks
from health-related events.

     PA11 and PA12 aimed to discourage the consumption of alcohol, tobacco, and other unhealthy food
      products to help reduce the incidence of, and vulnerability of the population to, non-communicable
      diseases. Non-communicable diseases, including cardiovascular disease, diabetes, and chronic
      respiratory disease, posed a major threat to public health in Samoa, with the share of non-
      communicable diseases in the disease burden rising from 60 percent in 1990 to 73 percent in 2016,
      and the number of non-communicable disease-related deaths accounting for over half of all premature
      deaths. Although genetics is a factor, the top risk factors for these diseases are life-style related, and
      they include tobacco and alcohol consumption, high sugar and salt intake, high blood pressure, and a
      high body-mass index. By discouraging the consumption of alcohol, tobacco, and other unhealthy
      food products, these prior actions would help prevent and control non-communicable diseases.
     PA11 would raise the excise taxes on alcohol and tobacco, following the proposition that “excise
      taxes on alcohol and tobacco may be used to attain public health objectives by reducing the
      consumption of products with adverse health and social impacts” (Bird, 2015, Tobacco and Alcohol
      Excise Taxes for Improving Public Health and Revenue Outcomes – Marrying Sin and Virtue?, World
      Bank Policy Research Working Paper 7500). The same justification applied to excise taxes on sugary
      food products and salty food products. Moreover, excise taxes would be raised successively over a
      period of three years rather than just once over, based on the principle that “increase in tax rates
      should be large and sustained enough to reduce consumption,” as “small and episodic increases in
      tax rates are unlikely to reduce consumption because demand for cigarettes is quite inelastic”
      (Bredenkamp et al, 2015, Ten Principles of Effective Tobacco Tax Policy, World Bank Health,
      Nutrition and Population Global Practice Knowledge Brief). The relevance of PA11 is rated highly
      satisfactory.
     PA12 would have the Cabinet approve the Alcohol Control Bill of 2018 to contain alcohol consumption
      and abuse by strengthening regulations that govern the manufacture, importation, sale (including
      advertising and promotion), and consumption of alcohol (the Alcohol Control Bill was subsequently
      enacted by the Legislative Assembly of Samoa as the Alcohol Control Act of 2020, which also created
      the Alcohol Control Board to implement the new law). The legislation is comprehensive enough to
      cover all aspects of regulating alcohol supply, including provisions for enforcement by the Board, the
      Ministry for Revenue, and the Samoa Police Service. However, relative to an important objective of
      the Act “to reduce demand for and consumption of alcohol, and to minimize the harmful effects from
      the abuse of alcohol,” this prior action lacked a parallel measure on the demand side: an education
      campaign to strengthen the efficacy of this objective. The relevance of PA12 is rated
      moderately satisfactory.
     PA13 and PA14 consisted of measures to improve the procurement process and the inventory
      management system for pharmaceuticals. Many people living with non-communicable diseases
      struggle to gain access to the affordable quality medicines that they require. A Methodology for

                                                                                                  Page 12 of 30
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
First Resilience Operation (P162104)



  Assessment of Procurement Systems (MAPS) review conducted in 2014 found weaknesses in
  Samoa’s procurement practices, including that the Ministry of Health typically relied on ad hoc
  practices to order supplies. The Samoa National Non-Communicable Disease Cost Study of 2017
  found that the National Health Services procured medicines for non-communicable diseases at three
  to six times the benchmark prices of the World Health Organization. An efficient procurement process
  and inventory system would improve access to these medicines at affordable prices. These measures
  would complement efforts to revitalize the country’s primary health care system by fielding
  multidisciplinary teams (composed of primary care physicians, nurses, nutrition assistants, allied
  health workers, and members of Village Women’s Committees) back to rural health care facilities. In
  recent years, Samoa had veered away from a strong primary health care system by pulling out
  doctors from rural health facilities (the country had 11 rural health facilities – 6 rural district hospitals
  and 5 community health centers) and assigning them to national referral hospitals (the country had
  two main hospitals – one in Apia and another on Savaii Island). The initiative aimed to reverse the
  previous policy with the goal of checking the rise of non-communicable diseases particularly in rural
  villages.
 PA13 would have the government adopt a framework contract for negotiating the purchase of
  essential medicines. A framework agreement (also called blanket purchase agreement or master
  ordering agreement) is an arrangement between buyers and suppliers that provides the terms
  governing contracts to be established for a certain period of time, in particular with regard to prices,
  and where necessary, the quantity planned. A framework agreement, which may in advance include
  repetitive conditions, aims to provide an expeditious ordering of commonly used goods purchased on
  the basis of the lowest price (United Nations, Trade Facilitation Implementation Guide). According to
  the U.N. document, framework agreements offer several benefits: (a) they save on cost and time as
  they avoid the need to renegotiate standard terms and conditions; (b) for long-term purchases, they
  contribute to long-term relationships between buyers and sellers; (c) although the initial work is
  heavier than for a single contract, the downstream benefits outweigh these costs; and (d) buyers
  using framework agreements have achieved up to 10 percent year-on-year improvements in cost and
  time of procurement. The expectation was that the use by Samoa of framework agreements for
  pharmaceuticals would help improve the efficiency of the procurement process and thereby reduce
  the unit cost of essential medicines, benefitting especially poorer households which, more likely than
  not, utilized government rather than private pharmacy services. However, the benefit of this
  innovation may be lost if the “inefficiencies in government procurement systems, which are common
  in many low-income countries,” persisted (Seiter et al, 2021, How to Improve Medication Access for
  Chronic Illnesses, World Bank Blogs). The relevance of PA13 is rated moderately satisfactory.
 PA14 would institute an integrated and computerized inventory management control system for
  pharmaceuticals. Samoa previously operated a manual inventory system that frequently failed to
  keep track of basic data including medicine batch numbers and expiry dates. A Ministry of Health
  audit conducted for a concurrent Bank operation, the Samoa Health Strengthening Program,
  discovered that: (a) more than 50 percent of medicines were out of stock in health facilities; (b) rural
  district hospitals did not adequately monitor inventory; and (c) the centralized medicine supply system
  had no real-time link to the stock rooms at district hospitals. The measure would prevent stock-outs,
  reduce wastage, and ensure ready access to medicines. An integrated inventory system would also
  make the procurement process more efficient with readily available data about stocks and flows of
  medicines in the inventory. The expected efficiency gains from a computerized inventory management
  system were outlined in the Samoa National Non-Communicable Disease Cost Analysis Study of
  2017. The relevance of PA14 is rated moderately satisfactory



                                                                                                 Page 13 of 30
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     First Resilience Operation (P162104)




Rating

Satisfactory

4. Relevance of Results Indicators

Rationale

Results Indicator Associated Relevance      Baseline   Target    Actual       Actual Achievement
                  Prior      Rating                              Value        Change Rating
                  Action                                                      in
                                                                              Results
                                                                              Indicator
                                                                              Relative
                                                                              to
                                                                              Targeted
                                                                              Change,
                                                                              in
                                                                              Percent
Objective 1 - To strengthen Samoa's macroeconomic and financial resilience
RI1 – Revenue       PA1      Satisfactory 24.8         26         27.6       233        High
buoyancy            PA2                   (FY12-       (FY18-     (FY18-
(domestic tax and                         FY16)        FY21)      FY21)
nontax revenues,
in percent of GDP)
RI2 – Status of     PA3      Satisfactory “Enhanced “Enhanced “Enhanced 100             High
compliance with PA4                       follow-up    follow-up” follow-up”
the FATF                                  (expedited)” (FY19-     (FY19-
recommendations,                          (FY17)       FY21)      FY21)
as assessed by
the July 2018 APG
Follow-Up Report
to the 2015 APG
Mutual Evaluation
Report
RI3a – Number of PA5         Satisfactory 0            At least 5 70         100        High
registered security                       (FY17)       FY19)      (FY19)
interests on
movable collateral,
increase in
percent
RI3b – Number of PA5         Moderately   0            At least 5 105        100        High
registered security          Satisfactory (FY17)       (FY19)     (FY19)
interests on
movable collateral
owned by women

                                                                                               Page 14 of 30
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                       Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     First Resilience Operation (P162104)



or women-owned
enterprises,
increase in
percent
Objective 2 - To enhance Samoa's resilience to the effects of climate change and natural hazards
RI4a – Number of PA6       Satisfactory 0             10          100        1000    High
building permits PA7                     (FY17)       (FY20-      (FY20-
issued for single-                                    FY21,       FY21,
story residential                                     average) average)
housing that
complied with the
National Building
Code, proportion
of total issued in
percent
RI4b – Time taken PA6      Satisfactory 0             10          80         800     High
to approve          PA7                  (FY17)       (FY20-      (FY20-
building permits                                      FY21,       FY21,
for single story                                      average) average)
residential
housing, reduction
in percent from the
baseline
RI5 – Number of PA8        Moderately    0            3           11         367     High
approved road       PA9    Satisfactory (FY17)        (FY19)      (FY20)
designs informed
by the
Vulnerability
Assessment and
Climate Resilient
Roads Strategy
RI6 – Number of PA9        Satisfactory 0             2           3          150     High
improvement                              (FY18)       (FY21)      (FY21)
initiatives
identified in the
Samoa
Infrastructure
Asset
Management
Strategy that were
implemented
RI7 – Number of PA10       Moderately    0            14          41         293     High
Community Integr           Satisfactory (FY18)        (FY21)      (FY21)
ated Management
Plans that were
reviewed before
June 2021 for

                                                                                           Page 15 of 30
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                      Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     First Resilience Operation (P162104)



approval by the
Climate Resilience
Steering
Committee
Objective 3 - To reduce Samoa’s vulnerability to non-communicable diseases and to address
shocks from health-related events.
RI8a – Price of      PA11   Moderately                Greater     21.9         100 Substantial
alcoholic            PA12   Unsatisfactory            than 5.7    (from June
beverages,                                            (i.e., the  2016 to
tobacco, and                                          increase in June 2021)
narcotics (CPI                                        price of
index), increase in                                   food and
percent, compared                                     non-
to the price of food                                  alcoholic
and non-alcoholic                                     beverages)
beverages (CPI                                        (from June
index), increase in                                   2016 to
percent                                               June 2021)
RI8b – Price of      PA11   Moderately                Greater     -4.5         0   Negligible
instant              PA12   Unsatisfactory            than 5.7    (from June
noodles, increase                                     (i.e., the  2016 to
in                                                    increase in June 2021)
percent, compared                                     price of
to the price of food                                  food and
and non-alcoholic                                     non-
beverages (CPI                                        alcoholic
index), increase in                                   beverages)
percent                                               (from June
                                                      2016 to
                                                      June 2021)
RI8c – Price of      PA11   Moderately                Greater     1.5          0   Negligible
sweet                PA12   Unsatisfactory            than 5.7    (from June
biscuits, increase                                    (i.e., the  2016 to
in                                                    increase in June 2021)
percent, compared                                     price of
to the price of food                                  food and
and non-alcoholic                                     non-
beverages (CPI                                        alcoholic
index), increase in                                   beverages)
percent                                               (from June
                                                      2016 to
                                                      June 2021)
RI9a – Tender        PA13   Moderately                Lower       Lower for        Modest
prices for 220       PA14   Unsatisfactory            (2019       50.5 percent
select medicines                                      compared of the 220
at closing,                                           to 2016)    select
compared to the                                                   medicines


                                                                                          Page 16 of 30
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      First Resilience Operation (P162104)



prices in the                                                      (2019
baseline                                                           compared to
                                                                   2016)
RI9b – Tender    PA13           Moderately                Lower    Lower for 85              Modest
prices for 220   PA14           Unsatisfactory            (2019    percent of
select medicines                                          compared the 220
at closing,                                               to 2016) select
compared to the                                                    medicines
international                                                      (2019
benchmark prices                                                   compared to
reported by                                                        the
Management                                                         international
Sciences for                                                       benchmark
Health                                                             in 2016)


Objective 1 - To strengthen Samoa's macroeconomic and financial resilience

      RI1 – tax buoyancy or tax and nontax revenues in percent of GDP – was adequate to measure the
       impact of tax and nontax reform measures to raise the income tax threshold, remove several income tax
       exemptions, scrap income tax holidays, simplify the capital gains tax regime, facilitate the collection of
       capital gains taxes, eliminate the tourism tax credit scheme, and increase non-tax fees and charges. This
       results indicator would reflect the achievement of the objective to raise revenues and thereby strengthen
       macroeconomic resilience. The relevance of RI1 is rated satisfactory.
      RI2 – compliance with FATF recommendations – was adequate to measure the impact of the adoption of
       the "Samoa Anti-Money Laundering and Counter Terrorist Financing National Strategy 2016-2020" and
       the passage of the Money Laundering Prevention Amendment Act of 2018. The Mutual Evaluation
       Report of Samoa, adopted by the Asia Pacific Group on Money Laundering (part of a global network
       of FATF-style regional anti-money laundering bodies) placed Samoa in September 2015 on an
       “enhanced follow up (expedited)” status – the baseline – based on the degree of the country’s technical
       compliance with the Forty Recommendations of the Financial Action Task Force (the standard set of
       internationally accepted standards against money laundering the financing of terrorism). Technical
       compliance with each of the recommendations is rated on a four-point scale – compliant (C), largely
       compliant (LC), partially compliant (PC), and non-compliant (NC) – while follow-up status consists of
       three levels, “regular follow-up,” “enhanced follow-up,” and “enhanced follow-up (expedited).” A
       graduation in the follow-up status (i.e., from “enhanced follow-up (expedited)” to “enhanced follow-up,” as
       targeted) would reflect improved compliance by Samoa with the international AML/CFT standards, which
       would strengthen financial resilience. The relevance of RI2 is rated satisfactory.
      RI3a – Registered security interests on movable collateral – was adequate to measure the impact of the
       implementation of the Personal Property Securities Act and launch of the Personal Properties Securities
       Registry. A second indicator, RI3b – registered security interests on movable collateral owned by women
       or women-owned enterprises – gave the metric a gender dimension. According to a study supported by
       the Asian Development Bank, only a third of Samoan women who applied for loans obtained loans, as
       they were less able to pledge security for their loans (no comparable data for men was
       cited). These results indicators would reflect the degree to which movable property was used as
       collateral for loans, thereby improving access to finance and strengthening financial resilience. A
       practical problem, however, arose with the measurement of the second indicator during implementation,
       because in many cases assets were registered in more than one name (e.g., husband and wife, or

                                                                                                   Page 17 of 30
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     First Resilience Operation (P162104)



      siblings), making it difficult to disaggregate the registry data by gender. To address the problem, the
      Ministry of Commerce, Industry, and Labor adjusted the data such that assets with multiple owners were
      excluded from the computation of the gender ratios. The relevance of RI3a is rated satisfactory, while
      that of RI3b is rated moderately satisfactory.

Objective 2 - To enhance Samoa's resilience to the effects of climate change and natural hazards

     RI4a – number of building permits issued for single-story residential housing that complied with the
      National Building Code, in percent of total issued – was adequate to measure the impact of the approval
      of amendments to the National Building Code and the adoption of the Guidelines for the Application of
      the National Building Code, both of which aimed to modernize the building codes and standards in
      response to changing climate and natural disaster risks. A second indicator, RI4b – the time taken to
      approve building permits for single-story residential housing, reduction in percent from the baseline –
      would measure the efficiency by which these new rules were applied and enforced by the regulatory
      authorities. These results indicators would reflect the degree of compliance with the new building code, a
      high degree of which would enhance the resilience of buildings to climate and disaster risks, particularly
      of one-story residential buildings which comprised 90 percent of all residential buildings and were
      previously subject to less stringent engineering inspections and certifications than taller residential
      buildings. The relevance of RI4a and RI4b is rated satisfactory.
     RI5 – number of approved road designs that were informed by the Vulnerability Assessment and Climate
      Resilient Roads Strategy – was adequate to measure the impact of the approval of the Vulnerability
      Assessment and Climate Resilient Roads Strategy, which aimed to improve the resilience of the road
      network to climate and disaster risks by upgrading their engineering standards and maintenance
      requirements. “Informed by” meant that the road designs considered the engineering standards set for
      storm surges, floods, droughts, and other extreme weather events. The results indicator would reflect the
      degree to which the road network would have been made more resilient to climate change and natural
      hazards, at least as far as road designs were concerned. The relevance of RI5 is rated moderately
      satisfactory.
     RI6 – number of improvement initiatives identified in the Samoa Infrastructure Asset Management
      Strategy that were implemented – was adequate to measure the impact of the approval of the Samoa
      Infrastructure Asset Management Strategy, which aimed to improve the resilience of public infrastructure
      to climate and disaster risks by enhancing their life-cycle management. The next step following the
      approval of the Strategy would be the implementation of the 12 infrastructure asset management
      “improvement initiatives” that were advanced by the Strategy as national priorities. The results indicator
      would reflect the degree to which public infrastructure would have been made more resilient to climate
      change and natural hazards, following the objectives of Strategy The relevance of RI6 is
      rated satisfactory.
     RI7 – number of Community Integrated Management Plans (CIMPs) that were reviewed before June
      2021 for approval by the Climate Resilience Steering Committee – was adequate to measure the impact
      of the publication of the CIMPs, which were five- to ten-year framework plans (blueprints) that aimed to
      strengthen the resilience of the districts and villages to the impacts of climate change and natural
      disasters. The purpose of the review was: (a) to ensure that the district-level CIMPs met national climate
      resilience objectives, and (b) to verify that ministry and state-owned enterprise programs under
      implementation conformed to the CIMP solutions. Because the Climate Resilience Steering Committee
      consisted of the heads of all government ministries and state-owned enterprises, the review and
      approval by the Committee give reasonable assurance that the ministries and state-owned enterprises
      would apply the CIMPs as framework plans for their own projects. This operation did not fund the
      implementation of any of the climate change and natural disaster solutions advanced by these five- to

                                                                                                 Page 18 of 30
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     First Resilience Operation (P162104)



      ten-year framework plans. Hence, the indicator does not measure CIMP implementation. Information
      obtained after closing indicate that a new operation would support the implementation of select climate
      change and natural disaster risk projects, for which the Climate Resilience Steering Committee would
      subsequently monitor CIMP implementation. Because the results indicator required only the review, and
      not the approval, of the CIMPs by the Climate Resilience Steering Committee, the indicator is weaker
      than it might have been. The relevance of RI7 is rated moderately satisfactory.

Objective 3 - To reduce Samoa’s vulnerability to non-communicable diseases and to address shocks
from health-related events.

     RI8a – the relative price increase of "Alcoholic beverages, tobacco, and narcotics" (i.e., relative to the
      price increase of "Food and non-alcoholic beverages"), RI8b – the relative price increase of instant
      noodles (i.e., a salty food product), and RI8c – the relative price increase of biscuits (i.e. a sugary food
      product) had shortcomings: (a) the excise taxes supported by the associated prior action (annual
      increases in excises on tobacco of 5 percent and alcoholic and sweetened beverages of 3 percent over
      three years and the introduction of excise taxes on salty and sugary food products in the Excise Tax
      Rates Amendment Act of 2016) could not be the sole drivers of the results indicators. For example, world
      sugar prices, which dropped 22.3 percent in 2017 (baseline) but rose 21.9 percent in 2021 (closing),
      would have affected biscuit prices independently, apart from the effects of the new excise taxes on
      sugary food products; (b) the decline in the price of instant noodles at implementation, notwithstanding
      the introduction of excise taxes on salty food products (PA1-5), also illustrates this point; and (c) more
      importantly, the more relevant outcome, the reduced consumption of these unhealthy food products, is
      not measured at all. The relevance of RI8a, RI8b, and RI8c is rated moderately unsatisfactory. The
      Bank acknowledged that attribution was an issue for these price related results indicators. The
      indicators, however, were still used given the absence of relevant data for optional indicators and
      considering capacity constraints in Samoa. To monitor consumption behavior, a series of analysis would
      have been required, which the Bank had planned and had worked on in collaboration with the
      Government, including: (a) a landscape study on the prices of the products and the policy roadmap of the
      Government; (b) a baseline survey on the consumption before the introduction of taxation; and (c) an end
      line survey after the introduction of taxation. The Bank health team accomplished the first and second
      and was due to conduct the third, except that the process was delayed because of extraneous factors,
      including the COVID-19 pandemic. Considering this, a more practical results indicator was chosen, which
      was available relatively easily. It demonstrated the expected outcome to some extent, although the
      attribution was weak.
     RI9 – “unit price of select medicines declines relative to benchmarks” – had three shortcomings: (a) it
      was poorly defined and poorly worded. The Program Documents for the two operations did not define
      “select medicines” or “unit price," and did not quantify the target for a “decline relative to
      benchmarks"; (b) the associated prior actions (the approval of framework contracts for the procurement
      of pharmaceuticals and the introduction of an integrated and computerized inventory management
      system for pharmaceuticals) would not be the sole drivers of the results indicator. Samoa imported all
      medicines and was a price taker in the international drug market, where other factors could either
      reinforce or countervail price trends; and (c) the indicator would be difficult to measure at
      implementation. The ICR attempted to address these issues at closing: (a) "select medicines" were
      defined as 220 essential medicines in the Ministry of Health's drug monitoring list; (b) by "unit price," the
      ICR counted the number of medicines (proportion of the 220) for which individual tender prices (i.e.,
      prices after the introduction of the framework contract arrangement) were lower than the benchmarks,
      rather than computing some composite price (e.g., the group average); and (c) there were two
      benchmarks and hence two results indicators and targets, RI9a – the tender prices at closing were lower

                                                                                                     Page 19 of 30
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  First Resilience Operation (P162104)



                   than the prices in 2016, and RI9b – the tender prices at closing were lower than the international prices
                   reported by the Management Sciences for Health in its International Drug Price Indicator in 2016. (The
                   Management Sciences for Health is a U.S.-headquartered non-governmental organization that aims to
                   expand access to medicines and health care services in 150 countries). Primarily because of the
                   attribution issue, the relevance of RI9a and RI9b is rated moderately unsatisfactory. The
                   Bank acknowledged that attribution was an issue for these price related results indicators. The
                   indicators, however, were still used given the absence of relevant data for optional indicators and
                   considering capacity constraints in Samoa.



  Rating

  Moderately Satisfactory

   5. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               To strengthen Samoa's macroeconomic and financial resilience.

               Rationale
               The program met or exceeded the targets for all four results indicators, all of which were relevant measures of
               the objective to strengthen Samoa's macroeconomic and financial resilience:

                     RI1 - Revenue buoyancy, measured as domestic tax and nontax revenues in percent of GDP,
                      increased from 24.8 percent of GDP in the baseline (average in FY12-FY16) to 27.6 percent of
                      GDP by closing (average in FY18-FY21), exceeding the target for an increase to 26 percent of GDP
                      (average in FY18-FY21). The degree of achievement of the target is rated high.
                     RI2 - Samoa's status on compliance with the Forty Recommendations of the Financial Action Task
                      Force improved from "enhanced follow-up (expedited)" in FY17 to "enhanced follow-up" in FY19-
                      FY21, achieving the target that the status be maintained at "enhanced follow-up (expedited)" or
                      improved to "enhanced follow-up." Samoa’s “enhanced follow-up (expedited)” status in the baseline
                      was based on the following ratings: compliant on 5 of the 40 recommendations, largely compliant on
                      11, partially compliant on 22, and non-compliant on 2, according to the Samoa Mutual Evaluation
                      Report published by the Asia Pacific Group on Money Laundering in September 2015. The “enhanced
                      follow-up” status at closing was based on the following ratings: compliant on 5 of the 40
                      recommendations, largely compliant on 15, partially compliant on 18, and non-compliant on 2,
                      according to the Third Follow-Up Report – Mutual Evaluation of Samoa published by the Asia Pacific
                      Group on Money Laundering in September 2018. The four recommendations for which Samoa was
                      now rated as largely compliant (from partially compliant previously) included: Recommendation 2 -
                      National cooperation and coordination; Recommendation 3 - Money laundering
                      offense; Recommendation 5 - Terrorist financing offense; and Recommendation 10 - Customer due
                      diligence. Samoa remained non-compliant in 2018 as in 2015 on two recommendations:


                                                                                                               Page 20 of 30
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   First Resilience Operation (P162104)



       Recommendation 7 - Targeted financial sanctions related to proliferation, and Recommendation 19 -
        Higher-risk countries. The degree of achievement of the target is rated high.
      RI3a - Total registered security interests on movable collateral (excluding transitional filings) increased
       by 70 percent, from 596 in FY18 to 1,014 in FY19, meeting the target for an increase of at least 5
       percent. The degree of achievement of the target is rated high. RI3b, registered security interests
       on movable collateral owned by women or women-owned enterprises, increased by 105 percent, from
       199 in FY18 to 408 in FY19, meeting the target for an increase of at least 5 percent. More recent data
       indicate that total registered security interests on movable collateral increased further to 3,457 in
       FY22, and security interests on movable collateral owned by women or women-owned enterprises to
       1,329 in FY22. The degree of achievement of the target is rated high



Rating
Highly Satisfactory



OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To enhance Samoa's resilience to the effects of climate change and natural hazards.

Rationale
The program exceeded the targets for all five results indicators, all of which were relevant measures of the
objective to enhance Samoa's resilience to the effects of climate change and natural hazards.

      RI4a – The proportion of building permits issued for single story residential housing that complied with
       the National Building Code was 100 percent on average in FY20-FY21, exceeding the target of 10
       percent. The degree of achievement of the target is rated high. RI4b, the time taken to
       approve building permits for single story residential housing, was reduced by 80 percent on average in
       FY20-FY21, exceeding the target of 10 percent. The degree of achievement of the target is rated
       high.
      RI5 – The number of approved road designs that were informed by the Vulnerability Assessment and
       Climate Resilient Roads Strategy increased from zero in FY17 to 11 in FY20, exceeding the target of
       3. More recent data indicate that the number of approved road designs informed by the Vulnerability
       Assessment and Climate Resilient Roads Strategy was 22 in FY22. The degree of achievement of the
       target is rated high.
      RI6 – The number of improvement initiatives identified in the Samoa Infrastructure Asset Management
       Strategy that were implemented increased from zero in FY18 to three in FY21, exceeding the target of
       two. Of the 12 improvement initiatives in the Samoa Infrastructure Asset Management Strategy, the
       following were implemented: (a) management support contract for aviation infrastructure (made part of
       the Apia airport contract); (b) asset valuation for roads and bridges (expected to produce a revised
       maintenance regime for roads and bridges), and (c) review of heavy vehicle charges (supported by a
       Bank investment project). Additionally, procurement to implement a fourth initiative –
       recommendations for improvements to the road asset management system – was underway. The
       degree of achievement of the target is rated high.

                                                                                                   Page 21 of 30
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   First Resilience Operation (P162104)




      RI7 – The number of Community Integrated Management Plans that were reviewed and approved by
       the Climate Resilience Steering Committee was 41 by FY21. The achievement exceeded the target in
       two parts: (a) while the target was for the review of the Community Integrated Management Plans
       before June 2021 for approval by the Climate Resilience Steering Committee, the Climate Resilience
       Committee actually reviewed and approved the Community Integrated Management Plans, and (b) the
       target was for at least 14 districts, the Climate Resilience Committee actually reviewed and approved
       the Community Integrated Management Plans for all 41 districts. The degree of achievement of the
       target is rated high.



Rating
Highly Satisfactory



OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
To reduce Samoa’s vulnerability to non-communicable diseases and to address shocks from health-related
events.

Rationale
The program met the targets for only two of the five results indicators, and the other three results indicators
were not relevant measures of the objective to reduce Samoa's vulnerability to non-communicable
diseases. The Cat DDO was drawn down for two health-related shocks. The Financing Agreement did not
require separate prior actions or results indicators solely for the Cat DDO. The information relayed in this ICR
Review about the Cat DDO was not derived from the ICR but obtained from the Bank team post-closing and
is reported with the explicit recognition that the budget support payment did not require the government to
account for how the money was spent.

      RI8a – The price of alcoholic beverages, tobacco, and narcotics rose 21.9 percent from June 2016 to
       June 2021, meeting the target for an increase of at least 5.7 percent (i.e., the increase in the price of
       food and non-alcoholic beverages from June 2016 to June 2021). The degree of achievement of the
       target is rated substantial because of attribution problems (see Section 4). RI8b, the price of instant
       noodles, declined by 4.5 percent from June 2016 to June 2021, failing to meet the target for an
       increase of at least 5.7 percent. The degree of achievement of the target is rated negligible. RI8c, the
       price of biscuits, rose by 1.5 percent from June 2016 to June 2021, failing to meet the target for an
       increase of at least 5.7 percent. The degree of achievement of the target is rated negligible.
      RI9a – The tender prices for 50.5 percent of 220 essential medicines declined in 2019 from 2016
       (before the framework contract arrangement was introduced), substantially meeting the target that the
       tender prices be lower in FY18-FY20 (annual average) than in FY17. The degree of achievement of
       the target is rated modest. RI9b, the tender prices for 85 percent of 220 essential medicines, were
       lower in 2019 than the benchmark prices (listed in the International Drug Price Indicator published by
       Management Sciences for Health) in 2016 (after adjustment from the 2014 data), substantially
       meeting the target that the tender prices be lower in FY19-FY20 than the international reference
       prices in FY17. The degree of achievement of the target is rated modest.

                                                                                                  Page 22 of 30
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   First Resilience Operation (P162104)




      Cat DDO - Measles Outbreak: US$3.5 million of the US$8.7 million Cat DDO contingency financing
       was drawn in December 2019 to support the government emergency response to the measles
       outbreak at the end of 2019. There were more than 4,600 confirmed measles cases in December
       2019. The Bank team disclosed the following information. (1) The Cat DDO emergency funding helped
       the government update the cold chain equipment used for vaccine storage, train workers for the
       measles, mumps, and rubella (MMR1 and MMR2) vaccination drive, catch up on the vaccination of 3-
       21-year-olds, and expand vaccination to cover 1-2-year-olds. (2) The mass vaccination campaign
       helped contain the measles outbreak and limit the number of deaths to 80. (3) The government also
       mobilized non-Bank resources to help address the measles outbreak. The Asian Development Bank
       financed a project to enhance cold chain facilities for vaccination. Australia and New Zealand fielded
       doctors and nurses to Samoa to support the vaccination effort. (4) Following the Cat DDO funding, the
       Bank approved a US$9.3 million IDA grant in December 2019 for the Samoa Health System
       Strengthening Program, a Program-for-Results operation for 2020-2025 that aims to improve the
       quality and efficiency of the health system, including the ability to prevent the outbreak of
       communicable diseases such as measles and to stem the rise of non-communicable diseases.
      Cat DDO - COVID-19 Pandemic: US$5.1 million of the US$8.7 million Cat DDO contingency
       financing was drawn in March 2020 to support the government's response to the COVID-19
       pandemic. There were as yet no confirmed COVID-19 cases in March 2020, but a "State of
       Emergency" had been activated across the country. The Bank team disclosed the following
       information. (1) The Cat DDO emergency funding helped the government purchase personal
       protective equipment, assemble border control and testing stations, organize and equip negative
       pressure hospital wards, build and prepare quarantine facilities, and conduct a public health
       awareness campaign to warn of the risks of COVID-19. The emergency funding also helped the
       government launch a fiscal stimulus package including one-time pension payments, unemployment
       subsidies, paid training for hospitality workers, reduction in electricity and water bill payments for the
       poor and the elderly, and benefits for frontline health workers. (2) The public health measures helped
       the government achieve mass vaccination that limited the number of deaths to 29 (unchanged from
       June 2022). The economic measures meanwhile benefitted the vulnerable. (3) Following the Cat
       DDO funding, the Bank approved another US$3.4 million in April 2020 for the COVID-19 response,
       delivered through a dedicated emergency health project and from the Contingency Emergency
       Response Component of the Samoa-Pacific Resilience Project under the Pacific Resilience
       Program. The funds were used for laboratory equipment, testing kits, cartridges, x-ray machines for
       early detection, and essential personal protective equipment for health workers. The funds also:
       supported community engagement and outreach efforts; provided training for health workers in case
       detection, outbreak investigation, contact tracing, and monitoring; and supported the surveillance
       system and helped conduct a joint external review. (4) The government was able to mobilize non-
       Bank resources to respond to the COVID-19 pandemic, including a US$20 million grant from the
       Asian Development Bank, US$15 million assistance from Australia, and various in-kind support
       (vaccines, medical equipment, personal protective equipment) from China, Japan, Australia, and New
       Zealand.



Rating
Moderately Unsatisfactory



                                                                                                  Page 23 of 30
                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                      First Resilience Operation (P162104)




OVERALL EFF TBL OLD




Overall Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
Rationale

Achievement of the first objective to strengthen Samoa's macroeconomic and financial resilience is rated highly
satisfactory. Achievement of the second objective to enhance Samoa's resilience to the effects of climate
change and natural hazards is rated highly satisfactory. Achievement of the third objective to reduce Samoa’s
vulnerability to non-communicable diseases and to address shocks from health-related events is rated
moderately unsatisfactory. Overall efficacy is rated satisfactory.



Overall Efficacy Rating

Satisfactory

6. Outcome

Rationale

The relevance of prior actions is rated satisfactory. Efficacy is rated satisfactory. Outcome is therefore rated
satisfactory.


a. Rating

Satisfactory

7. Risk to Development Outcome

The risks to the sustainability of the development outcomes of this series are substantial.

Macroeconomic Risk. After three consecutive years of economic contraction from 2020-2022, another
economic downturn or even anemic economic growth will pose risks to Samoa maintaining the ratios of tax and
non-tax revenue to GDP that it has attained under this project and under previous efforts at fiscal
consolidation. Forecasts are for a fiscal deficit of 2.9 percent of GDP in 2023 and 2.8 percent of GDP in both
2024 and 2025 (World Bank, Macro Poverty Outlook – East Asia and the Pacific, April 2023) as the larger than
expected economic contraction in 2022 (-6 percent after -7.1 percent in 2021) “will weigh on the pace of
economic recovery going forward.”

Institutional Capacity Risk. Implementing the new legislation that was enacted and the new policies that were
adopted under this series will continue to pose institutional capacity risks to the authorities in the near to medium
term. The ability of the Ministry of Works, Transport, and Infrastructure inspectors to verify compliance with
building permits will determine the integrity of the new National Building Code even as the results indicators

                                                                                                      Page 24 of 30
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      First Resilience Operation (P162104)



show a 100 percent adherence of newly issued housing permits to the Code standards. The capacity of the
Ministry of Health to enter into proper framework contracts for pharmaceuticals and to efficiently operate a
computerized medical supply inventory system will test the efficacy of the new procurement and inventory
systems which have been adopted under this project. The ability not only of the Central Bank of Samoa but
more importantly of financial institutions to follow AML/CFT rules will determine the sustainability of the Money
Laundering Prevention Amendment Act of 2018 which was enacted with the support of this
project. Continuing technical assistance by international agencies to the government will remain important,
especially through successor projects and in the context of policy and budget support provided by donors to
Samoa under the Joint Policy Action Matrix.

Political Risk.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Bank Performance – Design

Rationale

Analytical Foundations..

      Measures to strengthen macroeconomic and financial resilience were underpinned by: (a) the
       government's Revenue Review Report (2017), which conducted an independent review of the tax regime
       and recommended measures to strengthen the revenue base, and Strengthening the Capital Gains Tax
       in Samoa Report (2018), which identified options to maximize the potential of the capital gains tax; (b)
       the Asia Pacific Group's Mutual Evaluation Report on Samoa (2015), which evaluated compliance with
       the Forty Recommendations of the Financial Action Task Force; (c) the International Monetary Fund's
       Staff Report for the Samoa 2017 Article IV Consultation and Staff Report for the Samoa 2018 Article IV
       Consultation, which highlighted the risks posed by poor compliance to international money laundering
       standards to remittance flows; (d) the Asian Development Bank’s Unlocking Finance for Growth –
       Secured Transactions Reform in the Pacific Island Economies (2014), which advocated for reforms to
       the secured transactions framework to enable borrowers to pledge movable property as collateral for
       loans, as these reforms could “transform access to credit for individuals and firms”; and (e) the Asian
       Development Bank's Reform Renewed - A Private Sector Assessment for Samoa (2015), which
       recommended measures to improve the legal framework for lending, especially for small enterprises and
       for enterprises owned by women, including by enabling borrowers to pledge movable property as loan
       collateral, which was particularly important in an economy where only 20 percent of land was registered
       (and hence eligible as loan collateral).
      Measures to increase resilience to the effects of climate change and natural disasters were informed by:
       (a) the government's Samoa Post-Disaster Needs Assessment - Cyclone Evan (2013), which concluded
       that extensive damage to the housing stock could be reduced if builders and homeowners complied with
       building codes; (b) the international consulting firm SMEC's Vulnerability Assessment of the Samoa Road
       Network - Final Report (2017), which assessed the road network in Samoa and recommended priority
       investments, maintenance regimes, and minimum engineering standards for climate resilience; and (c)
       the Bank's Economics of Adaptation to Climate Change - Samoa (2010), which recommended the review
       and updating of coastal integrated management plans.

                                                                                                    Page 25 of 30
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      First Resilience Operation (P162104)



      Measures to reduce vulnerability to non-communicable diseases were informed by: (a) the Pacific Islands
       Forum Secretariat's NCD Roadmap Report (2014), which recommended increases in taxes for alcohol,
       tobacco, sugary foods, and salty foods to curb the incidence of non-communicable diseases in the
       Pacific Island countries; (b) the Samoa Law Reform Commission's Alcohol Reform Report (2016), which
       recommended measures to address the rise in alcohol-related violence; (c) the government's Samoa
       National Non-Communicable Disease Cost Analysis Study (2017), which outlined potential efficiency
       gains from reforms to medicine procurement; and (d) the government's Terms of Reference for a
       Modernized Pharmaceutical Inventory Control Management System (2018), which detailed the
       operations of a new inventory management system for pharmaceuticals.

Donor Coordination. The Bank aligned the prior actions supported by this series with the reforms contained in
the Joint Policy Action Matrix, developed by the Bank, the Government of Australia, the Government of New
Zealand, and the Asian Development Bank together with the government (led by the Ministry of Finance) as the
basis for budget support to Samoa. The Bank and the donors used the Joint Policy Action Matrix as the
mechanism for coordinating policy support and technical assistance to Samoa and avoiding duplication
among their country assistance programs.

Operational Risks and Mitigation Measures. The Bank judged the operational risk to the project to be
moderate overall, though it assessed two constituent risks to be substantial: macroeconomic risk and
institutional capacity risk. A reversal of fiscal consolidation efforts, slippage with the medium-term debt strategy,
and debt distress owing to natural disasters posed substantial macroeconomic risks. Sustaining fiscal reforms
supported by previous development policy operations, in addition to the implementation of the resilience
measures advanced by this series, would help mitigate these risks. Considering that other ministries apart from
the Ministry of Finance were to implement reform measures supported by this series, the relatively poorer
institutional capacity of these agencies posed substantial risks to the implementation of the program. Continuing
technical assistance by the donors to the line ministries under the Joint Policy Action Matrix would help mitigate
these risks.



Rating

Satisfactory

b. Bank Performance – Implementation

Rationale

Supervision. According to the ICR, with institutional capacity constraints posing a substantial operational risk to
the program, the Bank actively helped the government to implement all of the program reforms,. However, there
were some shortcomings with the Bank's supervision. Implementation Status and Results Reports (ISRs) were
lacking. According to the Bank Guidance - Implementation Completion and Results Report (ICR) for
Development Policy Financing (DPF), ISRs are necessary for programmatic operations if the time between the
last operation's Board date (the first operation was approved in October 2017) and next operation's Board date
(the second operation was approved in November 2019) exceeds 12 months. ISRs would have helped with
progress reporting and review, according to the ICR. Also, the results indicator RI9, “unit price of select
medicines declines relative to benchmarks,” remained poorly defined and difficult to measure (see Section 4).


                                                                                                      Page 26 of 30
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     First Resilience Operation (P162104)



Adaptation – Indicative Triggers. The Bank translated the indicative triggers drawn at the appraisal of the first
operation to more concrete prior actions for the second operation. More importantly, the Bank revised proposals
which proved to be impractical. For example, the Bank dropped the proposed prior action for Samoa to
establish a credit bureau to provide comprehensive information on all borrowers. Instead, the Bank discussed
with the Asian Development Bank an alternative for a credit bureau that would service Samoa but that would be
part of a regional arrangement. The proposed Samoa First Resilience and Recovery Development Policy
Operation is exploring this option among other institutional and governance arrangements for a credit
information system.

Adaptation – Cat DDO. The Cat DDO was introduced in the second operation to help the government address
a natural disaster that might occur during the program period. The contingency financing was initially aligned
with the second objective, to enhance resilience to the effects of climate change and natural hazards. At
implementation, the Bank agreed with a government application to use the Cat DDO to help address health-
related events: the measles outbreak in 2019 and the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020. The change was related
to an expanded version of the third objective, while remaining consistent with the permitted uses of a Cat DDO,
"to address shocks related to natural disasters and/or health-related events" (World Bank, 2018, Product Note -
IDA Catastrophe Drawdown Option).



Rating

Satisfactory

c. Overall Bank Performance

Rationale

Performance at design is rated satisfactory. Performance at implementation is rated satisfactory. Overall Bank
Performance is therefore rated satisfactory.


Overall Bank Performance Rating

Satisfactory

9. Other Impacts

a. Social and Poverty

The ICR argues that many of the reforms supported by this series benefitted the poor in Samoa, where the
incidence of poverty was a high 20.3 percent of the population in FY13/14 and would have likely risen since.

      Revenue reforms under the first program objective helped the government continue to consolidate public
       finances and build fiscal buffers, with the fiscal space enabling the authorities to roll out various support
       measures to vulnerable households during the COVID-19 pandemic. About a third of the 3.1 percent-of-
       GDP fiscal stimulus in FY20 and three quarters of the 4.1 percent-of-GDP fiscal stimulus in FY21

                                                                                                      Page 27 of 30
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      First Resilience Operation (P162104)



        were allocated to vulnerable households. The support measures included: (a) temporary reductions in
        rent and utility bills; (b) a one-off top-up to all beneficiaries of the existing senior citizen’s pension scheme
        (this was permanently increased in the FY21 stimulus package); (c) grace periods for loan repayments;
        (d) dividend payouts by the National Provident Fund; (e) unemployment subsidies; (f) subsidies to market
        vendors; (g) paid training for hospitality sector workers; and (h) other direct assistance to vulnerable
        communities and groups.
       The increase in the income tax threshold benefitted the lowest income households. Analysis in the
        Revenue Review showed that raising the income tax threshold from WST 12,000 to WST 15,000
        benefited an additional 1,852 lower-paid employees (the average savings was WST 300 per employee
        per annum), taking the number of workers in formal employment who were exempt from the income tax
        to an estimated 14,199.
       The reforms to reduce the vulnerability of the financial sector to the withdrawal of correspondent banking
        services by global banks helped maintain access by households to remittances, especially
        benefitting poor and vulnerable households. The Household Income and Expenditure Survey of 2013/14
        showed that remittances accounted for a higher share of the income of the poorest quintile than for the
        overall population. As remittance inflows rose from 18.5 percent of GDP in FY16 to 34 percent of GDP in
        FY22, the AML/CFT reforms helped address the concerns of correspondent banks and maintain
        remittance services to households.



b. Environmental

According to the ICR, the prior actions supported under the first and third program objectives did not create any
negative impacts on Samoa’s environment, natural resources, or forests.



c. Gender

The ICR reported that registered security interests on movable collateral owned by women or women-owned
enterprises increased 105 percent, from 199 in FY18 to 408 in FY19, meeting the target for an increase of at
least 5 percent (see Section 5 - Objective 1). The target was associated with the passage of the Personal
Property Securities Act and the implementation of the Personal Properties Securities Registry, which
aimed to improve access to finance by allowing movable property to be used as collateral for loans.



d. Other

---
10. Quality of ICR

Rationale




                                                                                                         Page 28 of 30
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      First Resilience Operation (P162104)



Consistency with Guidelines. The ICR is consistent with OPCS guidelines on ICRs for development financing
operations and includes sections on the relevance of prior actions and the relevance of results indicators.

Conciseness. The account of the project’s performance is well informed and concisely presented.

Results Orientation. The efficacy assessment is outcome-oriented and based on the degree of achievement
of the results targets.

Quality of Evidence. The ICR presents ample evidence to support its assessment of the Bank’s performance at
design and during implementation.

Quality of Analysis. The assessment of the efficacy of the program is candid and evidence-based.

Lessons. The ICR draws lessons that would be valuable to reform programs that address risks across a range of
sectors, require impactful decisions by the government, and are difficult to implement with the limited institutional
capacity of implementing agencies.


a. Rating

Substantial

11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                           ICR                   IEG
                                                                                  Disagreement/Comments
Outcome                           Satisfactory         Satisfactory

Bank Performance                  Satisfactory         Satisfactory
Relevance of Results
                                  ---                  Moderately Satisfactory
Indicators
Quality of ICR                    ---                  Substantial


12. Lessons

Four lessons are drawn from the ICR, with some adaptation.

The combination of a development policy operation and a disaster risk management development policy
operation with catastrophe deferred drawdown option offers several advantages to achieving a
resilience objective. In this pioneering hybrid series, the Cat DDO provided Samoa with a substantial quick-
disbursing financing in the immediate aftermath of two health-related shocks, the measles outbreak in 2019 and
the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020. Meanwhile, the development policy operation supported the government's
efforts to reduce vulnerability to health risks posed by non-communicable diseases. The prior actions for the
health sector program component and the contingency financing for health-related shocks were
complementary measures to achieve the third program objective. With the hybrid format, the government had to
work on only one set of prior actions (the Financing Agreement for the Cat DDO used the prior actions of the


                                                                                                     Page 29 of 30
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      First Resilience Operation (P162104)



second operation) and fulfill one set of reporting requirements. Moreover, the standard three-year
drawdown period for the Cat DDO effectively gave the government additional time to produce the results
associated with the prior actions (the target dates for the results indicators were shifted from FY18-19 to FY21).

While they have to be pitched to the institutional capacity of the implementing government, the prior
actions need to be sufficiently impactful to merit the size of the budget support provided by the
development policy operation. In this programmatic series, Samoa approved or enacted major legislation –
 the Income Tax Amendment Act of 2017, the Money Laundering Prevention Amendment Act of 2018, the
new National Building Code of 2017, the Excise Tax Rates Amendment Act of 2016, and the Alcohol Control
Bill – to advance the program objectives to strengthen macroeconomic and financial resilience, enhance
resilience to the effects of climate change and natural hazards, and reduce vulnerability to non-communicable
diseases and address shocks from health-related events. The government also adopted significant national
strategies – "Strengthening the Capital Gains Tax in Samoa," the Samoa Anti-Money Laundering and Counter
Terrorist Financing National Strategy 2016-2020, the Vulnerability Assessment and Climate Resilient Roads
Strategy, and the Samoa Infrastructure Asset Management Strategy – in pursuit of the program objectives. Less
substantive measures would have been weakly rather than robustly aligned with the program objectives.

Building institutional capacity is equally important as passing new laws and drafting comprehensive
development strategies in countries where capacity is weak. This often requires continuing assistance by
donors for institutional development activities. In this operation, a successor Bank project, the Climate Resilient
Transport Project, will help update the Vulnerability Assessment and Climate Resilient Roads Strategy and other
planning tools over 2019-2025. The Samoa Health System Strengthening Program will help build capacity at
the Ministry of Health, district hospitals, and health facilities to implement the National Non-Communicable
Disease Program over 2020-2026. The proposed Samoa First Recovery and Resilience Development Policy
Operation will help build capacity at financial institutions to implement Samoa Anti-Money Laundering and
Counter Terrorist Financing National Strategy.

Results indicators that are precise and well understood by the government allow for an effective and
efficient reporting of implementation progress and program outcomes. In this series, the results
indicator RI9 – “unit price of select medicines declines relative to benchmarks” was poorly defined at appraisal
and remained difficult to measure at implementation. The ICR recommends drawing up a complete list of results
indicators and their associated prior actions, definitions, data sources, and reporting parties at appraisal,
including the information in the Program Document, and obtaining a statement from the authorities and reporting
parties that they understood the indicators and reporting requirements. The preparation of an Implementation
Status and Results Report, which was required for this programmatic series with 12-month interval between
Board dates, would have helped remedy the problem early at implementation.


13. Project Performance Assessment Report (PPAR) Recommended?

No




                                                                                                    Page 30 of 30
