     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Fisc Mngt Comp Energy (P166322)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0023364

1. Operation Information



 Operation ID                              Operation Name
 P166322                                   Fisc Mngt Comp Energy

 Country                                   Practice Area (Lead)
 Guinea                                    Macroeconomics, Trade and Investment



 Non-Programmatic DPF

 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)                   Total Financing (USD)
 IDA-65070                                 31-Dec-2020                                           91,488,348.93

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 26-Nov-2019                               31-Dec-2020

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                               Co-financing (USD)

 Original Commitment                           90,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                            90,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Actual                                        91,488,348.93                                               0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                 ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Xiaolun Sun                 Judyth L. Twigg             Jennifer L. Keller              IEGEC




2. Program Objectives and Pillars/Policy Areas
DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives

The Program Document (PD) defined the Program Development Objectives (PDOs) as: (i) strengthening
fiscal management; (ii) enhancing the institutional and regulatory framework to promote competitiveness; and
(iii) improving the financial performance of the energy sector.



                                                                                                  Page 1 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Fisc Mngt Comp Energy (P166322)



b. Pillars/Policy Areas
The program had three pillars identical to the three PDOs:.

      Pillar 1 - Strengthening Fiscal Management.
      Pillar 2 - Enhancing the Institutional and Regulatory Framework to Enhance Competitiveness.
      Pillar 3 - Improving the Financial Performance of the Energy Sector


c. Comments on Program Cost, Financing and Dates

The financing of this operation consisted of an International Development Association (IDA) grant in the amount
of SDR 66.1 million (US$90 million equivalent). The grant was approved on November 26, 2019, became
effective on December 11, 2019, and closed on December 31, 2020 as planned. Actual disbursement was
US$91.5 million because of exchange rate fluctuation.

This operation was conceived as the first in a programmatic series of two development policy operations (DPOs).
An identification mission for DPF2 took place in January 2020 but was put on hold while a stand-alone COVID-19
Emergency DPF (P166322) was prepared. In March 2021, a virtual mission took place to restart the preparation
of DPF2. However, a military coup overturned the government in September 2021 and triggered OP 7.30.
Because of the political turmoil, the preparation of DPF2 was cancelled.


3. Relevance of Design

a. Relevance of Objectives

 Resource-rich but unable to leverage its endowment for sustainable growth and poverty reduction, Guinea
 continued to face significant development challenges in multiple areas. Access to basic services was low,
 consumption growth of the bottom 40 percent was negative during 2014-2018, and gender gaps were
 widespread across all dimensions. This DPF followed previous Bank engagements in Guinea that were
 directed at selected development challenges.

 The PDOs supported aspects of Guinea’s national development plan (PNDES, 2016-2020): PNDES Pillar 1 on
 good governance and PNDES Pillar 2 on inclusive structural transformation and diversification of the economy
 (PD, p. 18). The PDOs addressed three of the nine development constraints identified in the 2018 Systematic
 Country Diagnostic (SCD): weak fiscal management and public investment systems, low private sector
 investment and poor access to finance, and lack of good infrastructure and information/communication
 technology services (ICR, p. 5). The PDOs were aligned with four of the nine objectives supported by the
 Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for FY2018-FY2023: Objective 1 under CPF Pillar 1 to improve public
 fiscal and financial management, and Objectives 6, 7, and 8 under CPF Pillar 3 to increase agricultural
 productivity and access to markets, improve access to energy and water services through improved
 management of utilities, and improve the business environment.


b. Relevance of Prior Actions


                                                                                                  Page 2 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Fisc Mngt Comp Energy (P166322)



Rationale

DPF1 had ten prior actions (PA) to support the three PDOs. This ICRR does not assess the indicative triggers
(IT) for the dropped DPF2 but includes them in the table below to facilitate assessment of the design of the DPF
series and the results indicators.


 Prior Actions for DPF1                                 Indicative Triggers for DPF2 (dropped)

 PDO1: Strengthening Fiscal Management
                                                        Indicative Trigger 1. To strengthen the governance
 Prior Action 1. The President of the Republic of       and oversight of public establishments and
 Guinea has signed a decree dated September 28,         corporations (SOEs), the Recipient has: (i) put in
 2018 for law of 2017 on the financial governance of    place a policy requiring annual publication of audited
 public establishments and corporations, aiming to      financial statements for SOEs and published the
 strengthen the performance and oversight of state-     audited financial statements of five SOEs (enterprises
 owned enterprises (SOEs), and has issued five          with full ownership by the State, société publique)
 decrees amending the status of five public             selected on the basis of their size; (ii) updated the
 establishments and corporations to conform with the    database of active SOEs (enterprises with full or
 law of 2017.                                           partial ownership by the State) with financial and
                                                        governance indicators; and (iii) published the annual
                                                        portfolio report for SOEs according to international
                                                        standards.
 Prior Action 2. To improve the performance of the tax
 administration, the Recipient’s Ministry of Budget has
 issued: (a) ministerial order dated February 19, 2019, Indicative Trigger 2. To improve domestic revenue
 adopting a new organizational framework of the           mobilization, the Recipient has: (i) adopted policy
 National Directorate of Taxes (DNI) separating           measures to increase excise tax collections, such as
 strategic operation management functions from control implementing a multi-year plan to bring excise duties
 functions; (b) ministerial order dated August 1, 2019, on tobacco products closer to Economic Community
 creating and adopting the attribution and organization of West African States (ECOWAS) directive and
 of a tax policy unit within the Ministry of Budget’s     adjusted excise rates for selected products according
 Bureau of Strategy and Development (Bureau de            to pre-determined criteria and (ii) prepared and
 Stratégie et de Développement) to strengthen             initiated implementation of a roadmap to reorganizing
 evidence-based policymaking for tax policy; (ii) jointly DNI, including doing skill assessments, staffing
 with the Recipient’s Ministry of Economy and Finance positions based on technical criteria, and auditing of
 (MEF) a joint circular dated October 1, 2018,            DNI’s information system.
 instructing commercial banks and financial
 establishments to only accept electronic bank transfers
 for tax and custom payments due by large and
 medium enterprises.
 Prior Action 3. To strengthen debt management, (a) Indicative Trigger 3. To strengthen debt
 the Recipient’s MEF has published a declaration of       management, the Recipient has: (i) incorporated in
 public debt policy defining debt management              the 2020 Finance Law, the purposes for which the
 objectives and procedures; and (b) the Recipient’s       State can make external borrowing; (ii) carried out a
 MEF has published on its website a medium-term debt functional review of the organizational structure of the
 strategy (MTDS) and a statistical bulletin outlining the National Directorate of Debt and Public Aid for


                                                                                                   Page 3 of 17
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Fisc Mngt Comp Energy (P166322)



Recipient’s public debt data as of December 31, 2018 Development, including the identification of staff
and the first quarter of 2019.                       responsible for the debt strategy and annual
                                                     borrowing plan; and (iii) elaborated and published a
                                                     reform plan to eliminate the usage of non-marketable
                                                     securities.


PDO2: Enhancing Institutional and Regulatory Framework to Promote Competitiveness
Prior Action 4. The Recipient’s Ministry of Agriculture Indicative Trigger 4. To improve the transparency
(a) has launched a pilot e-voucher system for             and efficiency of agricultural subsidies and extension
agricultural inputs to improve the                        services, the Recipient has: (i) adopted a set of
transparency, targeting, and monitoring and evaluation measures to open input markets to the private sector;
of the distribution of subsidized agricultural inputs and and (ii) delivered e-extension services in three
a digital platform to interact with farmers for the       prefectures out of 33.
delivering of e-vouchers; and (b) has delivered e-
vouchers in four prefectures out of 33.
Prior Action 5. The Recipient’s Ministry of Public
                                                          Indicative Trigger 5. To improve road asset
Works has issued: (a) a ministerial order dated August
                                                          management, the Recipient has: (i) adopted
29, 2019, creating, providing a mandate for, and
                                                          measures to improve budget execution for road
operationalizing the Road Classification Commission;
                                                          maintenance; and (ii) operationalized the road
(b) jointly with the Ministry of Agriculture, an inter-
                                                          management agency (AGEROUTE) under the new
ministerial order dated March 4, 2019, implementing
                                                          forthcoming procurement process.
the road classification decree adopted on December 7,
2017, to define technical standards for all road types
after approval by the Road Classification Commission.
Prior Action 6. The Recipient has made operational
the Commercial Court of Conakry (Tribunal de
                                                          Indicative Trigger 6. To facilitate the settlement of
Commerce de Conakry) by making available to the
                                                          commercial disputes, the Recipient has: (i) expanded
Court the allocated budget under the 2019 Revised
                                                          the geographical coverage of the Commercial Court;
Budget Law, and through: (a) Presidential decree
                                                          (ii) established a court of appeal for commercial
dated August 6, 2018, appointing the judges sitting at
                                                          matters; and (iii) introduced simplified procedures for
the Commercial Court of Conakry; (b) ministerial order
                                                          small claims.
dated August 1, 2019, issued by the Ministry of
Justice, approving the internal rules of the Commercial
Court of Conakry; and (c) joint ministerial order dated
April 25, 2019 and decision dated February 14, 2019
issued by the Ministry of Justice, staffing the
Commercial Court of Conakry.
Prior Action 7. To simplify business procedures, the
                                                          Indicative Trigger 7. To simplify business
Recipient has established and made operational a
                                                          procedures, the Recipient has: (i) fully implemented
single window pilot project for external trade (“Guichet
                                                          the single window at the Port of Conakry; (ii) extended
Unique du Commerce Extérieur”) at Conakry Port
                                                          the single window for international trade to five border
through a unique online platform that dematerializes
                                                          crossings; and (iii) launched the operations of single
the management of commercial transactions and
                                                          window for land registration and construction.
facilitates the submission of customs declarations and
the management of certifications and authorizations for
imports and exports.

                                                                                                     Page 4 of 17
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Fisc Mngt Comp Energy (P166322)




PDO3: Improving Financial Performance of the Energy Sector
Prior Action 8. To improve the governance of the
public electricity utility (EDG), the Recipient has issued Indicative Trigger 8. To improve the governance of
a decree dated August 6, 2019, amending the statute EDG, the Recipient, through competitive processes,
establishing EDG to include the creation of EDG’s          has: (i) recruited the management team (including the
Board and the competitive selection of EDG’s               Director General, Directors, and Heads of
management team including the director general and Departments); and (ii) appointed an international
directors, to conform with law of 2017 on the financial management advisory firm to support the
governance of public establishments and corporations management team.
and its implementation decree.
                                                           Indicative Trigger 9. To improve the financial
                                                           performance of the electricity sector, the Recipient,
Prior Action 9. The Recipient’s Ministry of Energy and
                                                           through its Council of Ministers, has: (i) adopted a
MEF have issued an inter-ministerial order dated May
                                                           methodology that estimates adjustments to retail
23, 2019, increasing retail electricity tariffs by 15
                                                           electricity tariffs based on EDG’s revenue
percent for residential consumers and 5 percent for
                                                           requirements for service delivery and level of
professional consumers to improve the performance of
                                                           subsidies needed to cover the projected gap between
the electricity sector.
                                                           EDG’s revenue requirements and tariff revenues; and
                                                           (ii) has issued an inter-ministerial order increasing
                                                           retail electricity tariffs based on the adopted
                                                           methodology.
Prior Action 10. (a) The Recipient, represented by the
Ministries of Energy and Budget and MEF, has signed Indicative Trigger 10. To prevent accumulation of
an agreement with EDG, dated July 18, 2019, to clear arrears for unpaid electricity consumption by public
the net cross-arrear balance owed to EDG by the            institutions and public lighting, the Recipient has:(i)
Recipient as of December 31, 2018 and to establish a issued a ministerial order that classifies public
multi-year plan to pay the balance by January 10,          institutions into strategic and non-strategic; and (ii)
2025.                                                      approved a system for billing and collecting payments
                                                           from public institutions, with pre-paid meters for non-
(b) The Recipient has transferred to EDG, under the strategic public institutions and an advance payment
above-mentioned agreement, the first payment of GNF plan for strategic public institutions.
45 billion.


PDO1: Strengthening Fiscal Management

PA1 (Satisfactory): Guinean public establishments and SOEs suffered from poor governance and financial
losses, which was detrimental to the delivery of public goods and services and posed fiscal risks. The National
Assembly amended the Law on the Institutional Framework of Public Establishments and Corporations in
December 2017. PA1 supported adopting its implementation decree in September 2018 and aligning the by-
laws of five largest commercial SOEs with the new law. These new laws and regulations would enable the MEF
to better manage the fiscal liabilities of SOEs and strengthen SOE fiscal transparency with specific reporting
requirements to the MEF and on the internet. PA1 was a key action along the results chain to achieving PDO1.

PA2 (Satisfactory): At 12.5 percent of gross domestic product (GDP), Guinea’s tax revenues remained low for
its income level and well below the ECOWAS target of 20 percent of GDP. Various administrative challenges
(e.g., unclear or duplicative responsibilities, no specific unit to lead reforms, ad hoc assignment of taxpayers

                                                                                                      Page 5 of 17
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Fisc Mngt Comp Energy (P166322)



between tax units, and new firms created at business centers not automatically assigned to a tax
office) hindered the ability of the DNI to collect tax revenues. Based on IMF's ECF reviews, a WB study on
DRM, and previous DPFs on tax issues, PA2 supported actions to address these challenges by separating
strategic operations management functions from control functions, creating a tax policy unit within the DNI to
strengthen evidence-based policy making, and processing tax payments through the banking system to simplify
tax payments and encourage tax compliance. These measures would contribute to PDO1 by improving DNI’s
capacity to make sound tax policies, raise tax revenue collection, and increase tax payment transparency.

PA3 (Moderately Unsatisfactory): According to the 2018 Debt Management Performance Assessment Tool
(DeMPA) for Guinea, the institutional setting for debt management was fragmented, with no single entity
responsible for monitoring overall debt risk. There was no transparent debt recording and reporting system to
inform debt management activities. Inadequate debt and cash forecasting led to regular use of non-marketable
securities to pay domestic suppliers for their services. PA3 supported the government’s debt management
reform plans and the publication of a MTDS and public debt data on MEF website. While these actions were in
the right direction, as the ICR pointed out, they represented small steps toward addressing the significant
shortcomings underscored in the DeMPA for Guinea. More substantive support would be provided under DPF2,
whose cancellation broke down the results chain and weakened the program to strengthen debt management.

PDO2: Enhancing Institutional and Regulatory Framework to Promote Competitiveness

PA4 (Moderately Unsatisfactory): Guinean agriculture suffered from low labor productivity and low input use,
with less than eight percent of the cultivated land being planted with improved seeds and one of the lowest
levels of fertilizer use in Africa. Guinea’s traditional input subsidy program produced limited impact because
beneficiaries did not have access to agricultural advisory services to match the quantity of applied fertilizer and
the quality of the soils. The input subsidy program also created distortions that hindered private sector
participation in providing agricultural inputs, especially fertilizers. PA4 supported the government’s pilot program
to use mobile-based interventions to revamp the input subsidy programs. The pilot focused on four prefectures
and two crops (rice and maize) and was also supported by the regional West Africa Agricultural Productivity
Program (P122065) and the Guinea Integrated Agricultural Development Project (P164326). However, while
the tech-based platform could help improve the transparency, targeting, and monitoring and evaluation of the
distribution of subsidized agricultural inputs, it did not address the distortions that hindered private participation
in fertilizer supply or the key constraints to low agricultural productivity such as poor infrastructure and logistics,
and lack of commercialization of key value chains (ICR, p. 14).

PA5 (Moderately Unsatisfactory): The Guinea SCD reported that the quality of the road network had been
deteriorating over the past 15 years due to poor road asset management, delays in public procurement, and
lack of funding. Under the previous DPF series, the government approved a new road classification decree in
December 2017 to address the lack of legal clarity over various types of roads and overlapping responsibilities
among stakeholders for proper planning, maintenance, and rehabilitation of roads (PD, p. 27). PA5 supported
the operationalization of selected aspects of the road classification decree to further strengthen the policy and
institutional framework for road maintenance. While poor road classification system was an important constraint
to managing road asset, significant complementary measures are needed to address the fundamental issues
with road asset deterioration due to inadequate capacities, processes, and funding. PA5 was
therefore modestly relevant for achieving PDO2.

PA6 (Satisfactory): Resolving commercial disputes took on average 311 days in Guinea, with routine
commercial debt recovery cases taking years and complicated business disputes even longer to be resolved. In
2015, the government issued a decree to create a commercial court to provide prompt, efficient, and affordable


                                                                                                        Page 6 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Fisc Mngt Comp Energy (P166322)



 resolutions of business disputes or complex litigation. However, the court remained nonfunctional until PA6
 supported its operationalization by making available the allocated budget, appointing judges, approving internal
 rules, and staffing the court. At the same time, IFC TA supported establishing an investor grievance system to
 facilitate identification, monitoring, and resolution of problems faced by investors in the agri-food sector. These
 actions could lead to shorter resolution time to settling commercial disputes and contribute to improving the
 business environment to promote competitiveness.

 PA7 (Moderately Satisfactory): Guinea ranked poorly in the World Bank’s Doing Business reports for trading
 across borders (167th out of 190 countries). Cumbersome administrative procedures, lack of coordination
 among agencies, high prevalence of manual procedures, reliance on paper documentation, and absence of an
 integrated and harmonized framework for border agencies were key factors behind the high cost and significant
 delays of trade. PA7 supported a single window pilot project at Conakry Port through an online
 platform operated by an experienced private company to facilitate trade. The single window could help improve
 the predictability and transparency of Guinea’s trade procedures, giving the business community quick access
 to the country’s trade rules.

 PDO3: Improving Financial Performance of the Energy Sector

 PA8 (Satisfactory): The energy sector in Guinea faced structural weaknesses, resulting in only 30 percent of
 the population having access to electricity, well below the Sub-Saharan African average of 43 percent. The poor
 performance of EDG required high electricity subsidies. A key cause of EDG’s problems was weak corporate
 governance, which was due to a combination of factors that included the lack of a board of directors and of a
 functioning independent sector regulator. The Bank’s previous DPF series supported the signing of a
 management services contract with a private operator (Veolia-Seureca) to attract investments and realign the
 management of EDG. PA8 supported improving EDG corporate governance through a new management
 structure that would separate the roles of the board and management. It was an important action to inject
 greater transparency and accountability into EDG governance and therefore a critical step toward achieving
 PDO3 of improving the financial viability of the sector.

 PA9 (Satisfactory): Electricity tariffs covered on average 40 percent of the cost of service, contributing to
 EDG’s poor financial health. In 2018, the government increased electricity tariffs for all categories of consumers
 (25 percent for industrial consumers and 10 percent for households) while preserving the social tariff. PA9
 supported a further tariff increase for some consumers. While these modest increases were far from what would
 be needed for EDG to achieve financial equilibrium (i.e., almost doubling electricity tariffs by 2025, PD, p. 37),
 they moved in the right direction. It would contribute to PDO3 of improving financial performance of the energy
 sector.

 PA10 (Satisfactory): Weak billing practices and low collection rates (79 percent), especially from the public
 entities (53 percent), added to EDG’s financial woes. PA10 supported the government’s plans to eliminate the
 net cross-arrears between EDG and public institutions by agreeing on how to pay down the arrears and making
 a first payment. These actions supported the financial viability of the energy sector and would allow for proper
 differentiation between payments from the public sector to EDG for electricity subsidies and for electricity
 consumption. They would contribute to PDO3



Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

                                                                                                      Page 7 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Fisc Mngt Comp Energy (P166322)




4. Relevance of Results Indicators

Rationale

The DPF series defined eleven results indicators (RIs). All the indicators were clearly defined and
measurable with baselines and targets. In most cases, there was a credible results chain linking the PAs
to the outcomes measured by the RIs, and to the PDOs. However, some RIs only partially captured the
impact of the PAs; others measured mainly or exclusively the impact of the ITs from the dropped DPF2;
and a few measured larger impacts than what could reasonably be attributed to the PAs. The ICR
presents additional evidence in situations where the original RIs were inadequate.

                                                                                      RI
                                                                      Actual Actual / Achieve-
                                 Associated RI        Baseline Target
 Results Indicator                                                    Value Targeted ment
                                 PA         Relevance (2018) (2021)
                                                                      (2021) Change
                                                                                      Rating
 PDO1: Strengthening fiscal management
 RI1: Percentage of SOEs
 (enterprises with full
 ownership by the State) with
                                 PA1        MS        0        100    0      0%       Negligible
 published financial
 information available on
 internet.
 RI2: Value of excise tax
 revenue collected as            PA2        U         0.13     0.34   0.13   0%       Negligible
 percentage of GDP.
 RI3: Annual report to the
 Parliament detailing (i)
 progress towards MTDS
 targets and (ii) consistency of PA3        S         No       Yes    Yes    100%     Substantial
 the debt operations with ABP
 (annual borrowing plan) and
 purposes of borrowing.
 PDO2 Enhancing Institutional and Regulatory Framework to Promote Competitiveness
 RI4: Number of small farmers
 (less than 5 hectares)
 receiving agricultural input PA4         MS         2,900     20,000 15,675 75%           Substantial
 subsidies through the e-
 voucher system.
 RI5: Kilometers of roads
                             PA5          U          313       450      257     -41%       Negligible
 maintained/ per year.
 RI6: Time to settle
                             PA6          MS         311       180      98.3    162%       High
 commercial dispute


                                                                                                  Page 8 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Fisc Mngt Comp Energy (P166322)



(Enforcing Contracts - DB)
(days).

RI6 bis: Average rate of
                              PA6         HS          64%       80%       89%     156%       High
closed settlements (yearly)
RI7: (i) Time to import –
documentary compliance                    S           156       90        26      197%       High
(hours).                      PA7
RI7: (ii) time to register                                                Not
                                          HU          44        22                 NA        Negligible
property (days).                                                          reported
PDO3: Improving Financial Performance of the Energy Sector
RI8: Integrated Management
System to support the board
                               PA8  U          No       Yes               Yes     100%       Modest
of directors and management
team.
RI9: Electricity subsidies per
                               PA9  MU         1,081    850               1,601   -225%      Negligible
kWh invoiced in the year.
RI10: Public Sector
Collection Rates for           PA10 U          53       90                46      -19%       Negligible
Electricity (percent).

Indicators under PDO1: Strengthening Fiscal Management

RI1 (Moderately Satisfactory) had a much stronger link to IT1 of the dropped DPF2, which focused
entirely on SOE fiscal transparency, than PA1 on adopting laws and regulations to enhance MEF
oversight of SOEs. The cancellation of DPF2 broke the results chain and weakened RI1 as an indicator
for tracking the impact of PA1.

RI2 (Unsatisfactory) measured mainly the impact of IT2 of the dropped DPF2, which supported tax policy
reforms to improve excise tax collection. As such, it was a poor indicator for PA2 on the tax authority’s
overall capacity to make tax policies and collect tax revenues.

RI3 (Satisfactory) captured the impact of PA3 (and of IT3 under the dropped DPF2). Through reporting to
parliament, it tracked progress towards achieving MTDS targets and the gaps between annual debt
planning and actual borrowing. As such, it provided an indication of debt management capacity.

Indicators under PDO2: Enhancing Institutional and Regulatory Framework to Promote
Competitiveness

RI4 (Moderately Satisfactory) was well aligned with PA4 and measured the institutional capacity to deliver
agricultural input subsidies through one platform. However, as the link between PA4 and the framework
for promoting competitiveness was relatively weak, the indicator provided only partial information
on progress toward achieving PDO2.

RI5 (Unsatisfactory), which measured the extent of the road network (KM of roads) maintained per year,
was intended to capture the ultimate impact of PA5 toward better road management. While the RI was
appropriate for capturing a key aspect of the results chain toward enhanced competitiveness (better road

                                                                                                    Page 9 of 17
                   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                   Fisc Mngt Comp Energy (P166322)



               network maintenance), changes in the RI cannot be attributed to the PA (which enhanced road
               classification)..

               RI6 (Moderately Satisfactory) captured the impact of PA6 on improving the efficiency of Conakry
               Commercial Court in dispute resolution. As with other Doing Business indicators, it measured the de
               jure statutory time to settle business disputes. It would have been more informative also to track the actual
               experience of businesses going through the resolution process. The ICR proposed an additional indicator
               (RI6 bis), which was a highly relevant measure of the court’s success in settling commercial disputes. This
               ICRR considers the results achieved as measured by this new indicator, but assesses the relevance of
               the RIs according to the official results matrix in the PD.

               RI7 (i) (Satisfactory) captured the impact of PA7 and measured one, albeit important, aspect of the
               regulatory environment for external trade. It would be useful also to track the cost of going through
               customs procedures.

               RI7 (ii) (Highly Unsatisfactory) measured the impact of one of several actions that would have been
               supported under IT7 of the dropped DPF2. The ICR reported that it had been dropped, but this ICRR
               includes it since there was no Board-approved document indicating its removal from the results matrix.

               Indicators under PDO3: Improving Financial Performance of the Energy Sector

               RI8 (Unsatisfactory) was not related to PA8 on separating the board and management roles at EDG and
               thus did not capture the impact of the DPF1. Also, while an Integrated Management System could be a
               useful tool for EDG management to make better decisions and improve its financial performance, its
               existence was neither a necessary nor a sufficient condition for financial stability of the energy sector.
               Therefore, RI8 provided no information to gauge the impact of PA8 for achieving PDO3.

               RI9 (Moderately Unsatisfactory) measured EDG’s dependence on fiscal transfer, which was influenced by
               the tariff adjustments supported by PA9 and many other factors beyond tariff increases. Therefore,
               changes in the RI cannot be fully attributed to the PA.

               RI10 (Unsatisfactory), measuring the increase in collection rates, was not an appropriate measure for the
               impact of PA10, which focused on paying down electricity arrears by the public sector. The RI was a
               better measure of the indicative trigger from DPF2, which was ultimately dropped. Because the second
               DPF did not occur, the relevance of RI10 is rated unsatisfactory.



   Rating

   Moderately Unsatisfactory

   5. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
EFFICACY_TBL




                OBJECTIVE 1
                Objective
                Strengthening Fiscal Management


                                                                                                                  Page 10 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Fisc Mngt Comp Energy (P166322)




Rationale
The PAs under PDO1 supported measures intended to strengthen the governance and oversight of public
establishments and SOEs, improve domestic revenue mobilization and the performance of tax administration,
and strengthen debt management. While the supported actions were relevant to achieving PDO1, the results
were disappointing. There is no evidence of strengthened oversight of SOEs, as only one annual report on
SOE financial statements was published and it was in 2020. The Direction Nationale du Patrimoine de l’État
et des Investissements Privés encountered difficulties in collecting financial statements of public
organizations, resulting in even less coverage of SOEs than in previous years (ICR, p. 18). On tax revenue
collection, the ICR reports significant improvement in the organizational structure of the national tax
directorate, but there is no information on other aspects of the supported reforms (evidence-based tax
policymaking and tax payment transparency) due to a lack of relevant RIs. Instead, the RI focused on excise
tax, which remained at 0.13 percent of GDP in 2021, the same as in 2018 and well below the target of 0.34
percent of GDP. Annual reporting to parliament on progress towards MTDS targets and consistency between
debt operations and annual borrowing plans indicates strengthened debt management and transparency,
although much more improvement and capacity building are required to address the deep-rooted issues
highlighted in the DeMPA for Guinea.



Rating

Moderately Unsatisfactory

OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Enhancing the Institutional and Regulatory Framework to Enhance Competitiveness

Rationale
The PAs under PDO2 supported measures intended to improve competitiveness through the delivery of
agricultural input subsidies and extension services using digital mobile interventions, enhancement the
management of road assets; and strengthening the business environment by facilitating the settlement of
commercial disputes and investor complaints and simplifying business processes for trade facilitation. The
relevance of the supported actions to the achievement of the objective varied greatly and results were mixed.
The business environment improved. An IFC-financed evaluation of 2021 shows that the operationalization of
the Commercial Court made an important contribution to reducing the time to settle commercial disputes.
With IFC assistance, the government approved a new Law on Commercial Courts in 2021 to further
strengthen contract enforcement. As the Commercial Court examined an increasing number of cases, its
efficiency in closing settlement improved (ICR, p. 21), leading to much shorter settlement time and higher
resolution rate. Similarly, the operationalization of the single window for external trade helped cut
import/export processing time by over 80 percent and raise custom revenues. Despite a delay due to COVID-
19, the government extended the single window for external trade to five border crossings. The ICR does not
report on the RI on property registration time but notes that the single window for land registration is still
under construction, suggesting no improvement.

In agriculture, the ICR reports that with support from the Guinea Integrated Agricultural Development Project
(P164326), the government continued to implement the institutional reforms that would have been supported
under the dropped DPF2. These included establishing an e-extension platform to monitor the rollout of the e-
voucher program and to communicate with beneficiaries, integrating the platform into the call center as part of

                                                                                                Page 11 of 17
                         Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                         Fisc Mngt Comp Energy (P166322)



                      the citizen engagement system, training staff of National Agency for Rural Promotion and Agricultural Council
                      (Agence Nationale de la Promotion Rurale et du Conseil Agricole) on the use of digital solutions, and
                      expanding the number of digital resource pilot centers (10 vs. 3 targeted under the dropped DPF2). However,
                      it is difficult to attribute these achievements to the narrower DPF1 support.

                      On roads, the ICR argues that the military coup strongly impacted the institutional reforms that were expected
                      to deliver the targeted results, although the results chain between the PA actions and the targeted RI
                      outcomes was weak. In the event, the results as measured by the RI worsened, with a regression of over 40
                      percent.



                      Rating

                      Moderately Satisfactory

                      OBJECTIVE 3
                      Objective
                      Improving the Financial Performance of the Energy Sector

                      Rationale
                      The PAs under PDO3 supported measures intended to improve the governance of the EDG and the financial
                      viability of the electricity sector by raising electricity tariffs and clearing net arrears owed to the EDG. Despite
                      strong relevance of the supported actions, the RIs poorly measured progress as a result of the actions and
                      the outcomes were below expectation. The ICR reports that the coup of 2021 halted and then reversed
                      progress regarding the governance of EDG. The RI measured the set-up of an information
                      technology management system, which was mostly achieved but offered no information on the governance or
                      the financial performance of the energy sector. COVID-19 postponed the planned electricity tariff increase
                      until an arrêté introduced a price increase for non-residential customers in June 2021. The ICR provides data
                      on electricity price increases of 11.3 – 34.8 percent for different customers. The RI, however, measured the
                      overall electricity subsidy to EDG, which was a poor indicator of the impact of electricity tariff adjustments and
                      increased by 48 percent (vs reduction of 20 percent). Finally, the collection rate of public sector electricity bills
                      decreased by 13 percent (vs a targeted increase of 80 percent) due to non-implementation of the planned
                      reforms that would have been supported under the dropped DPF2, but not under DPF1.



                      Rating

                      Unsatisfactory


OVERALL EFF TBL OLD




Overall Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
Rationale




                                                                                                                            Page 12 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Fisc Mngt Comp Energy (P166322)



With modest progress in strengthening debt management and negligible evidence of improvement in the
government of SOEs and tax revenue collection, the achievement of PDO1 is rated Moderately Unsatisfactory.

The operationalization of the commercial court and the single window for trade substantially reduced the time
required to complete the related procedures. There were also significant advances in the government’s ability to
distribute agriculture input subsidies in a transparent and targeted manner. However, there was no progress in the
management of road assets. Achievement of PDO2 is rated Moderately Satisfactory.

The financial performance of EDG did not improve because reforms of EDG governance were reverted, electricity
tariff adjustment was difficult to implement during COVID-19, and public sector collection rates for electricity
worsened. Achievement of PDO3 is rated Unsatisfactory.



Overall Efficacy Rating
Moderately Unsatisfactory


6. Outcome

Rationale

Overall, DPF1 had relevant PAs that could have made a positive contribution toward achieving the PDOs.
However, the COVID-19 pandemic, the military coup, and the subsequent cancellation of DPF2 severed the
results chains between the planned DPF program and the PDOs. The health crisis and the political turmoil
made some reforms untenable (e.g., SOE governance, electricity tariff increases), while the significantly
reduced scope and depth of Bank support left other reforms unsupported (e.g., single window for land
registration, a system for billing and collecting payments from public institutions). While good progress was
achieved in strengthening the institutional and regulatory framework for resolving business disputes and going
through customs, in enhancing debt management and transparency, and in improving the transparency,
targeting, and monitoring for distributing subsidized agricultural inputs, results were poor in all other areas. The
governance of SOEs did not improve, road maintenance deteriorated, and the energy sector posed increased
fiscal risks.


a. Rating

Moderately Unsatisfactory

7. Risk to Development Outcome

The abrupt change of government had a strong impact on Guinea’s institutions, elevating the risks to
sustaining the development outcomes achieved under DPF1, which focused on institutional reforms. Where
significant progress had been achieved (commercial courts and single window for trade), there were clear
signs of commitment to improving the business environment, but reforms could stall where delays had
already occurred (single window for land administration). Improved capacity and transparency in debt
management and distribution of agriculture subsidies indicated important institutional strengthening, but

                                                                                                      Page 13 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Fisc Mngt Comp Energy (P166322)



more capacity building and accompanying reforms are needed to safeguard these advances. In the other
areas (SOE oversight, tax administration, road management, and utility EDG), given the modest or negative
progress achieved, the risks were significant, although not so much to sustaining development outcomes but
to relaunching the needed reforms.


8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Bank Performance – Design

Rationale


Design of this DPF series built on the reforms supported under the previous DPF series, which also
supported measures to enhance fiscal management, energy sector reform, and road asset management.
The PD drew lessons from that series and the World Bank’s experience in fragile and low-income
countries. These included the importance of close coordination with other development partners such as
the IMF and the EU, upstream analysis of social and poverty impacts of prior actions to guide policy
reforms, complementarity between the reform program of the proposed DPF series and the World Bank’s
investment project financing and technical assistance, and an inter-ministerial body for the coordination,
supervision, and monitoring of the program being used to ensure ownership and sustainability of the
reform program.

Another lesson highlighted in the PD was a good understanding of the political economy implications of
reforms, strong political commitment at the highest levels, and selectivity in the choice of reforms based on
the government's priorities and implementation capacity. However, the reforms supported under this DPF
series were wide-ranging and difficult, given that many involved structural changes to Guinea’s institutions
and governance mechanisms suggesting that the design of the DPF series could have been more
selective.

Studies by the World Bank and IMF, and those prepared for related Bank operations, provided adequate
analytical underpinnings for the PAs. The PD clearly established the results chains between the PAs, RIs,
and PDOs. Some RIs, however, other RIs were at a higher than appropriate level or linked exclusively to
DPF2. The shortcomings in the results framework became more pronounced when the implementation of
the DPF series was interrupted and DPF2 dropped.

The PD assessed that the operation entailed substantial risk overall, especially political and governance
risks, which it considered high while noting “that political opposition could evolve into sporadic outbreaks of
instability." The Bank proposed no mitigation measure against this risk, nor against the substantial macro
risks the DPF series faced. Risk assessment did not refer to potential health emergencies but noted
Guinea’s vulnerability to external shocks and the associated fiscal impact. For sector strategies and
policies, institutional capacity, and fiduciary risks, which were rated as substantial, the mitigation measures
were relevant and included mainly on-going lending and technical assistance programs by the World Bank
and other donors (AFD, AfDB, EU, and IMF).




                                                                                                      Page 14 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Fisc Mngt Comp Energy (P166322)



The PD noted that the design of the DPF series benefited from wide-scale consultations, including various
levels of government and stakeholders such as private sector representatives and farmers. The Bank
collaborated closely with development partners.



Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

b. Bank Performance – Implementation

Rationale

An Implementation Status and Results Report of December 2020, just before DPF1 closed, noted that
implementation of reforms was at a slower pace than planned due to the COVID-19 pandemic, but that the
preparation of DPF2 had started. Clearly, COVID-19 and the associated lockdowns and suspension of technical
assistance programs seriously limited the Bank’s ability to implement the DPF series. The 2021 military coup
resulted in the removal of key focal points and temporary freezing of accounts and operations by the de facto
government. The Bank responded to the health and political crises with available tools.



Rating

Satisfactory

c. Overall Bank Performance

Rationale

The operation encountered multiple unexpected shocks that could not have been fully mitigated. The design
of the DPF series was technically sound (covering key issues and supporting appropriate reforms) and
reflected significant prior analyses and engagement, as well as good donor coordination. However, it was
overly ambitious by including many difficult institutional reforms, given the scope and depth of the reform
agenda and the delicate political context and limited institutional capacity in which the reforms were to be
implemented. Shortcomings in the results framework hindered results monitoring in some cases. The Bank
responded to the external events flexibly and adjusted appropriately.


Overall Bank Performance Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

9. Other Impacts



                                                                                                 Page 15 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Fisc Mngt Comp Energy (P166322)



a. Social and Poverty

The ICR reports that the electricity tariff reform included a price increase for all consumers, which would impact
the poor negatively (with the impact on poverty impact limited to 0.1 percentage points), although the impact
was mitigated by the Emergency DPF during COVID-19 outbreak that contained electricity bill relief targeted at
the most vulnerable consumers. The e-voucher program for distributing agriculture subsidies was associated
with a positive impact on poverty through better targeting.



b. Environmental

The ICR reports that the measures supported by the DPF series did not cause significant negative impact on
Guinea’s environment. It notes that Guinea has a solid legal and institutional framework to ensure effective
management and protection of the environment, and that the government has organized trainings and awareness
campaigns to educate the beneficiaries of agricultural input subsidies on proper handling, storage, and protection
against some sensitive products.



c. Gender

The ICR reports that women represented 36 percent of the targeted beneficiaries and 39 percent of smallholder
beneficiaries in the pilot e-voucher program for distributing agriculture subsidies.



d. Other

N/A




10. Quality of ICR

Rationale

The ICR presents adequate and robust evidence to support the achievements reported. It cites credible
sources, provides ample background information to allow for proper understanding of the context and progress,
and offers candid assessment of both the program’s achievements and its failings. In several cases where the
original RIs were inadequate, the ICR presented additional data. The ICR draws four salient lessons, all
supported by the evidence and findings of the ICR, operationally relevant, and anchored in the experience of
the DPF series. It offers valuable insights on how better results could be achieved by learning from the
experiences and lessons of this operation.




                                                                                                    Page 16 of 17
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Fisc Mngt Comp Energy (P166322)




a. Rating

High

11. Ratings
                                                                                   Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                    IEG
                                                                                   Disagreement/Comments
                                 Moderately            Moderately
Outcome
                                 Unsatisfactory        Unsatisfactory
                                 Moderately
Bank Performance                                       Moderately Satisfactory
                                 Satisfactory
Relevance of Results                                   Moderately
                                 ---
Indicators                                             Unsatisfactory
Quality of ICR                   ---                   High


12. Lessons

IEG concurs with most of the lessons in the ICR and wishes to highlight the following two points.

The first lesson (sectoral diversification can help hedge against high political and governance risk, but there are
tradeoffs with capacity constraints) underscores the difficult balancing act in a challenging environment. In
countries where many reforms are urgent and there is high uncertainly in every undertaking, picking the winning
reforms is both difficult and risky. However, while a strategy of spreading Bank support across multiple reform
areas might help avoid total failure, there is no evidence that such a strategy has delivered satisfying results;
overstretching clients’ capacity has a proven record of making success elusive regardless of political risk.

IEG commends the ICR’s strong focus on M&E; two of its four lessons were related to results monitoring. An
additional lesson from the DPF series was that it may be unwise to select RIs that are only supported by the
later operations in a DPF series. This is especially true in countries susceptible to internal and external shocks
that could lead to program suspension/cancellation.


13. Project Performance Assessment Report (PPAR) Recommended?

No




                                                                                                     Page 17 of 17
