     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Forests and Community (P132846)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0023453

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P132846                                     Forests and Community

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Argentina                                   Environment, Natural Resources & the Blue Economy


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-84930                                  30-Nov-2020                                         20,675,960.46

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 07-Apr-2015                                 31-May-2022

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            58,760,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                             20,675,960.46                                               0.00

 Actual                                         20,675,960.46                                               0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Alejandra Eguiluz           Vibecke Dixon                 Avjeet Singh                   IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) of the Forests and Community Project, as articulated in the Loan
   Agreement (Schedule I), is the following: “To improve forest management and increase access to markets
   and basic services by small forest producers (including indigenous people and Campesinos) in Selected
   Northern Provinces.” It is identical to the one expressed in the PAD (page 5).

   The PDO will be parsed, for this review, as follows:


                                                                                                   Page 1 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Forests and Community (P132846)



          To improve forest management in Selected Northern Provinces
          To increase access to markets and basic services by small forest producers (including indigenous
           people and campesinos) in Selected Northern Provinces



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   The project had the following components:

   Component 1: Sustainable Livelihoods (at appraisal US$ 41.69 million, revised amount US$ 14.28
   million, actual amount US $14.20 million). This component would improve the livelihood of small forest
   producers and promote sustainable forest landscape management, with special emphasis on the Chaco
   Ecoregion, through: (a) the preparation of Integrated Community Plans (“PICs”), including the carrying out
   of forest landscape management planning, mapping, and consultations to produce PICs in approximately
   two hundred and fifty communities; and the identification and design of activities to be included in PICs; (b)
   the implementation of PICs, including the provision of technical assistance to 250 communities to support
   the implementation of PICs; and the carrying out of activities under the PICs, including forest management
   planning; enhanced resilience and productivity of agricultural and livestock management; forest and
   agricultural product processing and packaging; land tenure strengthening activities and pilots; the
   installation of wells for potable water and rain water harvesting systems; and the installation of alternative
   energy and wood energy systems (including improved wood stoves and improved charcoal kilns); (c) the
   design and implementation of subprojects. Forest management plans prepared under this component would
   be considered for certification and for financing under the Project and the National Forest Fund created by
   Forest Law 26.331.

   Component 2: Natural Forest Management and Civil Society (at appraisal US$0.64 million, dropped
   at first restructuring in 2019). This component would support the carrying out of a national forest and
   climate awareness campaign to expand and maintain support for the implementation of the Forest Law
   through the establishment and expansion of existing community radio stations in approximately fifty
   locations to distribute information locally on sustainable natural resources management, climate resilience,
   and indigenous rights.

   Component 3: Skills Development and Technology Transfer (at appraisal of US$7.40 million;
   dropped at first restructuring in 2019). This component would finance the strengthening of the technical
   and managerial skills of the indigenous and campesino community members, the small forest producers,
   and




                                                                                                    Page 2 of 21
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  Forests and Community (P132846)



the technical service providers and extension agents working in the Selected Northern Provinces through
the provision of short training courses, including both classroom and community level instruction and
financing of scholarship grants.

Component 4: Forest Monitoring (at appraisal US$ 6.66 million; revised US$ 3.53 million; actual $US
3.53 million). This component would support the expanding SAyDS (Secretariat of Environment and
Sustainable Development) technical and institutional capacity to manage forest information and monitor
changes in forest cover, including (i) the expansion of coverage of the forest administration, control, and
verification system to ten Selected Northern Provinces; (ii) the establishment of a national deforestation and
forest degradation early warning system, and (iii) the establishment and monitoring of a national grid of
permanent sample plots.

Component 5: Project Management and Impact Monitoring (at appraisal US$4.52 million, revised
$US 5.10 million; actual $US 5.10 million). This component would finance (i) the provision of support for
the technical and administrative coordination of the Project, including the hiring of consultants to staff the
NEU (National Executing Unit) and LEUs (Local Executing Units, at the level of the selected provinces) (ii)
development of an impact evaluation system to identify changes in outcomes directly attributable to project
activities and (iii) development and implementation of a grievance redress mechanism to identify and
resolve project-related grievances.

Changes to components (at first restructuring in August 2019)

The original Component 1 - Sustainable Livelihoods was renamed: Improving Livelihoods for Sustainable
Forest Management, and the number of PICs to be developed was reduced from 250 to 100. To cope with
the budgetary restrictions and the scarce availability of technical assistance agencies in the field, LEUs
(Local Executing Units) were proposed to play a major role in directly supporting the implementation of 80
PICs (Integrated Community Plans)

The original Component 2 - Natural Forest Management and Civil Society and original Component 3 -
Skills Development and Technology Transfer were dropped. Limited and more focused training (but no
scholarships) was agreed to be provided under Component 1

The original Component 4 - Forest Monitoring was renamed the new Component - 2 Information
Systems for Sustainable Forest Management. It was adjusted to focus on completing the national native
forest inventory and the operationalization of the SACVeFor (Forest Administration, Control, and Verification
System) and the SAT (Deforestation and Forest Degradation Early Warning System). These systems were
in an advanced stage of implementation at the time of restructuring in 2019.

The original Component 5 - Project Management and Impact Monitoring was renamed to become the new
Component 3 - Project Management and Monitoring and was adjusted to include additional resources that
were instrumental for the achievement of the PDO, taking into consideration the analysis made during the
MTR, such as more human resources for the LEUs (Local Executing Units) to make up for the lack of
specialized technical assistance agencies at the local level.

A split rating will be undertaken because the changes did affect the PDO-level indicators substantially in
that the scope and target values were substantially reduced.




                                                                                                  Page 3 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Forests and Community (P132846)




e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project cost. The planned project cost at appraisal (including the borrower’s contribution of US $ 2.3
   million) was $US 60.91 million (PAD, table 1 page 8), the revised amount (amendment to loan and
   restructuring in 2019) was $US 23.06 million and the actual cost at project closing was $US 22.83
   million, which stands for 99% of the revised amount and 37,5% of the original amount.

   Financing: The World Bank approved an IBRD loan to the Government of Argentina of $US 58,76 million in
   September of 2015. As a consequence of the macroeconomic crisis in Argentina in 2018, the GoA
   (Government of Argentina) saw its fiscal deficit grow and asked the WB to cancel the loan amount by $US
   38 million. Therefore, the project's revised loan amount was $US 20.76 million (without borrower’s
   contribution).

   Borrower contribution: The borrower’s contribution was of US$2.3 million and was allocated to the
   component 5 Project Management and Impact Monitoring. The actual contribution at closing was US$ 2.3
   million.

   Dates

   The project was approved on September 21, 2015 and became effective on November 13, 2015. The
   original project closing date was November 30, 2020, but successive extensions (second and third
   restructuring) brought the actual closing date to May 13, 2022. The project went through 3 restructuring
   processes (level II):

        i. First restructuring in July 2019, as a response to the implementation challenges and to comply with
           the GoA’s request to partially cancel the loan. The following main changes applied: a partial
           cancellation of the loan in the amount of 38 (65% of the original loan amount), the dropping of 2 out
           of the 5 components, a significant reduction of the scope of component 1, modifications to the
           results framework and a redistribution of costs by component.
       ii. Second restructuring in November 2020. In the midst of the COVID19 pandemic, this restructuring
           pushed the closing date by 8 months, modified the disbursement schedule and the results
           framework (in a minor way), and reallocated funds among disbursement categories.

   Third restructuring in July 2021. This process pushed the closing date further, to May 2022 and reallocated
   disbursement categories.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Context at Appraisal

When the Forests and Community Project was appraised in 2015, Argentina was one of the top performers
in the region in terms of reducing poverty and sharing the gains of rising prosperity by expanding the middle
class. Nonetheless, significant regional disparities within the country persisted with respect to poverty and
access to basic services; people in rural areas had poor access to education, healthcare, roads, and

                                                                                                    Page 4 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Forests and Community (P132846)



water. Indigenous people (IP), in particular, have historically been one of Argentina's largest and most
vulnerable groups of rural poor. Comprising 2.5 percent of the country’s total population, IPs inhabit all
provinces of Argentina but are especially populous in the northern provinces (PAD, page 1).

At project design, 20 percent (60 million ha) of the country’s land was considered degraded, with high rates
of deforestation (240,000 ha per year) reported and disturbances (such as fires, overgrazing, drainage, and
pollution of soils) often driven by cropping and ranching in grasslands (PAD, page 1). One-third of
Argentina’s continental territory is covered with natural grasslands and another third with crops and forest
plantations. Indigenous communities and rural farmers depend heavily on these resources for their
livelihoods, making them particularly vulnerable to encroachment and climate change. At project appraisal,
the four provinces of Chaco, Salta, Santiago del Estero, and Formosa had some of the highest levels of
unmet basic needs nationwide. In the most critical areas (the project identified as target
areas), approximately 80 percent of the population were indigenous, and 30 percent of households had
unsatisfied basic needs.

In November 2007, Argentina enacted the Law 26.331 (Law of Minimum Budgets for the Environmental
Protection of Native Forests), also known as ¨the Forest Law¨) aiming at protecting natural forests (PAD,
page 2). The law established a Forest Fund to provide public resources to provinces, promote the
sustainable use of forests, and pay for environmental services. Although for the previous six years (before
appraisal), the GoA had transferred around US$55 million to the Forest Fund (PAD, page 2), these
resources were not easily accessible to the poorest rural forest dwellers. Translating the Forest Law into
action required, among other things, broadening access to Forest Fund resources and building close
coordination between national, provincial, and local level stakeholders to improve Fund management
performance.

Consistency with Country Strategy

The PDO is aligned with and contributes to the implementation of a number of the GoA’s public policies,
including Law 26.331 (“Minimum Budgets for the Environmental Protection of Native Forests”), the National
Biodiversity Strategy (ENB), Law 27.520 (“Minimum Budgets for Adaptation and Mitigation to Global
Climate Change”), the “Social Participation and Gender Perspective” policy, as well as other ministerial
policies.

Consistency with Bank Strategies

The proposed project supports the World Bank Group’s (WBG) twin goals of reducing extreme poverty and
increasing shared prosperity in a sustainable manner. It contributes to poverty reduction (targets vulnerable
populations and focuses on poor regions). It pilots an approach to climate-resilient production systems and
improved access to forest management for smaller landholders.

At appraisal and during the first two years of implementation, the PDO was consistent with the Argentina
Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) FY15-18 (Report No. 81361-AR) and its strategic theme of “Reducing
Environmental Risks and Safeguarding Natural Resources.” Specifically, it contributed to the following CPS
Result Areas: “Improving natural forest cover in the Chaco Ecoregion,” as well as cross-cutting portfolio
management indicators related to (a) increasing the share of WBG financing directed to impoverished
Northern Provinces; (b) governance (strengthening institutions to reduce emissions from deforestation); and
(c) gender (through gender mainstreaming and disaggregated data collection).



                                                                                                     Page 5 of 21
                       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                       Forests and Community (P132846)



During implementation from 2019 and at project closing, the PDO remained aligned with the current
Argentina CPS FY19-FY22 (Report No. 131971-AR), particularly with CPS Focus Area 3 of
“supporting Argentina to achieve its Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) by reducing its vulnerability
to climate change and mitigating the country’s global environmental footprint.” It especially aligned with
Objective 9, which aims to support climate-smart agriculture, implementing Community Driven Development
(CDD) subprojects to increase the number of farmers adopting climate risk management approaches.
Additionally, the PDO was aligned with the 2018 Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD): Argentina:
Escaping Crises, Sustaining Growth, Sharing Prosperity, particularly with its Pathway 4 of “Investing in
natural capital and ensuring environmental sustainability.”

Previous Bank experience

This project represented a continuation of a robust long-term engagement of the WB in the forestry sector.
It built on the results and experiences from a stream of IBRD/Global Environment Facility (GEF) operations
that the World Bank had supported to foster rural development and the protection of livelihoods, nature, and
carbon stock. The engagement includes the following projects: (a) Rural Corridors and Biodiversity GEF
Project (P114294), that protected vulnerable natural areas and conserved biological diversity in the Chaco
and Patagonian ecoregions; (b) AR Socio-Economic Inclusion in Rural Areas Project (P106685), that
focused on supporting small producers on value adding and increasing access to markets; (c) Integrated
Risk Management in the Rural Agroindustrial System Project (P162316), aimed at improving the
management of agricultural risks, including through nature-based solutions; (d) Reducing Emissions from
Deforestation and Forest Degradation (REDD+) Readiness Preparation Grant (known as Argentina FCPF
REDD Readiness Project) (P120414) that supported Argentina’s efforts to mitigate climate change and
access forest carbon markets; (e) Sustainable Natural Resources Management Project (P100806) that
reinforced the collaboration among institutions responsible for managing and protecting forest resources; (f)
Native Forests and Protected Areas Project (P040808) that contributed to the preparation of the Forest Law
(26.331), implemented a national forest inventory, planned for modernization of the National Parks Agency,
and invested in infrastructure and capacity building in high visibility parks; and (g) the Forestry Development
Project (P006040) that enhanced the competitiveness of forest plantations and plantation-based industries.

Level of Ambition of the PDO

The level of ambition of the PDO was soundly supported by the lessons drawn from the long-term
engagement with the forest sector in Argentina. Even though the project focused on improving the
livelihood of forest producers, the PDO formulation was relatively less outcome-oriented, as both the (i)
access to markets and services and (ii) the improved forest management should lead to a higher-level
impact on populations (whose benefits are measured in the first outcome indicator).

Based on the above, Relevance is rated Substantial.


Rating Relevance TBL




Rating
Substantial


4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)


                                                                                                    Page 6 of 21
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  Forests and Community (P132846)



EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               To improve forest management in Selected Northern Provinces

               Rationale
               Theory of Change (ToC)

               The Theory of Change (for both objectives combined) outlined that inputs such as the formulation of
               Integrated Community Plans (PICs), technical assistance and capacity building for both provincial staff and
               communities, building forest and climate awareness, development of an early warning system for
               deforestation and establish a National Native Forest Inventory would lead to outputs such as formulated and
               implemented Integrated Community Plans (by the provinces), infrastructure for improved access to water in
               place and improved stoves delivered, Small-Scale Forest Producers (SFPs) trained in value addition to
               forests products, radio campaigns on forest and climate awareness delivered, community members, SFPs
               and provincial service providers trained and scholarships delivered, operational early warning systems and a
               second national forest inventory completed and published. These outputs were expected to lead to the
               following outcomes: Increased land use planning and adoption of sustainable production practices, improved
               access to basic services by SFPs and increased value of their products, trade agreements, strengthened
               technical and managerial skills, and improved capacities of control authorities to identify deforestation threats
               and improved capacities of environmental authorities to inform forest policy. This was expected to lead to
               improved forest management eventually, Improved access to markets by SFPs, and Improved access to
               basic services by SFPs. The concepts described in the PDO would logically lead to improved livelihood and
               income as a result of access to markets and improved use of forest resources..

               Outputs

                     An operational Early Warning System was put in place, as originally targeted. As of February 2022,
                      the system generated 24,840 alerts (on an area of 670,494.9 ha, ICR page 24). The ICR mission
                      verified that the systems were being used as a monitoring tool by the authorities at the national level
                      (National Forest Directorate) and by the provincial forestry directorates, and it is expected to be
                      extended to other forest regions. Target achieved.
                     51.36% of the timber transported in Participating provinces was tracked by SACVeFor (Forest
                      Administration, Control and Verification System), achieving the original target of 50%.

               While not documented in the ICR, the TTL informed IEG on May 18th that the Integrated Community Plans
               first piloted by the project are now incorporated into the local regulatory framework through Resolution
               427/2020 (ICR page 23). The plans promoted participatory planning, associative arrangements, community
               improvements for sustainable forest production, and providing basic services such as water. They also
               constituted a joint planning strategy for a territory that enabled managing larger landscapes, avoiding forest
               fragmentation, and reaching more beneficiaries.

               Outcomes:

                     5,770 people in the forest and adjacent communities were reported to have monetary and non-
                      monetary benefits from the forest, compared to an original target of 50,000, target not achieved. Of

                                                                                                                   Page 7 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Forests and Community (P132846)



       these, 2,735 were female, not achieving the original target of 25,000, and 2,130 were of ethnic
       minority groups or indigenous, not achieving the original target of 37,500.
       The ICR describes the benefits as equipment, training, and technical support, through the
       implementation of the PICs (ICR, page 23
      384,380 hectares were brought under approved PICs (forest management plans) at project closing,
       exceeding the original target of 310,000 hectares.

While the original output targets were achieved, the outcome targets were only modestly achieved. The rating
for this original objective 1 is thus Modest due to low achievement.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
The Objectives formulation and the related ToC did not change.


Revised Rationale
Outputs:

      An operational Early Warning System was put in place, as originally targeted. Target achieved. (This
       indicator target was not revised during restructuring).
      51.36% of the timber transported in Participating provinces was tracked by the Forest Administration,
       Control and Verification System (SACVeFor), achieving the original target of 50%. (This indicator
       target was not revised during restructuring).

Revised output indicators:

      2,599 households (1,675 indigenous and 924 campesinos) were formally linked to Law 26.331 (which
       fosters forest management) through the approval of 82 Integrated Community Plans, exceeding the
       target of 2,100 households. (This indicator was added at restructuring).

Added output indicators:

      The second national forests inventory was completed, achieving the revised target. (This indicator was
       added at restructuring.)
      9 Integrated community plans were formulated jointly between the national and the provincial
       authorities, and 3 of them were approved, not achieving the target of 20 Integrated community plans
       jointly formulated and approved. (This indicator was added at restructuring).

Outcomes:




                                                                                                Page 8 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Forests and Community (P132846)




       5,770 people in the forest and adjacent communities were reported to have monetary and non-
        monetary benefits from the forest, compared to a revised target of 10,500, a target not achieved. Of
        these, 2,735 were female, not achieving the revised target of 4,200, and 2,130 were indigenous or of
        ethnic minorities, not achieving the revised target of 5,250.
        The ICR describes the benefits as equipment, training, and technical support, through implementing
        the Integrated Community Plans (ICR, page 23).
       384,380 hectares were brought under approved Integrated Community Plans at project closing, not
        achieving the revised target of 420,000 hectares.

While the project fully achieved four of the five revised output targets, it did not achieve any of the two revised
outcome targets. The revised objective 1 is thus rated Modest due to low achievement.



Revised Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To increase access to markets and basic services by small forest producers (including indigenous people and
Campesinos) in Selected Northern Provinces

Rationale
ToC

The project’s ToC (for both objectives combined) is presented under the original objective 1.

Outputs

       1,985 households had improved access to water, not achieving the original target of 6,400.

Outcomes

       620 small forest producers reported improved access to markets, not achieving the original objective
        of 2,000.
       45% of the target households had improved access to basic services, almost achieving the original
        target of 50%.
       The project reached 10,441 direct project beneficiaries, not achieving the original target of 105,000. Of
        these, 46.7% were female, almost achieving the original target of 48%. No target values for ethnic
        minority or indigenous people under this indicator was set at appraisal (but added at
        restructuring). The vast discrepancy between the original target and the actual achievement of total
        beneficiaries is because this indicator was revised from originally intending to measure all
        beneficiaries of improved forest management to measuring direct beneficiaries of the project grants.
       81% of project beneficiaries feel that project investment reflects their needs, exceeding the original
        target of 70%.


                                                                                                     Page 9 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Forests and Community (P132846)



While the outcome indicator target value of improved access to water was not achieved, the indicator targets
at the outcome level were either not achieved or almost achieved. The original objective 2 is thus rated
Modest due to low achievement.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 2 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
The Ojectives formulatino and the revised ToC were not changed.

Revised Rationale
Outputs:

Revised output indicators:

      1,985 households reported improved access to water for consumption or production by constructing
       40 rainwater-collection roofs and 46 excavated reservoirs, exceeding the target of 1,000 households.

Added output indicators:

      546 beneficiaries reported that trade agreements had been established to commercialize their forest
       products, almost achieving the revised target of 600 beneficiaries. This indicator was added at
       restructuring.



The following additional achievements at the output level are presented in the ICR but are not captured in the
RF and thus have no targets values:

      681 households received improved cookstoves through the Project, of which 648 (95 percent)
       reported a reduction in consumption of firewood or gas as a result.
      The project helped dig 13 wells to provide drinking water in Salta province. Training was also provided
       on the safe and sustainable use of the water infrastructure. At the time of the project closing, eight
       more rainwater harvesting ponds were still under construction in Santiago del Estero province.
      While project support for livestock activity in PICs was limited, it was essential for most of the
       community members’ livelihoods with highly positive economic results. There was an immediate
       increase in the quantity and average unit price of sales in cattle, goats, and pigs commercialized in
       PICs. While this had a positive impact on community members’ income, reaching environmentally
       sustainable practices for livestock remains a pending issue.



Outcomes:


                                                                                                Page 10 of 21
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               Forests and Community (P132846)




                                  620 small forest producers reported improved market access, exceeding the revised target of 600.
                                  81% of the surveyed beneficiaries reported that project investment reflected their needs, achieving the
                                   revised target of 70%. This target was added at restructuring.
                                  45% of the target households reported improved access to basic services, almost achieving the target
                                   of 50%. (Target value not revised).
                                  The project reached 10,441 direct project beneficiaries, almost achieving the revised target of 10,500.
                                   Of these, 46.7% were female, exceeding the revised target of 40%, and 65.3 % were indigenous,
                                   exceeding the revised target of 50.
                                  81% of project beneficiaries feel that project investment reflects their needs, exceeding the original
                                   target of 70%.

                            In addition to the achievements at the outcome level captured in the RF, the ICR reported on the following
                            additional outcome-level achievements:

                                  The average household income increase was approximately ARS 14,117 per household
                                   (approximately US$130 at the April 2022 exchange rate) between February 2020 and July 2021. This
                                   represents an average increase of 3 to 6 percent, according to the “Poverty and Indigence Income
                                   Ceilings” (INDEC 2021). There is, however, no reference or baseline to compare it to, nor a clear
                                   attribution to the project interventions.
                                  Some forest products showed price increases and sales volumes between February 2020 and July
                                   2021. The top-ranked products showing increased unit prices are Chaguar handcrafts in Salta (656
                                   percent), honey in Chaco (620 percent), and poles in Santiago del Estero (579 percent). There is,
                                   however, no evidence that attributes this to the project intervention and no baseline values for
                                   comparison.

                            While we lack indicators that measure improved income and life conditions, it is plausible that improved
                            access to markets and water will positively impact the lives of communities. The results from the beneficiaries’
                            surveys also indicate increased household income.

                            Based on the above, the rating for the revised objective 2 is Substantial.



                            Revised Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Both Original Objectives are rated Modest due to low achievement, so the overall achievement pre-
                            restructuring is rated Modest.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating                                  Primary Reason
                                                                                                                              Page 11 of 21
             Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
             Forests and Community (P132846)



         Modest                                                    Low achievement
 OBJR1_TBL




         OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
         Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
         The Revised Objective 1 is rated Modest due to low achievement, and Revised objective 2 is rated
         Substantial. The overall efficacy rating for revision 1 is thus Substantial with moderate shortcomings.



         Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating
         Substantial



 5. Efficiency
The ICR (pages 61-65) presents a sound economic efficiency analysis, including different sources and models
to calculate profitability, NPV, and benefits attributable to the project.

Economic efficiency

An ex-ante economic and financial analysis (EFA) was conducted at the time of project appraisal, expecting an
economic IRR of 31 percent internalizing avoided deforestation, with a financial IRR of 23 percent, excluding
avoided deforestation. The expected Economic Net Present Value (NPV) would be around US$44 million (PAD,
page 12).

The ex-post EFA conducted during the ICR mission shows an IRR of 19 percent and NPV of US$1.3 million at a
15 percent social discount rate for a 20-year period (ICR, page 61). Results of the analysis fall below the
original PAD estimates in 2015 because of delays in the first two years of project implementation in the
elaboration of PICs and the substantial decrease in the amount invested in PICs (following the first restructuring,
which canceled the loan amount by 65%). As there was no IRR or NPV calculated at the restructuring in 2019,
comparisons on profitability indicators can be made only with the original PAD estimates.

Benefits from PICs. The benefits of PICs could not be calculated at appraisal, as PICs are demand driven. The
set of productive investments in PICs showed positive financial profitability, with a financial IRR of 12 percent
financial discount rate, ranging from 12 percent to 45 percent, depending on the model (different models applied
depending on the type of PIC). NPV ranging from ARS 22,891 (for the PICs in Chaco, which included activities
such as livestock and small forest production) to ARS 6.4 million (indigenous PICs in Chaco, which included
incomes such as honey production and handicrafts). (ICR figure 6.2). PICs that included productive investments
showed more economic profitability. Benefits from access to water infrastructure predominate (68 percent of
total benefits in PICs), followed by productive investments (19 percent), efficient stoves (13 percent), and
vegetable plots (1 percent).

Environmental benefits. The FAO CFIC team prepared one exercise and another by the DNB (Forest National
Department- Ministry of Environment), comparing deforestation rates within the PICs areas to several
counterfactual scenarios outside the PICs areas. Positive environmental benefits were noted, confirming that



                                                                                                           Page 12 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Forests and Community (P132846)



forest cover in PICs was maintained in absolute terms and deforestation rates were lower within PICs areas
than outside PICs areas (ICR page 28).

Other efficiency ratios. The ICR analyses the cost per beneficiary ratio and the operational cost ratios, which
are only moderately above the estimates in the PAD (mainly due to the partial cancellation of funds and scale
losses). There has been a reduction of 7 percent in cost per beneficiary (IBRD) but a 5-percentage point
increase in the management cost ratio (from 13 to 18 percent) since 2019. t.

Operational and administrative efficiency:

The project implementation rate was low during the first four years. This was mainly due to: (i) the economic
crisis that started around 2018 and forced the GoA to take drastic fiscal measures that led to the cancellation of
a substantial amount of the loan; (ii) the overestimation of the availability and capacity of the stakeholders in the
provinces that were to provide technical assistance for the elaboration and implementation of PICs; (iii) the
coordination and management challenges faced by the NEU (National Executing Unit) concerning the LEUs
(Local Executing Units).

The downsizing of the project in 2019 enabled a simplification and prioritization of the project’s interventions.
From then on, a more efficient execution took place, even under the difficult circumstances of the COVID-19
outbreak and in the context of the economic crisis in the country. Funds were almost entirely used by project
closure in 2022.

The economic analysis is inconclusive since it is hard to compare to the expected EIRR, given that the reference
to the ex-ante situation was not updated at the moment of the 2019 restructuring. Interventions were downsized,
and PIC’s benefits could not be compared against project costs. There were shortcomings in operational
efficiency also. The overall efficiency rating is Modest.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?              Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                       0
 Appraisal                                                   0
                                                                                        Not Applicable
                                                                                       0
 ICR Estimate                                                0
                                                                                        Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome



                                                                                                       Page 13 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Forests and Community (P132846)




              Before
Indicator                         After Restructuring
              Restructuring
Relevance     Substantial         Substantial
Efficacy      Modest              Substantial
Objective 1   Modest              Modest
Objective 2   Modest              Substantial
Efficiency    Modest              Modest
Outcome       Moderately
                                  Moderately Satisfactory
Rating        Unsatisfactory
Outcome Value 3                   4
Disbursement US$10.98 million     US$ 20.68 million
Disbursement
              53%                 47%
percentage
Weight value  1.59                1.88
              3.47, rounded up to 4
Total Weight

Overall          Moderately Satisfactory
Outcome
Rating


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The main risks identified are the following:

     i. Social risk: from the campesino and indigenous communities, if the forest management mechanisms
       do not result in sustainable benefits for them, the situation could cause social unrest.
    ii. Institutional risk: The success of achieving a joint elaboration of the PICs relies on the national and
        provincial levels of institutions sharing the same political vision on community involvement and
        resource management and distribution. The fact that only 3 of 20 PICs were approved in this way
        speaks for the challenges of this process.
   iii. Environmental risks: There is a risk that the water from the wells may not continue to be treated and
        monitored by the safeguard mechanisms, which may represent a health hazard. Also, the rainwater
        collection infrastructure and groundwater wells supported by the project aimed to mitigate the risk that
        climate change poses to the sustainability of the improved access to water. Dry winter periods are
        becoming longer and drier, which will put pressure on water resources. Effective management of soil



                                                                                                    Page 14 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Forests and Community (P132846)



      and vegetation through the PICs will positively contribute to hydrological regulation and, thus,
      sustainable use of water resources (this affects particularly the Chaco area).




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project design constituted a joint effort between the World Bank and the Secretariat of Environment
  and Sustainable Development (SAyDS), with collaboration from the FAO, and was the result of a long-
  standing engagement. The appraisal was supported by sound experience and practice, lessons learned,
  and sufficient technical analysis. The original design assumed that a varied type of stakeholders, private
  and public, at the local level, would participate as an ecosystem that would support the elaboration and
  implementation of the PICs in a sustainable way. The design included sound ex-ante economic and
  financial analysis of the areas for which that was possible (however, not for the income-generating
  activities of the PICs, as those were demand-driven and unknown at the time of appraisal).

  At design, a shortcoming was the overestimation of the number of actors (civil society and private sector)
  that could get involved at the local level, either as stakeholders or in a facilitating capacity (providing
  technical assistance) in the elaboration of the PICs. Some indicator definitions were unclear or ambitious
  given the time frame (e.g., Forest fund resources allocated) and were addressed to a large extent during
  implementation. The ICR also notes the inadequate assessment of technical capacities in the field to
  reach the targeted beneficiaries and expected project outcomes during project preparation which
  contributed to initial poor project performance and the decision by mid-term to scale down the project to
  more manageable levels.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The World Bank team undertook 16 support missions, including environmental and social implementation
 support and financial and procurement specialist support. The World Bank safeguards and fiduciary teams
 had an important role in providing solutions to issues that arose and assisting counterpart staff with training
 and close follow-up. The fiduciary specialist worked with the PIU to monitor budget allocation and planning
 and disbursement progress. Through timely project restructurings the WB team showed proactivity to
 improve project performance and address challenging contextual situations (two changes in the national
 government administration, the macroeconomic imbalances and the fiscal management measures taken by
 the government, as well as the COVID-19 pandemic). The MTR conducted in 2018 provided strategic
 direction for the remaining implementation period and served to build the PIU’s management capacities to
 improve project planning and monitoring tools and practices. Special attention was also provided by the
 World Bank’s environmental and social safeguards specialists during the last two years of implementation,
 due to unexpected complications that emerged and that needed their intervention for the project to comply
 with WB policy at project closing. The considerable downsizing of the project in 2019 justified a new

                                                                                                    Page 15 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Forests and Community (P132846)



 economic and financial analysis, so that ex-post analysis would have realistic comparison values, but they
 were not undertaken.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The M&E was well designed with some minor shortcomings. Some of the outcome indicators (monetary
 and non-monetary benefits) lacked precision as to what the non-monetary benefits consisted of. The
 impact survey could have drawn deeper findings on impact results if more impact indicators had been
 identified (changes in behavior, perceived improvement of life conditions).

 At appraisal, the following was planned regarding the M&E: biannual progress reports with performance
 indicator updates; a project-specific impact evaluation designed in consultation with the Development
 Impact Evaluation Initiative (DIME); the need for the national counterpart to rely more on the Local
 Executing Units (LEU) and ensure that they follow established methodologies for progress reporting. An
 M&E strategy was included in the Operational Manual (OM), and it was foreseen that an M&E specialist
 would provide support and capacity development at all levels (Organogram Annex 3, Figure 3.3, PAD). The
 implementing agency was to be involved in developing the results framework. M&E reports, including
 environmental and social monitoring results, were to be produced quarterly at the LEU level and every six
 months at the National Executing level. Annual evaluation and impact monitoring reports were to facilitate
 adaptive management, allowing for the identification of issues and lessons that could help adjust the
 operational strategy. The project's mid-term review was planned for no later than 30 months after
 effectiveness.



b. M&E Implementation
  Data collection and analysis were systematic during project implementation, and the PIU was attentive
  and committed to improving and adjusting the M&E system as necessary. These efforts permitted the
  successful tracking of the indicators of the RF and were particularly useful in tracking the PICs’
  elaboration.

  Beneficiaries’ surveys took place at two stages: during PIC formulation to identify beneficiaries’ priorities
  and before the end of project implementation to assess satisfaction with project interventions (ex-post).
  Outcomes were significantly assessed through beneficiary surveys and were not verified or triangulated
  with more objective measurement methods. They included a qualitative question about the degree to
  which respondents felt that project activities reflected their preferences. A total of 1,336 surveys were
  conducted for heads of households and were conducted twice to a representative sample of

                                                                                                      Page 16 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Forests and Community (P132846)



  beneficiaries. The survey allowed for gender disaggregation. A third survey was planned for after the
  project closing but could not occur due to COVID restrictions.

  The weaknesses of some indicators lacking conciseness were not corrected during implementation. For
  instance, the indicator that measured access to basic services could have been modified to “access to
  water.” A baseline data collection was not carried out. Still, comparing some of the project achievements
  to the initial situation would have been useful, particularly for the outcome indicators.



c. M&E Utilization
  M&E was used as a key tool to inform decision‐making, planning, and budgeting for project
  management. The M&E results guided the reallocation between disbursement categories and the
  downsizing of final targets for some results indicators during the three restructurings, aiming at keeping
  the PDO achievable while honoring the commitments made to local communities.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   At appraisal, the project was classified as Category B. The safeguards triggered are the following:
   Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01; Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04; Forests OP/BP 4.36; Pest
   Management OP 4.09; Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11; Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10;
   Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12.

   The environmental risks were rated as Moderate, and the project was expected to reduce pressure on
   forests and produce positive impacts. However, some of the project investments implemented to support
   cattle ranching in forest ecosystems might have environmental effects in the long term, leading to poorly
   understood effects, such as forest fire risk, biodiversity, and greenhouse gas balance. During
   implementation, the overall safeguards performance was less than satisfactory, and weaknesses related to
   implementing safeguard policies, such as Environmental Assessment, Indigenous Peoples, and Involuntary
   Resettlement, persisted.

   During a mission conducted in November 2021, it was found that several of the wells that would provide
   water access to the indigenous communities (in the province of Salta) had too high levels of salts, which
   made the water unapt for human consumption. Although the agreement between the WB and the GoA had
   been that if such an event took place, the wells would be sealed, the GoA, in order to provide access to
   safe water for parts of the communities, opted for treating the water to make it safe for consumption (most
   of the treated water would be used for crops and animals, and only a small part for human consumption).
   An Action Plan was established with the WB safeguard specialists (including the regional WB specialists) to
   follow up activities closely and mitigate the risks. Among the mitigation measures that were included:
   obtaining confirmation from laboratories on the water quality, involving other public authorities in the
   supervision of the plan (Ministry of Health and the Water Authority at the local level), establishing the need

                                                                                                    Page 17 of 21
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Forests and Community (P132846)



  to elaborate reports on the water quality twice a year, etc. The action plan is under implementation, and the
  project is still being monitored as part of the regional portfolio supervision (exchanges with the Bank team).
  The ICR notes that no project-related fatalities, health/safety-related accidents, or other significant
  environmental incidents attributable to the project were recorded during implementation, and most
  safeguards aspects were addressed.

  The social risks were not rated explicitly in the Project Appraisal Document, but during most of the project
  implementation, the social safeguards performance was rated as less than satisfactory. There were
  significant technical weaknesses in the Project Implementation Unit (PIU) regarding the implementation of
  social safeguards instruments for Indigenous Peoples and resettlement. The Indigenous Peoples in the
  project area were identified during project preparation, and a participatory process involving them was
  conducted to ensure their engagement and consent. However, the impact of the COVID-19
  pandemic interfered moderately with the project's work in the territory, as switching to a virtual mode
  affected how the project engaged with the communities.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management

  The FM arrangements provided accurate and timely financial information, and budget allocation and
  distribution were adequately carried out. The Directorate of Projects had constructive engagement with the
  World Bank on FM aspects throughout the implementation period, and moderate FM shortcomings were
  identified during supervision missions. Financial statement audits were carried out by Argentina's General
  Audit Office, sometimes submitted with some delay, and were found to be acceptable without any qualified
  opinions. All recommendations were addressed during the project implementation, and all interim financial
  reports submitted to the World Bank were considered acceptable and received within standard timelines.
  Overall, the FM Implementation Status and Results reports ratings ranged from moderately unsatisfactory
  to satisfactory.

  Procurement

  The World Bank’s procurement post review carried out in October 2022 showed that the provisions
  outlined in the Procurement Regulations (applicable to the project), the Loan Agreement, and the PAD
  were substantially complied with. Despite several staff rotations, the PIU retained a procurement specialist
  with experience executing processes financed by the World Bank. The technical inputs were provided by
  the requesting areas and incorporated into the respective documents. Despite some delays in the
  procurement process execution, mainly based on the operational context of the project, the PIU managed
  to carry out the activities approved in the Procurement Plan.

  During the first years of implementation, disbursement increased at an average rate of 16 percent,
  decreasing notably in 2019. After the 2019 restructuring, when a partial cancellation for US$38 million was
  processed, the disbursement rate experienced a steady increase throughout the rest of the project life,
  reaching a 99.6 percent rate at the project closure. Advances to the Designated Account have been
  thoroughly documented. As of January 24, 2023, a small balance of US$.084 million remains undisbursed
  and is to be canceled.


                                                                                                  Page 18 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Forests and Community (P132846)




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   Following the recognition of the PICs as a national intervention strategy for the GoA, they have continued
   to be implemented through the Payment for Results Program funded by the Green Climate Fund (since
   2022). This Program includes measures to reduce greenhouse gas emissions as a strategy to address
   climate change (ICR, page 30).



d. Other
   The Implementation Completion assessment was conducted a few months prior to project closing and, as
   pointed out by the project team in its correspondence to IEG (07/25/23), the ICR was thus not able to
   capture the full picture of all actual achievements at project closure.



11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                     IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
                                Moderately
Outcome                                                Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
                                                                                  There were shortcomings in
Bank Performance                Satisfactory           Moderately Satisfactory
                                                                                  Quality at Entry.
Quality of M&E                  Substantial            Substantial

Quality of ICR                  ---                    Substantial


12. Lessons

IEG draws the following lesson:

When a project that is restructured with considerable downsizing of its scope does not
update its Economic and Financial Analysis, the economic efficiency may be difficult to
measure ex-post, as the original EFA no longer represents the baseline of comparison. In this
project, the lack of an EFA at mid-term review also hindered the ability to decide on investment
priorities based on data, eventually leading to additional project restructurings and the reallocation of
resources among disbursement categories.

The following lessons drawn from the ICR, with some adjustments made by IEG, are deemed
particularly relevant:

When sufficient political will and institutional capacity are present, projects with a strong
community participatory planning component with new target populations are more likely to
be successful. In this project, not all Provinces had the same disposition towards the involvement


                                                                                                     Page 19 of 21
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Forests and Community (P132846)



of indigenous and campesinos communities. Those with better disposition and higher technical
capacity were more successful in facilitating participatory planning.

An appropriate level of precision and detail of a project's investment may enhance the
project's execution rate and achievement. Carefully defining the geographic scope of the
interventions and focusing the project implementation on a narrow but thoroughly detailed and
known set of investments strongly aligned with the key expected results (instead of offering a broad,
untested, or loosely defined set of investment alternatives) is essential to keep that balance,
particularly in cases of constrained implementation capacities. This is supported by the fact that
once the project scope was reduced, the execution rate and achievement of results significantly
improved.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR presents a good analysis of evidence. The quality of evidence is substantial, based both on the
surveys conducted and the data collected for the indicators of the results framework. In terms of the quality of
analysis, there is a clear link between the narrative, the ratings, and the evidence. The original and revised
ToCs are depicted graphically in detail in respective figures. The efficacy is assessed comprehensively, though
the ICR should have undertaken a split evaluation given the significant reduction in scope and targets.

Lessons are clear and well explained with concrete project examples. The main learnings of the project are
identified.

The ICR is results-oriented. The discussion on achievements was adequately balanced between reporting on
the achievement of outcome indicators and what the project achieved on the ground. It provides a candid,
accurate, substantiated set of observations aligned to the project development objective. It also acknowledges
the shortcomings, such as not having an updated EFT at the time of the MTR and first restructuring, to enable a
more realistic baseline to compare progress and economic benefits by project closure.

The ICR used the available data to the extent possible to justify most of the assigned ratings, showing
consistency with guidelines. The ICR provided comprehensive coverage of the implementation experience and
candidly reported shortcomings. However, the length of the ICR is nearly double the recommended length in
the guidelines.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                  Page 20 of 21
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
Forests and Community (P132846)




                                                                  Page 21 of 21
