     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GZ: Health System Resiliency Strengthng (P150481)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0023446

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P150481                                    GZ: Health System Resiliency Strengthng

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 West Bank and Gaza                         Health, Nutrition & Population


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-18986                                   30-Jun-2020                                            8,462,234.64

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 21-Jan-2015                                31-May-2022

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                             8,500,000.00                                     8,500,000.00

 Revised Commitment                              8,500,000.00                                     8,500,000.00

 Actual                                          8,462,234.64                                     8,462,234.64




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Denise A. Vaillancourt      Judyth L. Twigg              Eduardo Fernandez               IEGHC (Unit 2)
                                                          Maldonado




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   As stated in the February 4, 2015 Grant Agreement between the Palestine Liberation Organization (for the
   benefit of the Palestinian Authority) and the International Development Association (IDA), acting as
   Administrator of the Trust Fund for Gaza and West Bank (Schedule 1, p. 5), the Project Development
   Objective (PDO) was “…to support the Palestinian Authority in securing continuity in (healthcare) service
   delivery and building its resilience to withstand future surge in demand for effective healthcare coverage. The



                                                                                                    Page 1 of 26
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GZ: Health System Resiliency Strengthng (P150481)



   design document presented the same statement (PAD, pp. 8 and 21). The PDO did not change throughout
   the project’s life.

   While PDO-level indicators and targets were revised as a part of the project’s restructurings, none of these
   revisions warrant a split rating. A third hospital was added to the utilization rate indicator, measuring
   achievement against Objective 1 (securing continuity in healthcare service delivery). Targets for this indicator
   were adjusted to reflect corrected baselines, but the level of ambition remained the same. An indicator
   tracking a decline in overall costs of referrals was changed to track a slower growth rate in the cost of outside
   medical referrals (OMR), based on more accurate baseline information. Moreover, this was a more
   appropriate measure of the project's effect against a backdrop of rapidly increasing demand for OMR due to
   population growth and demographic transition.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  17-Jan-2018

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Original Components:

   Project support was to delivered through four components.

   Component 1: Emergency and Rapid Response Window (original estimate of US$2.0 million; actual
   at closing: US$2.07 million). This component was designed to ensure the continuation of basic healthcare
   services at minimum acceptable levels and avoid such services from experiencing systemic collapse in the
   aftermath of the Gaza conflict in 2014. It was to cover selected non-medical recurrent costs of operating and
   maintaining health service facilities in the major hospitals of Gaza, including: (i) fuel costs for hospital
   generators and ambulance services; (ii) hospital cleaning services and cleaning materials; and (iii) hospital
   catering services.

   Component 2: Rationalizing Outside Medical Referrals (OMR) (original estimate of US$3.5 million;
   actual at closing: US$3.66 million). This component aimed to support the Palestinian Authority (PA) to
   institute immediate cost-cutting measures in order to improve efficiency in the current system without
   compromising access to needed and quality health services. It was to include support for: (i) the review and
   renegotiation of contracts and other arrangements between the Ministry of Health (MoH) and private health
   service providers for the provision of health services, including the undertaking of a costing study; (ii) the
   development of a guidance note for medical referrals setting forth rules for the treatment and referral of
   selected health conditions; (iii) the strengthening of the medical referral information system and the


                                                                                                     Page 2 of 26
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    GZ: Health System Resiliency Strengthng (P150481)



  development of a medical referrals master plan; and (iv) the strengthening of public provision of selected
  health services through strategic procurement of critical medical equipment.

  Component 3: Supporting Health Coverage to Strengthen Sector Resilience (original estimate of
  US$2.0 million; actual at closing: US$1.78 million). This component was to cover activities designed to
  support the establishment of a national health coverage scheme, including the consideration of options for
  separating the roles of MoH in financing, service provision, and regulation of health care. It was to
  include support for: (i) the definition of enrollment criteria and options; (ii) specification of the benefit
  package of healthcare services, including the costing of services and the establishment of criteria for the
  inclusion of these services in the package; (iii) the establishment of provider payment options for primary
  and hospital care; (iv) the development of strategies for covering the informal sector; and (v) the
  establishment of an independent pooling and purchasing agency to separate financing, pooling, and
  purchasing functions from service provision.

  Component 4: Project Management and Capacity Building (original estimate of US$1.0 million;
  actual at closing: US$0.95 million). This component was to finance activities and costs aimed at
  strengthening MoH capacity in project management and monitoring and evaluation (M&E). Specific areas of
  support were to include the provision of consultants’ services, audits, training, and the financing of operating
  costs.

  Revisions to Components

  While the project underwent four restructurings (see Section 2e), the components were not substantially
  revised during project implementation. There were, nevertheless, some adjustments introduced, and some
  activities were scaled back in light of constraints encountered during implementation. These are itemized in
  Section 8b (Quality of Supervision).



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Cost. The total actual cost of the project was US$8.46 million equivalent, or 99.5 percent of the original
  estimate of $8.50 million.

  Financing and Borrower Contribution. The project was financed by a Grant from the Trust Fund for
  Gaza and West Bank, for which IDA was Administrator. The US$8.5 million grant was fully (99.5 percent)
  disbursed. No counterpart funding was planned or provided.

  Key Dates. The project was approved on January 21, 2015 and became effective less than a month later
  on February 16, 2015. A first restructuring (September 7, 2015) provided additional financing in the amount
  of US$1.25 million to complement the US$7.25 million provided to the project under the original Grant
  Agreement to fulfill the original commitment of the Trust Fund to provide $8.5 million in financing. The
  financing was provided in two tranches because at the time of project approval, the Trust Fund only had an
  available balance of US$7.25 million. Following the July 17 2017 mid-term review, a second restructuring
  (January 17, 2018) adjusted a few indicators and targets in light of progress and to clarify measures. A third
  restructuring (January 13, 2020) made more adjustments in the results framework and extended the original
  closing date by a year and a half to December 31, 2021. In March 2020, US$0.8 million was reallocated
  from Component 3 (Supporting Health Coverage to Strengthen Sector Resilience) to Component 2
  (Rationalizing Outside Medical Referrals/OMR) to strengthen MoH’s COVID-19 case management

                                                                                                    Page 3 of 26
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GZ: Health System Resiliency Strengthng (P150481)



   capacity. A fourth and final restructuring (October 27, 2021) introduced a second extension of the closing
   date, to May 31, 2022, to enable completion of project activities.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The PDO is highly relevant to current country conditions. Despite some progress made under this
emergency operation, the fragile health system in West Bank and Gaza (WB&G) continues to face
formidable challenges that undermine its ability to respond to the health needs of the population. Ongoing
challenges include underfinancing of health services; inefficiencies in the allocation and use of financial
resources and in the organization of the health system and service delivery; and low service quality.
Underfinancing and inefficient allocation and use of scarce resources were exacerbated by the COVID-19
crisis, which consumed considerable amounts of scarce health sector resources. Health sector
performance has also been negatively impacted by continued escalations in violence in Gaza, which have
limited the mobility of the population and caused a rise in deaths and injuries, as well as damages and
losses to the health sector. Health costs have risen dramatically in the face of rapid population growth and
an epidemiological transition with growing of incidence of non-communicable diseases (NCDs), which
are expensive to manage and treat. Sources of financing are fragile. Public health spending has doubled
over the previous decade, and donor funding has been unpredictable. Moreover, the fragmented health
financing model has not been able to address the imbalance between government health insurance
revenues and public expenditures on health. Rapidly growing reliance on an expensive and complex
referral system of OMR to private hospitals in WB&G is neither efficient nor sustainable. The International
Monetary Fund report to the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee on WB&G (April 26, 2022) highlighted the need to
implement spending reform centered on health referrals to address fiscal pressures due to rising health
expenditures.

The PDO is highly relevant to the current development priorities of the country. PA’s National
Development Plan (NDP) (2021-2023) places economic and human capital at the core of its strategy. In
response to the COVID-19 pandemic, it places strong emphasis on the resilience of institutions. The NDP
supports three pillars: (1) ending occupation; (2) reform and enhancement of service delivery; and (3)
sustainable development. Within Pillar 2, the NDP prioritizes the strengthening of institutions to provide
more effective and quality citizen-centered public services. It also highlights the importance of strengthening
governance and efficiency of public services in supporting the health-related outcomes specified in National
Policy #27 (Providing Quality Health Care Services for All) and National Policy #28 (Improving Citizens’
Health and Wellbeing). Pillar 3 is geared towards the support of economic growth and investments in
human capital. Health-relevant activities in the NDP include promoting the effectiveness, coherence, and
inclusion of the social services systems, with a special focus on women and children, and advancing
universal health coverage (UHC).

The PDO is also highly relevant to the Bank’s Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for the West
Bank and Gaza for FY2022-2025, issued in 2021. The CPF supports two Focus Areas. Under Focus Area
1 (Strengthening Institutions for Economic and Social Prosperity), several objectives are closely aligned
with the project’s objectives. Objective 1.2 aims to support service providers to become financially
sustainable. Objective 1.3 aims to achieve better human development outcomes, within which health-
specific aims are the achievement of UHC and enhanced resilience to health shocks. Under Focus Area 2

                                                                                                    Page 4 of 26
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      GZ: Health System Resiliency Strengthng (P150481)



               (Boosting Innovation and Diversification for a Well-Connected Palestinian Economy), Objective 2.3 seeks to
               improve infrastructure through World Bank investment that leverages donor resources. The project’s focus
               on reproductive health services and its emphasis on citizen’s engagement in the context of family health
               and UHC are relevant to the two cross-cutting themes of the CPF: addressing and narrowing gender gaps;
               and promoting citizens’ engagement.

               At the time of project design, the World Bank had already played an integral role in the health sector
               in WB&G, as well as in other fragile and post-conflict countries, rendering it well equipped to
               undertake the project in a challenging context. The Bank’s previous engagements in the health sector
               in WB&G, including the three-phase Emergency Services Support Program (2002-2013) and a series of
               analytic and advisory services, were critical in informing the design of this emergency project. Moreover, the
               Bank’s considerable experience working on health sector analysis and investments in many fragile and
               post-conflict countries provided the opportunity for incorporating this experience into the
               project. Furthermore, the World Bank brings global experience and expertise in the field of health financing
               and health insurance. Overall, in health, the World Bank’s comparative advantage is in systems building
               and strengthening. The Bank’s health sector strategy is focused on supporting countries to create
               sustainable health systems that deliver results for the poor. This includes a multi-sectoral dialogue and
               perspective, the knowledge and ability to strengthen health systems and financing, and dialogue with the
               Ministry of Finance to ensure that the sector is adequately funded to achieve its targets.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To support the Palestinian Authority in securing continuity in healthcare service delivery

                             Rationale
                             As laid out in the theory of change presented in the ICR and accompanying text (ICR, pp. 8-9), the project
                             aimed to secure continuity in healthcare service delivery by covering urgent health financing needs, which
                             had markedly increased as a result of the Gaza conflict of 2014. In complement to MoH’s continued financing
                             of human resources, drugs, and consumables, the project’s Emergency and Rapid Response Window was to
                             support selected non-medical recurrent costs of operating and maintaining health service facilities in Gaza,
                             including the three major hospitals of Gaza (Shifa, Nasser, and European Gaza), assuring the provision of the
                             following outputs: (i) fuel for hospital generators and ambulance services; (ii) hospital cleaning services and
                             cleaning materials; and (iii) catering services for hospitals. The Bank’s team specified, in its June 23, 2023
                             note to IEG, that these outputs were expected to prevent the collapse of these three major hospitals and the
                             spread of infections. The project was also to finance strategic procurement of equipment in selected hospitals
                             in WB&G for surgical, obstetric, and neonatal care, among other services, to enhance hospitals’ capacity to
                             continue delivery of critical services and their continued utilization by the population. (Provision of this

                                                                                                                              Page 5 of 26
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   GZ: Health System Resiliency Strengthng (P150481)



equipment was also meant to support Objective 2, with enhanced hospital capacity expected to reduce the
need for OMR.)



Outputs and intermediate results

      Under its Emergency and Rapid Response Window, the project provided emergency support for non-
       medical expenditures in Gaza’s three largest hospitals (Shifa, Nasser, and Gaza), including fuel costs
       for hospital generators and ambulance services, and hospital cleaning services and materials, the
       latter focused especially on the surgical, intensive care, and neonatal intensive care units, for a total of
       175 health facilities, including Gaza’s three largest hospitals (91 in 2014 and 84 in 2015). A post-
       intervention assessment carried out by MoH in 2016 showed substantial reduction in medical waste in
       these targeted critical units, which helped prevent outbreaks of communicable disease. The
       assessment also revealed that the level of satisfaction with these services among MoH employees
       and patients rose dramatically, from 15 percent in 2014 to 85 percent in 2015 (ICR, pp. 14-15). In a
       follow-up note to IEG dated June 23, 2023, the Bank’s team noted that, given the limited project
       financing and huge needs, MoH prioritized the use of these funds for fuel and cleaning services, and
       ultimately did not use financing to support catering services.
      The project equipped six newly built operating rooms in Alia Hospital in Hebron (West Bank), which
       also benefited from an Ultrasound Doppler machine to establish a complete unit for vascular surgery.
       The project also provided Beit Jala Hospital (West Bank) with a sterilizer for its Central Sterile Service
       Department, which serves a large population in the southern governorate.
      The project supplied neonatal medical equipment and related training to Neonatal Intensive Care
       Units in four facilities: Palestine Medical Complex and Jenin, Rafedia, and Alia hospitals. The Bank’s
       team, in its follow-up response to IEG of June 23, 2023, gave more detail on the equipment provided
       (a portable echo machine, neonatal monitors with central station, cooling mattress with amplitude
       integrated electroencephalogram monitor, and open resuscitators) and its use. This equipment
       enabled these facilities to deliver obstetric and neonatal services, both basic -- Emergency Obstetric
       and Neonatal Care (BEmONC) -- and enhanced -- Comprehensive Emergency Obstetric and
       Neonatal Care (CEmONC). As such, this equipment had a direct influence on obstetric occupancy
       rates and also helped reduce referrals in support of Objective 2.
      The Bank’s team also noted in its June 23, 2023 communication that the provision of cleaning support
       was critical for infection prevention and control. These services had a positive impact on the
       continuity of delivery of obstetric services for normal deliveries and complicated cases at Shifa
       hospital (Gaza), one of the most important hospitals in Gaza providing obstetric and neonatal care,
       including both BEmONC and CEmONC.



Outcomes

Continuity of services was measured in terms of utilization rates of the most critical services (outpatient,
emergency, and obstetrics) in the major hospitals in WB&G that benefited from the project. The Bank’s team
clarified in its June 23, 2023 note to IEG that: (1) WB&G did not have a well-established system of primary
health care with gatekeeping function, which resulted in the population’s high reliance on hospital outpatient



                                                                                                     Page 6 of 26
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   GZ: Health System Resiliency Strengthng (P150481)



services; and (2) almost all deliveries (normal and complicated) are conducted in hospitals, because primary
health care facilities do not conduct any deliveries.

Overall, occupancy rates in the three largest public sector hospitals in Gaza (Shifa, Nasser, and
European Gaza Hospitals) showed a consistently increasing trend during the first four years of the project and
showed promise for fully achieving the target. However, these rates started to decline in 2020 due to the
disruptions and challenges caused by COVID. The ICR also noted (p. 15) that there was a relative increase in
service utilization following the escalation of violence in Gaza in May 2021.

      From a baseline of 89 percent, the occupancy rate of Shifa Hospital decreased very slightly (by 2
       percent) to 87.3 percent by the project’s end, substantially achieving the target of at least
       maintaining the baseline rate (98 percent achievement). The occupancy rate had actually risen to 92
       percent in 2017, exceeding the minimum target (of at least maintaining the baseline level),
       but COVID-19 caused a subsequent decline in the last two years of the project.
      From a baseline of 74 percent, the occupancy rate in Nasser Hospital declined to 61.8 percent by the
       project’s end, falling short of the target to maintain (at least) the baseline level (84 percent
       achievement). Occupancy actually rose to 87.6 percent in 2017, exceeding the minimum target,
       but then declined during the project’s last two years because of the COVID pandemic.
      From a baseline of 79 percent, the occupancy rate in European Gaza Hospital declined by almost half,
       to 41.5 percent, not achieving the minimum target of maintaining the baseline rate (53 percent
       achievement). The baseline level of occupancy was maintained at 79 percent in 2017, but
       subsequently declined with the onset of the COVID pandemic.
      In summary, targets were fully met in all three of Gaza’s main hospitals in 2019 (pre-COVID), but the
       decline in utilization rates during the last two years of the project, caused by the pandemic, affected
       end-of-project results, with declines in occupancy in two of the three hospitals.

Occupancy rates in two public sector hospitals in the West Bank (Rafedia and Alia Hospitals) showed
mixed results.

      From a 2015 baseline of 85 percent, the occupancy rate of Rafedia hospital increased to 98.5 percent
       by the project’s end, exceeding the highest range of the target (a 10 percent increase over the
       baseline).
      From a 2015 baseline of 136 percent, the occupancy rate of Alia hospital declined to 111 percent by
       the project’s end, not achieving the target of at least maintaining the baseline rate. On the other
       hand, occupancy at 136 percent of capacity may have overextended the hospital’s ability to
       maintain quality of care. In its follow-up response to IEG (June 23, 2023), the Bank’s team noted that
       one of the reasons for the high baseline utilization rate was the health system’s overreliance on
       hospital care and lack of focus on primary health care. This project’s Component 3 and a new World
       Bank-financed project support the building of primary health care capacity to reduce the need for
       costly hospital care and referrals.

Utilization rates of obstetrics services (total bed days/total beds available x 100) in three hospitals (one in
Gaza: Shifa; and two in West Bank: Rafedia and Alia) provide an indication of continuity and improved uptake
of these critical services. The Bank’s team, in its June 23, 2023 follow-up communication with IEG, noted that,
over and above the provision of obstetric and neonatal equipment to Rafedia and Alia hospitals, the project’s




                                                                                                 Page 7 of 26
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   GZ: Health System Resiliency Strengthng (P150481)



financing of cleaning services was critical for infection prevention and control, which was pivotal in ensuring
continuity of delivery of obstetric services, both for normal delivery and complicated cases.

      Utilization of Shifa Hospital obstetrics increased from 76 to 113 percent, exceeding the highest
       range of the target of 84 percent (a 10 percent increase over the baseline). Shifa is one of the most
       important hospitals in Gaza providing both BEmONC and CEmONC.
      Utilization of Rafedia hospital obstetrics increased from 94 percent to 96 percent, exceeding the
       minimum target of maintaining the baseline level.
      Utilization of Alia obstetrics increased from 105 percent to 127 percent, exceeding the highest range
       of the target of 116 percent (a 10 percent increase over the baseline).

On the other hand, trends in the number of outpatient department visits (OPD) at these same three
hospitals show mixed results.

      By the project’s end, 107,538 outpatients were seen annually in Shifa (Gaza) Hospital, achieving
       only 60 percent of the target to maintain (at least) the baseline level of 180,000. (The baseline was
       adjusted in March 2020 (ISR #15) to correct the inaccurate baseline established at the project’s outset
       and carried over into the January 2018 and January 2020 restructurings.)
      By the project’s end, 83,967 outpatients were seen annually in Rafedia (West Bank) Hospital,
       exceeding by 40 percent the target to maintain (at least) the baseline level of 60,000. (The baseline
       was adjusted in March 2020 to correct the inaccurate baseline established at the project’s outset.)
      By the project’s end, 68,463 outpatients were seen annually in Alia (West Bank) Hospital, achieving
       two-thirds (67 percent) of the target to maintain (at least) the baseline level of 102,046. Alia
       Hospital was added to the list of beneficiary hospitals when the project's scope was expanded under
       the 2018 restructuring.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To support the Palestinian Authority in building the resilience of the health system to withstand a future surge
in demand for effective healthcare coverage

Rationale
The project sought to strengthen the resilience of healthcare service delivery to promote more effective and
efficient coverage in the face of growing demand and rising healthcare costs. This was to be achieved
through two intermediate outcomes:

      The rationalization of OMR and the implementation of immediate cost-cutting measures to improve
       efficiency in health care delivery (referrals master plan, rationalizing contracts with outside providers;
       strengthening the referrals information system, training of health staff, and strengthening public
       provision of select health services through strategic procurement of critical medical equipment); and


                                                                                                    Page 8 of 26
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   GZ: Health System Resiliency Strengthng (P150481)




      Progress in the establishment of a national health coverage scheme, considering options for
         separating MoH’s roles in financing, service provision, and regulation (defining enrollment criteria and
         options; specifying the benefit package of services, their costs, and criteria for
         inclusion/exclusion; establishing provider payment options for primary and hospital care; developing
         strategies for covering the informal sector; and establishing an independent pooling and purchasing
         agency to separate financing [pooling and purchasing] functions from service provision).



Outputs and intermediate results

Rationalizing OMR and instituting immediate cost-cutting measures to improve efficiency in the system:

Considerable steps were taken to rationalize OMR.

      Nine referral protocols and procedures for the costliest conditions were defined and rendered
         operational, almost achieving the target of ten protocols and procedures for the 10 costliest
         conditions (90 percent achievement). The nine include one on orthopedic surgery, which was
         included in neurosurgery. An update of one on oncology was also issued. MoH’s Service Purchase
         Unit (SPU) identified two more referral protocols (one for pediatric surgery and one for radiotherapy).
        From a baseline of 0, by the project’s end 29 new referral contracts/memoranda of understanding
         (MoUs) were negotiated with all outside providers and put into effect, essentially achieving the
         target of 30 (97 percent achievement). The four new MoUs were with Ibin Sina, a new hospital in
         Jenin; a diagnostic radiology center in Gaza; an ophthalmology center in Nablus; and Al Hilou hospital
         in Gaza.
        The project supported the development and full functioning of a consolidated government web-based
         health information system (HIS) for referrals and health insurance, in all hospitals taking referrals. This
         target was fully achieved. Entering all patients’ records on the e-referral system started in January
         2019. Further work is required, however, to merge the National Price Reference List into the e-referral
         system and then to use it for standardizing contracts. In short, while systems are operational and in
         place, their effective use requires additional agreements on standardized pricing. Such agreements
         have been finalized for 81 procedures (related to adult intensive care unit [ICU] and neonatal ICU,
         among others) with 11 hospitals out of a total of 23 that provide these services. The ICR also reports
         that (80) neurosurgery procedures agreements with standardized prices will be signed with three of
         the 12 facilities that provide those services.
        By the project’s end, the previous-generation Avicenna HIS was operational in 13 selected hospitals,
         surpassing the target of 10 (130 percent achievement). The 13 hospitals are Jenin, Watani,
         Tulkarem, Tubas, Jericho, QalQilia, Alia, Yatta, Salfeet, Beit Jala, Rafidia, Palestine Medical Complex,
         and Hugo Chavez Ophthalmic Hospital. The only remaining MoH hospital that does not have a
         functioning HIS is Al Muhtaseb Hospital, due to its old building infrastructure. The mental health
         hospital in Bethlehem has the HIS only in the laboratory department, keeping data on patients’ files
         confidential.
        A Referral Master Plan was developed and subsequently endorsed by the Cabinet in September 2016
         after extensive consultations within government and with other stakeholders. The Master Plan is
         currently being used as a key reference document by MoH and by all involved stakeholders.
        The project supported the establishment of the Government Health Insurance Management
         Information System (GHI MIS) through a range of activities, including business process analysis,

                                                                                                      Page 9 of 26
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   GZ: Health System Resiliency Strengthng (P150481)



       technical assistance, software development, and hardware procurement. This achievement:
       transformed health insurance from a registry to a system; provided linkages and integration with other
       MoH systems (Avicenna, HIS, and Electronic Referral/E-referral); and established linkages with other
       ministries (Ministry of Interior, Ministry of Labor) and government applications (e-
       Government). Project-supported technical assistance enabled the E-Referral system to track the
       entire process, from referral initiation to payment of referral hospitals.
      The project also supported the preparation of a National Price Reference (NPR) based on diagnostic-
       related groups, which were integrated into the referral system. The NPR was piloted in around 1000
       cases in five referral hospitals and will continue to support MoH’s SPU to formulate comprehensive,
       competitive, and transparent contracts with referral hospitals and standardize the use of the
       International Classification of Diseases, Tenth Revision, Procedure Coding System, as a reference in
       the billing process.
      The SPU also worked on establishing MoUs and contracts based in part on the work performed
       through the NPR.

Project support helped strengthen hospitals’ capacities to provide better quality of care and to take on more
complicated cases, thus reducing the need for OMR. These investments in quality also supported Objective
1 (continuity of services).

      The provision of medical equipment and related training (detailed under Objective 1 outputs) helped
       improve the services available in the large public sector hospitals in WB&G and contributed to
       reductions in referrals and improvements in quality of care, including for surgeries, obstetric and
       neonatal care, and vascular surgery, among others.
      Other investments in quality supported Quality and Patient Safety Departments of target hospitals and
       the Infection Prevention and Control unit at the MoH, including the delivery of 44 training sessions for
       491 staff from all hospitals focused on reduction in surgical site infections.
      With project support, a total of 700 health personnel received training, exceeding the target of 500 by
       40 percent. This included:
            o Specialty training of 600 health staff at four priority MoH hospitals (Alia, Jenin, Rafedia, and the
               Palestine Medical Complex) on topics such as pediatric pulmonology and neonatology, which
               were directly linked to reducing referrals.
            o Remote training of 12 specialists from West Bank hospitals provided by the Health Care
               Accreditation Council in Jordan on quality coordination and infection prevention and
               control. This translated into 60 percent achievement, as the January 2020 restructuring paper
               specified a target of 20 in all: 10 Certified Infection Preventionists and 10 Quality Improvement
               Practitioners.
            o Training of MoH and non-MoH health staff on the NPR, training of staff in health economics,
               and training of staff involved in the UHC component.
      By the project’s end, a grievance and redress mechanism (GRM) for OMRs and access to healthcare
       was designed and fully operational.

Provision of support for moving toward Universal Health Coverage (UHC) and Family Health as another
means of rationalizing health services:

      The project defined a roadmap to UHC with a detailed calendar and planned actions to enhance
       capacity to deliver needed services, reduce system losses, and ensure better quality of services to
       targeted populations.

                                                                                                   Page 10 of 26
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   GZ: Health System Resiliency Strengthng (P150481)




      With project support, a purchasing agency (the SPU) was created within MoH, staffed, and made
       functional.
      The project supported the SPU to be proactive in enhancing efficiency in the allocation of resources,
       using tools to benchmark productivity and to address cost increases, to better align incentives and
       increase sustainability. It supported the contracting of seven support staff as part of SPU institution
       building, which resulted in an increase in the efficiency and quality of financial and medical
       auditing. Five of these staff were maintained at the SPU with contracts through the MoH. At the writing
       of the ICR, all staff salaries were financed with government resources.
      The project supported the preparation of a communications strategy on UHC and its dissemination
       through a workshop. MoH undertook additional efforts to raise awareness on the projects’ various
       activities, especially health insurance, referrals, and the GRM. To this end, MoH formed a working
       group with members drawn from three units (SPU, Director General of Health Insurance, and
       Complaint Department), and with the support of MoH’s media and public relations unit, contributed to
       the production of various media materials. Four workshops were conducted at the regional level, and
       media materials were also used for interactions with communities (local radio, television, MoH
       website, social media, and posters), all with a view to promoting citizen’s engagement.

The project supported the Palestinian National Institute for Public Health (PNIPH) through a contract with the
World Health Organization (WHO) to strengthen data in the areas of family practice, human resources for
health (HRH), and health financing.

      The PHIPH provided technical assistance for improving data generation and reporting systems for
       family health through support for the scale-up of electronic health records for adults, child vaccination,
       and non-communicable diseases. The project provided computers and networking for the
       implementation of family practice electronic records in 118 clinics in three districts in West Bank and
       two districts in Gaza, fully achieving the target of five health directorates. The family record includes
       registration of patients with socio-demographic profile, health history, child health and immunization,
       child growth chart, adult file, and non-communicable diseases patient file, in addition to laboratory,
       radiology, and pharmacy services. This new indicator and target were introduced under the January
       2020 restructuring.

      The PNIPH also enhanced the availability and quality of health workforce data, which has become a
       model for Middle East & North Africa region countries. An observatory for all human resources for
       health was completed, resulting in a complete database providing oversight of the HRH situation and
       the adoption of sound policies to better manage the health workforce. Prepared with support from the
       Bank and other donors, the website (www.hrho.phiph.org) is now an important tool used for strategic
       assessment, planning, and management of health personnel at MoH, the private sector, and non-
       governmental organizations.
      The planned introduction of tools to define and periodically update the rationalization of health care
       benefits to support continuing improvements in efficiency and equity did not progress, due to a lack of
       technical expertise and overall lack of clarity on the health insurance reforms.

      With project support, medical auditing is performed by three medical auditors at the SPU, fully
       achieving the target of fully functional external audits being carried out (medical and financial).

The project strengthened MoH information management systems (e-referral and Government Health
Insurance management information system [MIS]). The digitalization of systems improved MoH’s capacity for

                                                                                                  Page 11 of 26
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   GZ: Health System Resiliency Strengthng (P150481)



evidence-based decision-making and stewardship of the health sector, while online automated processes
helped build trust and improved satisfaction among patients and hospitals.

Both in its main text and in Annex 1, the ICR reports on project beneficiaries (women and children benefiting
from essential health, nutrition, and population [HNP] services) as follows:

    o It reports that a total of 666,327 people received essential HNP services supported under the project,
      exceeding the target of 526,662. Of these:
            o 527,204 children were reported to be immunized between 2018 and 2021, exceeding the
               target of 414,318; and
            o 139,123 deliveries were attended by skilled personnel in 2021, exceeding the target of
               112,314 for that year.
    o It also reports that by the project’s end, 90 percent of people in WB&G had access to a basic package
      of health, nutrition, or reproductive health services, up from a 2015 baseline of 80 percent, fully
      achieving the target of 90 percent. This was presented as a summary average of four indicators
      over four years, but the details were not provided.

      At IEG’s request, the Bank’s team sent IEG a follow-up communication (June 23, 2023) providing
       details (not reported in the ICR) on annual data compiled on each of the four HNP service indicators,
       two for women and two for newborns/children. The Bank’s team noted that these services are
       delivered at hospitals and primary health centers and that these trends are a measure of the efforts
       made under the project to contribute towards UHC. It is still not clear to IEG to what extent these
       trends are attributable to the project’s support. (These indicators were added to the results framework
       during the January 2020 restructuring as a corporate results indicator.) Nevertheless, an analysis of
       this more detailed data presents a more nuanced indication of coverage. Between 2018 and 2021,
       direct beneficiaries of two essential maternal and child health (MCH) services (specifically assisted
       deliveries and immunizations), and access of newborns and pregnant women to MCH services, are as
       follows:
            o A total of 533,295 hospital-/health institution-based deliveries were assisted, averaging about
               133,324 per year, and showing consistently high coverage (between 99 percent and 99.9
               percent) each year, exceeding the target of 90 percent coverage.
            o A total of 527,204 children were immunized. While this number is consistent with the number
               that the ICR reports in its Annex 1 (see above), the detailed table provided by the Bank’s team
               labels this indicator as “immunizations number and % for under 2-year-old vaccines.” However,
               these annual numbers are closely aligned with the number of deliveries/live births that same
               year, an indication of under-one immunizations. The Bank’s team stated in its (June 23, 2023
               follow-up) explanation of the table that adding up the four years of children immunized would
               represent “children under-five who had received immunization services,” but it provided no
               indication of what was being measured: which vaccination(s), full vaccination, ever-vaccinated,
               or the ages of those children. The table shows 100 percent coverage for 2018, 2019 and 2020,
               and 96 percent for 2021, but the numerator and denominator are not clear, making it difficult
               to understand the measure and assess trends.
            o A total of 276,125 newborns were registered at MCH (data on West Bank only), averaging
               about 69,031 per year, and maintaining an average coverage of 89 percent, declining slightly
               from 91 percent (2018) to 86 percent (2021), substantially achieving the target of 90
               percent.
            o Concerning trends for pregnant women registered in MCH (1st, 2nd, and 3rd trimesters), net of
               United Nations Relief and Works Agency and the private sector, show substantial decline. A

                                                                                                Page 12 of 26
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   GZ: Health System Resiliency Strengthng (P150481)



              total of 228,230 pregnant women were registered during 2018-2021, averaging 57,057 per
              year, but the coverage of MCH registrations declined each year from 81 percent in 2018 to 66
              percent in 2021, falling short of the target of 90 percent.



Outcomes

Resilience has been achieved through enhanced service quality and efficiency, cost containment, and
improved equity.

      The average annual growth of total expenditure on OMRs of the three-year period coinciding with the
       last three years of the project (2019-2021) was 2.04 percent, far exceeding the target of achieving a
       level lower than the three-year (2013-2015) baseline average of 16.59 percent. This represents a
       substantial decline, with an interim three-year average of 9.73 percent for the 2016-2018 period.
      At the project’s outset, baseline expenditures on individual referrals from West Bank were 1.7 higher
       than expenditures on individual referrals from Gaza. By the end of the project, the ratio of expenditure
       per population spent on referrals between the West Bank & Gaza declined from 1.7:1 to 1.25:1 (or a
       26.5 percent reduction), achieving 82 percent of the target of 1.15:1 (or a 32.3 percent reduction).
       This indicates a substantial reduction in geographic inequities in referral costs between West
       Bank & Gaza. Achievement of this target was greatly affected by restrictions imposed on Gaza
       residents, specifically the need of Gaza patients and companions to obtain special permits issued by
       Israeli authorities to move outside of the Territory for treatment. (According to the Government of
       Israel, these restrictions are for the purpose of enhancing the security of Israel and Israeli citizens.)

Efficiency and cost containment achievements did not undercut quality of care. Indeed, thanks to project
investments in quality assurance and monitoring (training, information systems, infection prevention cleaning
and protocols, and oversight) and in the provision of specialized hospital equipment and related training:

      Hospital-acquired infections, an important cause of conditions leading to OMR, were dramatically
       reduced:
           o Device-associated infections (which cause central line-associated bloodstream infection,
               catheter-associated urinary tract infection, and ventilator-associated pneumonia) were reduced
               by two-thirds from a (2020) baseline of 19/1000 catheter or ventilator day to 6/1000,
               surpassing the target of 11/1000 by 62 percent.
           o Surgical site infections were reduced from 12 percent to 3 percent, far surpassing the target
               of 6 percent.
      Major hospitals in WB&G have enhanced capacity to deliver quality services, including surgeries,
       obstetrics and neonatal care, and vascular surgery, among others.

Efficiency and cost cutting measures also did not undercut access. On the contrary, UHC capacity building,
outreach to the population, and the development of information systems for a stronger evidence base for
family health bode well for continued progress in improving access to, as well as quality and efficiency of,
critical child and reproductive health services through a strengthened system of primary health care. Data
showing improved access to essential child and reproductive health services, presented above, indicate
already improvements on some fronts, along with remaining challenges. While much remains to be done,
preliminary steps towards the separation of the financing and service delivery functions and towards the


                                                                                                  Page 13 of 26
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                GZ: Health System Resiliency Strengthng (P150481)



                            achievement of UHC through a strengthened primary health care system pave the way for more progress to
                            these ends.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Objective 1 was substantially achieved. Utilization rates for key hospital services were mixed (across
                            hospitals, and across the three services: outpatient, obstetrics, and emergency), with some falling short of
                            targets, but most achieving or exceeding targets. For the most part, they all largely revealed the same general
                            trend of maintenance of or improvements in baseline levels until the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic, at
                            which time some of the gains deteriorated.

                            Objective 2 was substantially achieved, with one PDO target (reduction in growth of OMR) exceeded and the
                            other (improved equity in costs of individual referrals between WB&G) substantially (82 percent) achieved.

                            Attribution. While the ICR did not assess attribution head-on, it did note that most donors had withdrawn
                            their support due to unstable country conditions. This provides an indication of strong project attribution for
                            the outcomes achieved, notwithstanding some issues with the results chain analysis and the links between
                            activities and outcomes (discussed in this section and in Section 9).

                            Counterfactual. The uncertain and declining donor support during the project also points to a
                            counterfactual, in the absence of the project, of (i) further deterioration of service continuity, quality, and
                            utilization; and (ii) further weakening of the health sector’s resilience, with continued escalation of costs and
                            inefficiencies associated with continued growth of OMR, and no progress in moving towards UHC.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   The project generated substantial economic returns, in terms of both savings generated from improved
   efficiencies and health benefits. The economic analysis undertaken at appraisal documented a strong
   economic rationale for the project’s investment in public sector services, given its emergency nature, its effort to
   address inequities in access to quality and affordable services, and its aim to slow rapid growth in health sector
   costs and to support greater sector efficiency, both financial and operational. The baseline economic analysis
   estimated that through (i) the reduction of unnecessary referrals within the Palestinian territory (through clear
   rules and guidelines); (ii) reduction of referrals to Israel; and (iii) renegotiation of current contracts with referral

                                                                                                                                 Page 14 of 26
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      GZ: Health System Resiliency Strengthng (P150481)



facilities and elimination of unnecessary facilities, the project could achieve a 40 percent reduction in OMR
costs, compared with the expected trend-line of no project. This would entail a five percent reduction (from the
trend-line) in 2015, a 10 percent reduction from the 2016 trend-line, a 20 percent reduction from the 2017 trend-
line, and a 30 percent reduction from the 2018 trend-line, ultimately reaching a 40 percent reduction from the
2019 trend-line. Based on these projections, the economic analysis estimated cost-savings in referrals over the
lifetime of the project of US$198 million, compared with projected costs in the absence of the project (PAD,
Annex 10, p. 87).

The economic analysis undertaken at project completion was more expansive in its scope. Total savings on
OMR were estimated to be between US$222 million and US$677.5 million, surpassing the US$198 million
estimated at appraisal. Based on project results data, the end-of-project analysis was able to estimate additional
savings, including: US$2.9 million from averted catheter/ventilator infections; US$48.5 million from averted
surgical site infections; and US$13.3 million from averted out-of-pocket expenditures in the private sector,
culminating in total estimated savings of US$742.2 million, including the US$675.5 million savings on
OMR. Benefits from disability-adjusted life years (DALYs) averted were estimated at US$24.5 million, bringing
the total savings and benefits from DALYs averted to US$766.7 million, most of which was driven by savings on
OMR. Recognizing that these savings and benefits cannot be solely attributable to the project, the ICR (Annex
4, p. 58) also provides a second, conservative estimate based on 50 percent of all the above-cited estimated
savings (US$371.1 million) and 50 percent of estimated benefits from DALYs averted (US$12.3 million), bringing
the total of this most conservative estimate of savings and benefits from DALYs averted to US$383.4 million, still
surpassing the appraisal estimates (ICR, Annex 4, p. 58).

Despite the challenges of the COVID-19 pandemic, MoH capacity constraints, recurrent conflict, and
other contextual issues, project implementation was efficient overall. The project funds were fully (99.5
percent) utilized, and the actual costs of each component were close to original estimates. Processed as an
emergency operation, the preparation time was much faster than the average for Bank projects. Disbursement
of the emergency response under Component 1 was quick, in keeping with the urgency of the financing
needs. The other two components focusing, respectively, on rationalizing OMRs and supporting UHC, took
longer to launch because they were dependent on analytical work and procurement of equipment.

Challenges during implementation were addressed in a timely manner through consultations between MoH and
World Bank teams, the provision of technical assistance, and the recruitment of specialized staff. As reported in
the ICR (pp. 26-27), challenges faced by MoH included: difficulties in identifying and maintaining essential PMU
staff, especially delays in the recruitment of an M&E expert (during which time the existing PMU team covered
those tasks) and in the replacement of a financial specialist (during which time the project relied on Ministry of
Finance PMU staff); difficulties in making expected progress on UHC financing, because of a lack of clear
agreement on long-term and comprehensive reforms related to the pooling and separation of financing
functions; challenges associated with the interoperability and integration of digital systems and slower than
anticipated buy-in of new systems by hospital staff and managers; irregularity of project Steering Committee
meetings during the later years of the project; and lack of progress made on pooling functions, despite the
successful setting up of the SPU within MoH.

Despite these challenges, the project achieved most of its targets, with two extensions. The first extension of 1.5
years (from June 2020 to December 31, 2021) allowed the completion of Government Health Insurance MIS-
related activities, specialist training, SPU capacity building, and further strengthening of the e-referral system. It
also supported MoH in its effort to combat and contain the COVID-19 outbreak, including the setting aside of
US$0.8 million under Component 2 to support procurement of top priority items, appropriately supportive of the
resilience objective. A new, complementary COVID-19 emergency operation was rapidly prepared to

                                                                                                       Page 15 of 26
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      GZ: Health System Resiliency Strengthng (P150481)



supplement this support, aimed at strengthening MoH capacity in prevention, early detection, and care. The
second extension by an additional 5 months (from December 31, 2021 to May 31, 2022) enabled the processing
of the final procurement packages and the finalization of disbursements for activities that were delayed due to
MoH’s focused response to the COVID-19 pandemic.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     0
 Appraisal                                                  0
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     0
 ICR Estimate                                               0
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The relevance of the PDO is rated high, as the project was responsive to country conditions and issues faced in
the health sector today. The PDO was also closely aligned with the government’s current sector priorities and
with the Bank’s current CPF for the West Bank and Gaza for FY22-25, issued in 2021. Efficacy is rated
substantial, with Objective 1 (securing continuity in healthcare service delivery) and Objective 2 (building health
sector resilience to withstand future surge in demand for effective healthcare coverage) both substantially
achieved. Project efficiency is rated substantial. The ex-post economic analysis revealed that the project
generated substantial economic returns, both in terms of savings generated from rationalized OMR and
improved quality and efficiencies, and in terms of health benefits. Moreover, despite the challenges of the
COVID-19 pandemic, MoH capacity constraints, and recurrent conflict and other contextual issues, project
implementation was efficient overall. These ratings are indicative of minor shortcomings in the project's
preparation, implementation, and achievement, leading to an Outcome rating of Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

There is a considerable risk that project achievements may not be fully maintained, due to the
volatility of the conflict situation, the prolonged economic crisis, and decreasing aid flow, and
the impact of these factors on already inadequate financing for the sector. The May 2021 conflict in

                                                                                                    Page 16 of 26
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      GZ: Health System Resiliency Strengthng (P150481)



Gaza and contextual challenges have taken a toll on health infrastructure and human resources in the health
sector. Added to these challenges are the prolonged economic crisis, the derailed peace process, and
decreasing aid flow. The financial sustainability of the healthcare system remains at risk, despite the
significant reductions in the rate of growth of expenditures on OMR. These referrals will continue to be
needed, especially in light of the changes in demography and disease burden (increase in NCDs, which
require long-term, specialized, and costly care). Tax revenues have been falling because of the economic
crisis and, in the wake of COVID-19, resulting in limited fiscal space to bridge the financing gap of the
Government Health Insurance. To sustain and scale up the outcomes of this project would require that MoH
devise a more comprehensive reform plan with financial support from donors, along with continued domestic
financing. A new Bank-financed operation was noted by the ICR (p. 33) to be under preparation, which would
build on lessons of this project and contribute towards MoH’s reform plans.

Insufficient financing of the sector and inefficient use of available financing pose threats to the
sustainability of project achievements and continued reform. The resolution of these issues will
depend on improvements to Palestine’s health financing system, including the reform of weak
pooling and purchasing systems. The health insurance system in WB&G, with its fragmented schemes
and open entitlements, undermines health system sustainability, as there are no limits on services provided,
particularly for OMR at private hospitals. Clear governance and accountability structures are sorely needed
for the sector to be able to govern and control for different functions of health insurance, including enrollment
and eligibility of beneficiaries, the collection of contributions and co-payments, and the purchase of health
services. There is currently no centralized repository of information laying out the characteristics of each of
the 13 insurance schemes in the Territory. The ICR (p. 33) reports that a health chapter in an ongoing Public
Expenditure Review will draw on the lessons from this project and aim to update all existing analyses on
health financing to inform improvements to the efficiency, equity, and sustainability of health financing in
WB&G. This work will include deep analyses of the pooling and purchasing functions.

Country commitment and capacity to sustain the project’s outcomes are growing but will need
continued financial and technical support. PA’s National Development Plan (2021-2023) provides a clear
statement of government commitment to ensuring effective, efficient, quality, equitable, and citizen-centered
healthcare services, and the importance of strengthening governance and efficiency of services and
advancing the establishment of UHC to this end. Ensuring continuity and resilience of healthcare services
are pivotal elements of government strategy, an important part of which are ongoing: the rationalization of
OMR, the strengthening of pooling and purchasing functions, and the strengthening of sector
stewardship. Project support to capacity building (of policymakers, health professionals and MoH technical
staff) has helped the PA make important headway on these fronts and has rendered MoH better equipped to
ensure that implementation of efficiency and equity measures continue, and that needed reform is
undertaken. In short, the project has contributed to improvements in MoH’s sector stewardship capacity. This
in turn has helped pave the way toward increased donor confidence, whose technical and financial support
are critical to the consolidation and sustainability of gains made under this project.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project’s design was informed by strategic goals and built on lessons learned from the
  Bank’s long-term engagement in the sector. Its design and goals were aligned with the World Bank’s

                                                                                                      Page 17 of 26
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   GZ: Health System Resiliency Strengthng (P150481)



Assistance Strategy for West Bank and Gaza 2015-16 and the World Bank’s Regional MENA Health,
Nutrition and Population Strategy. As such, the project was consistent with the Bank’s twin goals
(eradicating extreme poverty and boosting shared prosperity) and with two pillars in MENA’s Regional
Strategy (ensuring economic and social inclusion and strengthening governance). Stakeholder
consultation (with authorities in WB&G, donors, partners, and NGOs) and efforts to align the project with
national goals ensured its relevance to needs and priorities in WB&G, as laid out in national policy
documents and expressed by national and local actors. The design of the project was informed by the
Bank’s previous engagement in the sector, particularly the Emergency Services Support Program and a
series of analytical and advisory services implemented over the previous few years.

The project’s design was appropriate to the fragile, conflict-prone context of WB&G. It was
prepared within a short period, as an emergency operation, to address the immediate needs of
healthcare delivery resulting from the conflict in Gaza. At the same time, it also sought to improve the
untenable fiscal situation of the healthcare system (characterized by rapidly escalating costs, severe
underfinancing, and inefficient use of available financial resources), which threatened to undermine
sorely needed medium-term improvements in the quality and coverage of health services delivery and
health outcomes. To this end, the design also supported preliminary steps in moving toward UHC and
evidence-based health sector stewardship. The project design also incorporated poverty, equity, and
inclusion elements, notably an outcome indicator to track reduction in inequities between West Bank and
Gaza on the costs of individual referrals, and the tracking of the share of beneficiaries of OMR who are
female. Conscious efforts were made to keep the project simple and flexible, given the fragile and
unstable country context.

Overall, project appraisal was thorough in its coverage and assessment of economic and financial
aspects, technical aspects, financial management, procurement, and social aspects, and in identifying
needed implementation support to be provided by the Bank. Implementation arrangements were well
prepared, for the most part. The risk assessment undertaken by the Bank during preparation raised the
risk of insufficient capacity of MoH to implement the reforms because of budget constraints, limited
technical capabilities, and fragmentation of the healthcare system. Proposed steps to mitigate these risks
included support for capacity building of PMU staff on fiduciary activities and compliance, and the hiring
of external technical consultants in coordination with other development partners. A project steering
committee was set up to help oversee project implementation and results, ensure that all essential
stakeholders were involved, and advise on corrective measures, as needed. No environmental or social
safeguards were triggered, and no Adaptation and Mitigation of Climate Change Co-Benefits information
was applicable to the project.

While largely ready for implementation at effectiveness, there were two minor shortcomings at
entry. First, around the time of the 2017 mid-term review it became apparent that the design of
Component 3 (supporting health coverage to strengthen sector resilience) was too broad and ambitious,
given MoH capacity constraints and the country’s volatile environment. This was also due to the lack of
clear agreement on a long and comprehensive reform related to the pooling and separation of financing
functions (January 17, 2018 Restructuring Paper p. 2). This shortcoming was addressed in early 2018
through a contract with WHO, working in collaboration with the Palestinian National Institute for Public
Health, to support MoH in implementing Component 3 (Section 8.b). Second, M&E arrangements did not
provide for an M&E expert to work in the PMU. Another M&E issue was the inadequacy of the initial PDO
indicator to measure progress in rationalizing OMR, both in terms of the lack of solid baseline knowledge
about the dynamics and trends in costs and in terms of the choice and definition of the measure. These
shortcomings were understandable given the project's emergency design and the difficult context of the

                                                                                                Page 18 of 26
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GZ: Health System Resiliency Strengthng (P150481)



  Territory's intense conflict and violence; and they were addressed during implementation, as described
  below.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 During implementation, the project team provided close supervision and used the ISRs and
 accompanying aides-memoire to document and address the challenges faced and put
 implementation back on track. The downgrading of ISR ratings in cases of delays or lack of progress
 prompted candid exchanges and the provision of technical advice and support to MoH to address and
 resolve issues. During the six-and-one-half-year implementation period, a total of 16 implementation
 support missions were conducted, on which aides-memoire were prepared and shared with MoH. A total
 of 18 ISRs were prepared, averaging almost three each year. Close follow-up and technical assistance,
 especially during late 2018 and 2019, addressed lags in implementation of activities to rationalize OMR,
 with activities put back on track and progressing as a result of the Bank’s support and
 guidance. Supervision of fiduciary aspects of the project was regular.

 The Bank’s team was also flexible and appropriate in adjusting project design during the course of
 implementation, when and where warranted. First, the mid-term review, conducted in 2017,
 acknowledged that progress on the development of the Government Health Insurance MIS fell short of
 original expectations and that a full-fledged system could not be finalized under the project. The mission
 thus recommended a reduction in the scope of this activity, supporting an agile, phased approach, rather
 than aiming for the adoption of a full system. Second, progress on UHC reforms was also slow because of
 the lack of MoH technical capacity and lack of agreement on the longer-term, more comprehensive reform
 related to the separation of pooling and financing functions within the health insurance program. The
 project was restructured to support an alternate modality for implementation, through which MoH
 contracted WHO, which had been playing a leading role in the UHC agenda and possessed the required
 technical capacity. Under the contract, WHO enlisted the support of the PNIPH as an implementing agency
 to develop a UHC road map focusing on strengthening the evidence-based data of MoH in the areas of
 health financing, human resources for UHC, and the family practice approach. While the latter two were
 implemented, the health financing work was ultimately dropped due to lack of agreement on long-term
 reform of the health insurance program. Third, some of the saved and undisbursed funds under the project
 were reallocated to finance priority needs emerging from the COVID-19 pandemic and from the May 2021
 escalation of conflict in Gaza, including the procurement of equipment, consumables, and information
 technology support to systems. Overall, the Bank’s implementation support plan, combining technical
 support with the cutting back of overambitious elements of project design, was effective in mitigating
 significant technical and implementation capacity gaps within MoH, culminating in a satisfactory
 outcome. Fourth, the project navigated and adapted to an unpredictable donor environment following the
 Gaza crisis in 2014, marked by expected donor financing not materializing in a timely manner and the
 sudden stop of all United States Agency for International Development-funded projects in January 2019,
 which affected the continuity of work on the e-referral system.

 The task team ensured continuous dialogue, oversight, monitoring, and technical support. Task
 Team Leaders (TTLs) were changed twice during the project lifecycle, and the transfers of responsibilities

                                                                                                 Page 19 of 26
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GZ: Health System Resiliency Strengthng (P150481)



 between TTLs occurred smoothly during each transition. When the COVID-19 pandemic caused travel
 restrictions to be put in place, the Bank’s team ensured ongoing supervision of technical and fiduciary
 aspects through regular virtual meetings.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The project’s theory of change, as laid out in the ICR (p. 9), captured well the project’s dual nature of
 emergency support (supporting Objective 1: continuity in healthcare service delivery) and development
 support (supporting Objective 2: improved resilience of the health system). However, there were some
 missing links. For example, under Objective 1, the theory of change highlighted fuel and cleaning services
 for hospitals, and outcome indicators tracked three hospitals in Gaza and two in West Bank. However, p.
 15 of the ICR notes that cleaning services were provided to 175 health facilities. It is not clear what kinds of
 health facilities these were, whether hospital-level, primary level, or both. Regarding Objective 2, the ICR
 provides the definition of resilience (p. 16, footnote 15) as “…the ability of the health system to improve
 fiscal sustainability through reduction in growth of OMR expenditures by improving local public hospital
 services, enhanced coverage, and cross-cutting efficiency measures, along with reduction in the inequity in
 referral costs between West Bank and Gaza.” However, it is not clear what the results chain is for
 achieving: enhanced coverage or “improved access to a basic package of health, nutrition or reproductive
 health services,” the latter listed as an output in the theory of change. It is also not clear in the theory of
 change what specific actions were needed to reduce the inequities in the costs of individual
 referrals between West Bank and Gaza, or what was the underlying cause of inequities being
 addressed. Enhanced quality of services was an important intermediate objective of the project, but it does
 not appear in the theory of change.

 Indicators were for the most part specific, measurable, achievable, relevant, and time-bound. The utilization
 rates for outpatient, emergency, and obstetrics services in three major hospitals in Gaza and two in West
 Bank served as proxy indicators of hospital service continuity, under the assumption that the denominator
 (facility capacity) did not change over time. The original indicator tracking a reduction in the total cost of
 referrals was, by the team’s own admission (ICR, p. 28), not based on reliable data or an understanding of
 the rapid growth of referral costs, and therefore not achievable. At the same time, IEG acknowledges that
 the Bank's team formulated the results framework to the best of its abilities in the context of an emergency
 response to a Territory in the midst of intense conflict and violence. Moreover, replacement of that
 indicator in 2018 with an indicator tracking reductions in the growth rate of referral expenditures was more
 straightforward and reflective of a better grasp of the baseline data and trends. The indicator measuring
 improved equity in individual referral expenditures between West Bank and Gaza is clear and useful.




                                                                                                     Page 20 of 26
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GZ: Health System Resiliency Strengthng (P150481)



 The PMU was responsible for overall project M&E, with the support and involvement of relevant MoH
 departments. Among PMU responsibilities were the management of data collection, aggregation, and
 periodic reporting on implementation progress and close monitoring of the project’s key performance
 indicators. Project monitoring was to include: (i) routine monitoring of activities against plans; (ii) a mid-term
 review to assess early results and effectiveness of activities; and (iii) periodic progress
 reports. Component 4 included M&E training.

 The PMU maintained a simple M&E system for data collection and output and outcome monitoring to
 ensure proper monitoring, reporting, and evaluation. The project’s support to improve the E-referral system
 and the Government Health Insurance MIS helped strengthen MoH governance capacity and also
 increased the PMU’s ability to report on key project indicators. Over and above the absence of any M&E
 staff in the PMU, other shortcomings in M&E design, which were revealed during implementation (Section
 9b), included a lack of clarity on data sources and definitions and low capacity to use the digital information
 system.



b. M&E Implementation
  With support from selected MoH Departments (Health Information Center, Medical Referrals, Health
  Insurance, and Finance), the PMU complied with M&E requirements. It managed data collection,
  aggregation, and periodic reporting on progress. While it complied with the Grant Agreement’s
  requirement to furnish progress reports no later than 45 days after the end of the period covered by
  each report, the mid-term review did recommend improvements to the quality of progress reports,
  especially with regard to the M&E (analytic) content. Initial challenges with data quality were caused by
  the absence of dedicated M&E staff and by delays in accessing data from the digital information
  system. To resolve this issue, the PMU worked with the SPU to clarify data sources and definitions and to
  obtain and verify any missing data from the digital information system. Additionally, the PMU contracted a
  health specialist to undertake project M&E, which led to improved quality of reports. Weaknesses in
  indicators were addressed during implementation, most notably the (above-cited) revision of the indicator
  to track reduced growth in the costs of OMR.



c. M&E Utilization
  Data on project performance and results were used to inform project management and decision-
  making. Implementation supervision missions (including the mid-term review mission) drew on M&E
  data, which were used to inform project plans and amendments. For example, M&E data showed a lack
  of progress in Component 3 (supporting health coverage), which led to changes in design. M&E data
  also informed critical assessment and ratings of implementation progress and progress towards
  objectives and targets. M&E was also an important source of information for the project’s technical
  steering committee, responsible for overseeing the project’s technical aspects and keeping all
  stakeholders informed of progress. In addition, the Bank and MoH teams ensured the dissemination of
  M&E data and reporting to additional relevant stakeholders.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

                                                                                                       Page 21 of 26
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GZ: Health System Resiliency Strengthng (P150481)




10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project followed World Bank procedure under safeguard policies. No Bank environmental or social
   safeguard policies were triggered. As a consequence, no safeguard documents were prepared or disclosed
   either during appraisal or during implementation. The environmental category of the project was classified
   as “C,” as it mainly focused on technical assistance and capacity building. As there were no civil works
   activities programmed under the project, no environmental or social safeguard issues were anticipated. It is
   significant to note that the ICR (p. 15) reports that the project’s support of cleaning activities in 175 health
   facilities showed substantial reduction in the accumulation of medical waste in critical units, preventing
   outbreaks in communicable disease. The ICR (p. 17) also reports that the training of 12 quality coordinators
   and infection prevention control specialists and of 491 hospital service providers – and the application of
   this training – culminated in significant reductions in device-associated (catheter and ventilator) infections
   and in surgical site infections.

   While the PAD had not envisaged any environmental risks, some social risks were considered, including the
   likely pressure on the healthcare system to ensure coverage of the poor and marginalized and equity within
   the system. In response, MoH coordinated efforts with key stakeholders, including other PA ministries
   (Social Affairs and Labor), local NGOs, and development partners to ensure adequate coverage and
   equity. The M&E framework also included measures of equitable access.

   The project also implemented communication activities to raise awareness on project activities, especially
   those addressing health insurance, referrals, and complaints channeled through the GRM. An MoH working
   group, drawing on members from relevant departments with the technical input of the MoH media unit,
   supported the production of media materials (posters, radio spots, videos, social media messages, stickers,
   magnets, and posters, among others). Messages were delivered through these means and materials, as
   well as through the MoH website, all with a view to promote citizens’ engagement.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management (FM) was judged to be satisfactory by the Bank at the time of project
   closing. Based on a sound assessment of FM capacity at the time of appraisal, FM arrangements were
   well established at the project’s outset. The PMU was staffed with a dedicated FM expert responsible for
   all FM aspects. The PMU had acquired considerable experience working on a previous World Bank-
   financed project (Third Emergency Services Support Project, closed in 2013), and its fiduciary
   management was further strengthened during implementation of the project. Internal control for the project
   was strong, and implementation procedures were outlined in a Project Operations Manual. The project was
   subject to an annual external audit, and all audit reports were submitted on time. In a follow-up email sent
   on July 3, 2023, the Bank's team confirmed that these annual external audits were all unqualified, with no
   issues detected. A Financial Manual was prepared in 2015 to reflect financial procedures to be used for the
   project. A US Dollar Designated Account was opened at the Bank of Palestine (Ramallah), and World
   Bank funds were deposited into this account. The PMU ensured that the account was reconciled, and MoH
   requested needed funding through the submission of Withdrawal Applications. The PMU checked,
   monitored, and cleared project deliverables before processing any payment, and the PMU followed the

                                                                                                     Page 22 of 26
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GZ: Health System Resiliency Strengthng (P150481)



   required formal PA procedures for payment approval. Quarterly internal financial reports were prepared
   and submitted on a timely basis, reviewed and cleared by the PMU. After Bank clearance of these reports,
   they were published on the Bank’s website. The final audit (covering January 1, 2022 to September 30,
   2022) was finalized and shared with the Bank.

   Procurement performance was also rated satisfactory at the close of the project. Procurement was carried
   out in accordance with the Bank’s Procurement Guidelines, published by the World Bank in January 2011
   and revised in July 2014. The PMU had a dedicated Procurement Specialist on its staff, with significant
   experience in procurement under World Bank-financed projects. Procurement plans were prepared and
   updated regularly by the Procurement Specialist, using the STEP system, and were consistently cleared by
   the World Bank. The project also supported contracting with a United Nations agency (WHO) for technical
   assistance on some activities falling under Component 3, which supported improved health
   coverage. During the project’s life, six ex-post procurement reviews were conducted by the Bank, the latest
   carried out in April 2022 on six contracts awarded between November 2020 and March 2022. No indication
   of possible governance issues or non-compliance was observed in any of these reviews.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   Mobilization of Private Sector Financing. The commitment of MoH to reduce OMR to other countries led
   to opportunities for the private sector hospitals in WB&G to provide tertiary level healthcare
   services. Efforts to limit referrals outside the Palestinian Territory led to spillover demand, and private
   sector hospitals in WB&G have invested in improving their capacity to deliver tertiary care. For example,
   some private hospitals in the West Bank and hospitals of the East Jerusalem Hospital Network (like
   Augusta Victoria Hospital) have invested in building up their diagnostic and treatment capacity for cardiac
   and cancer cases.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                               Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                       IEG
                                                                               Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                        Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Bank Performance               Satisfactory          Satisfactory
                                                                               There were shortcomings in
                                                                               design, but most of these were
                                                                               recognized and fixed during
Quality of M&E                 Modest                Substantial
                                                                               implementation, providing a
                                                                               sufficient basis to assess
                                                                               efficacy.
Quality of ICR                 ---                   Substantial


                                                                                                 Page 23 of 26
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GZ: Health System Resiliency Strengthng (P150481)




12. Lessons

The following lessons are a subset of the six relevant and insightful lessons presented in the ICR,
slightly reworded by IEG.

In FCV settings like WB&G, it is prudent to keep project design and technical components as
simple and flexible as possible. The project’s success was due in part to its simple and flexible
design. The emergency support under the project not only helped address the acute needs of
healthcare services in Gaza, but also enabled a quick response to the COVID-19 pandemic, without
the need for restructuring. The direct contracting with WHO in support of Component 3 (building
blocks for UHC), introduced during implementation to simplify Component 3, facilitated the provision
of timely inputs and technical expertise.

Project support of evidence-based health sector reform is a complex undertaking, especially
in an FCV setting, requiring due attention to contextual factors, including political economy,
limited capacity, stakeholder involvement, and the need for a phased approach, aligned with
country readiness to fully articulate, adopt and implement. Experience under this project has
revealed the wisdom of: (i) ensuring a robust understanding of country context and dynamics; (ii)
providing adequate funding and a roadmap for capacity building; (iii) remaining flexible to respond to
a dynamic situation; (iv) focusing on harmonization of donors’ work on governance and reform; and
(v) understanding the critical path and dynamics of health system strengthening. Starting with
relatively straightforward management systems and reforms and postponing the introduction of more
complex systems to a later phase allows the rollout of reforms incrementally at a pace that permits
institutions to absorb and integrate new systems, before moving on to subsequent phases.

It is feasible – and desirable – for an emergency operation to address acute healthcare
delivery needs in times of crisis, while at the same time supporting critical components of
health sector development, even in an FCV context. This project succeeded in achieving both its
emergency objective (continuity of healthcare services) and its development objective (strengthening
sector resilience through rationalizing OMR, improving equity of referral expenditures, and building
systems and capacities for moving toward affordable UHC through primary health care). Indeed, the
COVID-19 pandemic, unforeseen at the time of project design, has validated the project’s focus on
strengthening health system resilience, especially: (i) addressing health financing challenges and
reducing unsustainable health expenditures; (ii) building a foundation for strong primary health care;
(iii) increasing domestic investment in the health system; and (iv) addressing inequities in healthcare
access and health outcomes of marginalized populations.

Supporting health reforms requires a combination of consistent financing, technical
assistance, and a whole-of-government approach. The World Bank, through its in-country and
HQ-based staff, along with external consultants, provided consistent technical support throughout
project implementation. The project also engaged partners, donors and NGOs during design and
implementation. Experience under this project has pointed to the desirability of engaging
stakeholders from the wider government, beyond MoH, to ensure broader political support. In
retrospect, the fuller engagement of Ministry of Finance and the Prime Minister’s office may have
broadened and strengthened political support for sector reform. Sharing the project’s achievements



                                                                                                   Page 24 of 26
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       GZ: Health System Resiliency Strengthng (P150481)



to a wider range of actors and stakeholders might be an effective way of expanding reform buy-in,
demonstrating how seemingly intractable challenges can be addressed, even in difficult contexts.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

Quality of Evidence. Evidence provided was largely credible and sufficiently detailed, but there were a few
exceptions. The ICR provided no breakdown of beneficiaries of essential health, nutrition and reproductive
health services. (These were subsequently provided by the Bank’s team in a supplemental note, but there were
still questions on who the beneficiaries were and what services were provided). Labeling of indicators was not
always clear. For example, Annex 1, p. 42, reports that 46 percent of beneficiaries were female, without
specifying beneficiaries of what. A footnote in the main text notes that 46 percent of beneficiaries of OMR were
female, but t the ICR does not report on the total number of OMR beneficiaries. Another example is the
conflicting labels of children vaccinated (see Section 4).

Quality of Analysis and Results Orientation. The ICR’s narrative on efficacy was well presented and
informative overall, backed up by systematic tallies of performance of output and outcome targets. However,
there were some weaknesses in its assessment of some elements of the results chain. This is likely due to
some issues in the theory of change (see Section 9). For example, the results chain of support to UHC and its
effect on the uptake of maternal and child health services (immunization) is not clear.

Quality of Lessons. The ICR provided insightful lessons, firmly grounded in project performance and
experiences, which should be of broader interest to other FCV countries supporting emergency activities and/or
broader capacity development and sector reform.

Internal Consistency/adherence to guidelines. The ICR adhered to guidelines, connecting various elements
of the evaluation to provide an informative narrative, capturing outcomes and lessons in an extremely
challenging country context.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                  Page 25 of 26
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
GZ: Health System Resiliency Strengthng (P150481)




                                                                                 Page 26 of 26
