     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                      Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     FISCAL CONSOLIDATION & INCLUSIVE GROWTH (P159508)



                                                                          Report Number: ICRR0023153

1. Program Information



 Country                             Practice Area (Lead)
 Gabon                               Health, Nutrition & Population

 Programmatic DPF

 Planned Operations                   Approved Operations
 3                                    2

 Operation ID                         Operation Name
 P159508                              FISCAL CONSOLIDATION & INCLUSIVE GROWTH




 L/C/TF Number(s)                    Closing Date (Original)                  Total Financing (USD)
 IBRD-87890                          31-Oct-2018                                        199,234,236.08

 Bank Approval Date                  Closing Date (Actual)
 07-Nov-2017                         31-Oct-2018
                                     IBRD/IDA (USD)                              Co-financing (USD)

 Original Commitment                      200,000,000.00                                            0.00

 Revised Commitment                       200,000,000.00                                            0.00

 Actual                                   199,234,236.08                                            0.00




P164201_TBL
 Country                             Practice Area (Lead)
 Gabon                               Macroeconomics, Trade and Investment

 Operation ID                        Operation Name
 P164201                             Gabon second DPO ( P164201 )




                                                                                           Page 1 of 27
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      FISCAL CONSOLIDATION & INCLUSIVE GROWTH (P159508)




  L/C/TF Number(s)                             Closing Date (Original)                     Total Financing (USD)
  IBRD-87890,IBRD-89220                        31-Dec-2019                                             198906862.49

  Bank Approval Date                           Closing Date (Actual)
  19-Feb-2019                                  31-Dec-2019

                                              IBRD/IDA (USD)                                 Co-financing (USD)

  Original Commitment                            200,000,000.00                                                   0.00

  Revised Commitment                             200,000,000.00                                                   0.00

  Actual                                         198,906,862.49                                                   0.00



 Prepared by                   Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator            Group
 Shahrzad Mobasher             Judyth L. Twigg               Jennifer L. Keller                IEGEC
 Fard



2. Program Objectives and Pillars/Policy Areas
EVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives

The program development objectives (PDO) of the Gabon Fiscal Consolidation and Inclusive Growth Operation
consisted of (i) increasing revenue mobilization, stabilizing the wage bill, and improving procurement practices, (ii)
improving the investment climate and strengthening information and communication technology (ICT) services to
enhance competitiveness, and (iii) improving the efficiency of healthcare delivery and social protection services in
order to protect the poor (Program Document [PD], p. 4, and Letter of Development Policy, PD Annex 2). For the
purpose of this ICRR, the same three objectives are used.


b. Pillars/Policy Areas
The programmatic series was structured around three pillars/policy areas. Pillar 1 supported the policy objectives
of (i) increasing revenue mobilization and transparency, (ii) stabilizing the wage bill, and (iii) improving
transparency and efficiency in procurement practices. Pillar 2 pursued the objectives of (i) addressing key
bottlenecks in the investment climate and (ii) strengthening ICT services. Pillar 3 supported (i) improving the
efficiency of health care delivery, particularly at the primary care level, and (ii) increasing the efficiency of social
protection services.

Table 1: Prior Actions (PAs) under the First and Second Programmatic Series



Prior Actions for DPO1                           Prior Actions for DPO2

                                                                                                         Page 2 of 27
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      FISCAL CONSOLIDATION & INCLUSIVE GROWTH (P159508)



Objective 1: Increasing revenue mobilization, stabilizing the wage bill, and improving
procurement practices
Objective 1(a): Increase revenue mobilization and improve transparency
Enhancing revenue generation, through elimination, and improved coordination and
oversight, of tax expenditures
                                                   PA2: To enhance revenue mobilization and
                                                   reduce tax expenditures, the Borrower’s
PA1: To reduce the amount of tax                   Ministry of Economy has taken the following
expenditures, the Minister of Economy has (i) measures:
issued regulations (Arrêtés), within the
                                                   i. includes, in the draft 2019 Finance Law,
framework of the Fight against La Vie Chere
                                                   provisions to abrogate tax reliefs and
Program, which apply (a) a full exemption of
                                                   preferential rates in the tax and customs
custom duties and taxes to only 42 products
                                                   systems and an assessment report on tax
from the list of basic goods; (b) a rate of 5
                                                   expenditures in domestic tax sources of 2018;
percent on 116 additional products from the
                                                   ii. amend, through two Arrêtés, the selection of
list of basic goods; and (ii) revised the 2017
                                                   products under la Vie Chère program, to
Finance Law to specify that (a) all
                                                   include only 36 clusters of basic food items fully
exemptions from taxation on cross-border
                                                   exempted of custom duties and value added
transactions require authorization in the
                                                   tax; and
Finance Law and must be accompanied by
estimates of revenue foregone, and (b)             iii. amend through an Arrêté, the mandates and
discretionary administrative exemptions have functions of the Inter-Ministerial Committee for
been suppressed.                                   the Macroeconomic and Fiscal Framework to
                                                   coordinate and oversee tax expenditure
                                                   management.
Enhancing revenue mobilization, through increased alcohol and tobacco excises
                                                   PA3: To enhance revenue mobilization, the
                                                   borrower has (i) introduced in the 2018
                                                   Amended Finance Law excise taxes on
                                                   additional goods and services, including on
                                                   luxury cars, and revised rates on existing
                                                   excise items; and (ii) activated a levy of 5% on
                                                   the value of goods imported by small and
                                                   microbusinesses which are not registered as
                                                   value-added taxpayers.
Objective 1(b): Stabilize the wage bill and improve workers’ performance
Strengthening the recruitment control system
PA4: To stabilize the wage bill in the short       PA5: In order to strengthen the management of
term, the Prime Minister has issued a circular human resources and recruitment control
to all its ministries prohibiting all recruitments system, (i) the Borrower’s Prime Minister has
across administrations, including agencies, signed an Arrêté to extend the hiring freeze for
departments, and state-owned enterprises, a period of 36 months until August 2021,
for a period of 12 months, excepting only its excluding only its ministries responsible for
ministries responsible for health, national        health, national education, social affairs, and
education, and defense for which hiring will defense; and (ii) the Borrower’s Ministries of
be on a case-by-case basis.                        Public Service and Budget have initiated the
                                                   identification of civil servants and the clean-up


                                                                                                        Page 3 of 27
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      FISCAL CONSOLIDATION & INCLUSIVE GROWTH (P159508)



                                                of the human resources records to be
                                                completed by December 2018.




Making promotions more merit-based
                                                  PA6: To move from automatic promotion to
                                                  performance-based management, the
                                                  Borrower’s Prime Minister has signed an Arrêté
                                                  to suspend automatic promotions of civil
                                                  servants for three years, until August 2021.
Objective 1(c): Improve efficiency and transparency in procurement practices
                                                  PA8: In order to improve the efficiency and
                                                  transparency of public spending: (i) the
PA7: To improve the efficiency of                 Borrower’s Agence de Régulation des Marchés
procurement practices, the Council of             Publics (ARMP) has published its first annual
Ministers has adopted a draft law on public report including statistics on public procurement
procurement in line with its public financial     contracts and the single source contracting
management (PFM) framework, which inter rate; and (ii) the Borrower’s Supreme Audit
alia clarifies stakeholders’ responsibilities and Institution (SAI) has finalized and published its
better enforces provisions on the use of          annual report to the President and has
single sourcing.                                  published its performance audit reports on
                                                  infrastructure, and social and health insurance
                                                  (CNAMGS).
Objective 2: Improving the investment climate and strengthening information and
communication technology (ICT) services to enhance competitiveness
Objective 2(a): Improve the investment climate
PA9: To streamline business registration and
spur business creation, the Minister of           PA10: To open the one-stop shop for business
Investment Promotion has issued an Arrêté creation and post creation and make it fully
establishing a One-Stop Shop for business operational, the Borrower has: (i) reassigned
registration under its Agence nationale pour staff from all relevant agencies (business
la promotion des investissements (ANPI) and registry-RCCM, tax authority, social security,
said One-Stop Shop has been staffed by            official gazette) to the one-stop shop; and (ii)
transfer of representatives of the ANPI,          developed a new unified paper form for
enterprise and collateral registry (RCCM),        business start-up in use by all agencies present
and tax administration to said One-Stop           at the one-stop shop.
Shop.
                                                  PA11: To improve the investment climate, the
                                                  Borrower’s Prime Minister has signed an Arrêté
                                                  that establishes an inter-ministerial working
                                                  group with a mandate to agree on the contents
                                                  of the new investment code and incentive
                                                  regimes.
                                                                                                      Page 4 of 27
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     FISCAL CONSOLIDATION & INCLUSIVE GROWTH (P159508)



Objective 2(b): Strengthen ICT services
PA12: To strengthen ICT services, the
Council of Ministers has approved (i) the draft
                                                PA13: To increase access to digital services,
law on the regulation of electronic
                                                the Borrower has implemented a connectivity
communications and (ii) the draft law on
                                                initiative in one rural area funded by the
electronic transactions, including, inter alia,
                                                Universal Service Fund.
provisions for a more competitive ICT sector
and for more secure electronic transactions.
Objective 3: Improving the efficiency of healthcare delivery and social protection
services in order to protect the poor
Objective 3(a): Improve the efficiency of health care delivery
Adopting Performance Based Financing (PBF) in health care
                                                PA15: To facilitate gradual implementation of
PA14: To prioritize Primary Health Care
                                                the PBF reform in the selected health regions
(PHC) and make its delivery more efficient,
                                                starting in 2019, the Borrower has taken the
the Minister of Health has issued an Arrêté
                                                following measures: (i) the Prime Minister has
specifying the key design characteristics of
                                                signed an Arrêté defining the governance
the PBF PHC reform to be applied in
                                                structure of the PBF mechanism for the
selected health regions (i.e., West, central,
                                                operationalization of the health districts
south central, and south health regions and
                                                (départements sanitaires); and (ii) the Ministry
two health departments (Libreville 1 and
                                                of Health has completed the mapping of health
Libreville 2) within the Libreville-Owendo
                                                facilities for purposes of implementing the
health region).
                                                reform in selected health regions.
PA16: To ensure that PBF is effective, the
Minister of Budget has issued an Arrêté that
establishes a dedicated PBF account for
annual allocations and provides greater
autonomy to service providers.
Objective 3(b): Increase the efficiency of social protection services
Redefining poverty and vulnerability in Gabon and simplifying safety nets
                                                PA18: To enhance the targeting of social safety
PA17: To make social protection services
                                                nets and improve the contribution of the social
better targeted and more streamlined, the
                                                protection sector to the fight against poverty,
Council of Ministers has adopted: (i) a draft
                                                the Borrower has taken the following measures:
law to change the operational definition of
                                                (i) the President has promulgated a Law
Economically Weak Gabonese (GEFs) taking
                                                introducing fundamental principles for
into consideration, inter alia, household
                                                improving the targeting of GEFs; (ii) the
composition and the poverty line, and (ii) a
                                                Minister responsible for Social Protection has
decree simplifying the social security and
                                                established a multisectoral commission
welfare system, including the specification of
                                                mandated to draft the roadmap to implement
the priority target groups for monetary
                                                the new targeting mechanism and update the
transfers and fee exemptions as well as the
                                                GEF database; and (iii) the Ministers
amounts and terms of transfers and
                                                responsible for Social Protection and
exemptions.
                                                Economy have adopted the roadmap.
Improving the delivery of safety nets and health insurance for GEFs
PA19: To increase financial autonomy and
accountability for the delivery of safety nets

                                                                                                   Page 5 of 27
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      FISCAL CONSOLIDATION & INCLUSIVE GROWTH (P159508)



and non-contributory health insurance, (i) the
Minister responsible for Social Development
has signed with the CNAMGS an annual
performance contract specifying objectives in
terms of results and resources, and (ii) the
parliament has introduced a Special
Solidarity Contribution to finance health
insurance for GEFs.
                                                 PA20: To improve effectiveness and efficiency
                                                 in administering health insurance and delivering
                                                 social safety nets programs, the Borrower,
                                                 through the CNAGMS, (i) has launched
                                                 a bidding process for the digitalization of its
                                                 services, starting with health records; (ii) has
                                                 launched a bidding process for advisory
                                                 services to obtain ISO9000 for quality
                                                 management certification; and (iii) imposed the
                                                 mandatory use of competitive bidding for the
                                                 purchasing of cars.
c. Comments on Program Cost, Financing and Dates

Program Cost. The approved amount for the first and second operations in this programmatic series was
US$200 million each, for a total of US$400 million. The disbursed amount was US$199.2 million under the first
operation and US$198.9 million under the second operation. The difference between the approved amounts
and the actual amounts disbursed is explained by fluctuations in the SDR exchange rate. While a third
operation in the series was originally planned, it was decided at the Regional Operations Committee meeting for
the second operation in the series that the second operation would complete the series. The decision to cancel
the third operation came largely as a result of the difficulties encountered with reforms under Objective 3, which
necessitated changes to PAs during the second operation. Changes were required due to the complex
economic and budgetary context prevailing at the time, which did not allow budget allocations to be secured for
the reforms that were originally envisaged in the areas of health and social protection, and that could not be
further supported by the Bank due to the absence of ongoing Bank investment project financing in these areas.
The Bank’s management viewed the likelihood of reaching a satisfactory outcome on Objective 3 to be
relatively weak, and therefore decided to interrupt the DPO series at the second operation, with the option to a
start a new DPO series later on. While the results indicators (RIs) were established for a three-operation series,
the RIs remained unchanged, except in a few cases where PAs were modified.

Financing. The operations under this programmatic series were financed through two International Bank for
Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) loans (IBRD-87890 and IBRD-89220).

Dates. The first operation was approved on November 7, 2017 and became effective on December 13, 2017.
The original/actual closing date for the first operation was October 31, 2018. The second operation was
approved on February 19, 2019 and became effective on June 13, 2019. The original/actual closing date for the
second operation was December 31, 2019.


3. Relevance of Design

                                                                                                     Page 6 of 27
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    FISCAL CONSOLIDATION & INCLUSIVE GROWTH (P159508)




a. Relevance of Objectives

At the time of appraisal, Gabon was undertaking a program of sharp fiscal adjustment through
revenue-enhancing and expenditure-reducing measures. This was part of a larger commitment by all
member countries of the Central Economic and Monetary Community (CEMAC) (comprised of Cameroon,
Chad, the Central African Republic, Equatorial Guinea, Gabon, and the Republic of Congo) to stabilize the
CFA Franc's peg to the Euro within the context of falling oil revenues. In the years preceding these
operations, the introduction of tax exemptions, which were not subject to assessments to consider their
ramifications for the government's ability to deliver on its national development objectives, led to erosion of
the tax base. Tax expenditures were estimated to be equivalent to 4 percent of GDP (or 6.4 percent of non-oil
GDP). Roughly 60 percent of the tax expenditures were associated to foregone border taxes (i.e., customs,
import value-added tax (VAT), and import-related excises), while 28 percent and 12 percent of tax
expenditures were associated to foregone VAT and corporate income tax revenues, respectively.
Furthermore, there was a consensus around the need to mobilize revenues by increasing the tax base and
excise tax rates on alcohol, tobacco, and fuel. Taxes on these items yielded less than 0.5 percent of gross
domestic product (GDP) compared to 1.7 percent of GDP, on average, for Sub-Saharan Africa. For example,
taxation of cigarettes is 12-14 percent lower in Gabon than in Sub-Saharan Africa on average, with the excise
tax about 20 percent of the retail price of the most popular cigarette brand (very low compared with the 70
percent level recommended by the Framework Convention on Tobacco Control, which Gabon ratified in
2009).

Gabon was also confronted with an oversized and growing public sector wage bill, which impeded
achievement of its fiscal consolidation objectives. Public sector hiring did not adhere to the employment
ceilings defined in the Finance Law. The public sector wage bill consequently rose by 30 percent from 2010
through 2015 due to an increase in the number of public servants, the conversion of temporary workers to
permanent status, and the introduction of a poorly designed performance incentive system in 2014, which led
to a bonus payment of CFAF 100 billion, equivalent to a 14 percent increase of the total public sector wage
bill, that was later converted into base pay in 2015. These issues ultimately led the government to establish
Human Resources (HR) Management Directorates in all ministries to control hiring and improve HR
processes. At the time of appraisal, the government was also developing a new performance evaluation
system linking public servants' career progression to their performance in order to improve public service
delivery, while trying to limit the rise in the public sector wage bill.

In addition to the fiscal measures required, Gabon was also confronted with the need to diversify its
economy away from the hydrocarbon sector to build resilience against future shocks and support job
creation by raising its international competitiveness. At the time of appraisal, many of the jobs in Gabon
were concentrated in the hydrocarbon industry, as well as in the public sector. To lead the country's
diversification efforts, the government initiated public investments to develop sectors such as forestry,
agriculture, and agribusiness. The government also aimed at improving the investment climate through the
creation of the High Council for Investment, a high‐level platform for public‐private dialogue, the creation of
an Investment Promotion National Agency (Agence nationale pour la promotion des investissements, ANPI),
and improvements in technical and vocational education and training that involved, most notably, the
introduction of dual‐training programs in partnership with the private sector.

Finally, Gabon was challenged by the need to raise public spending in health and social safety nets
to support human development and poverty reduction, and to increase the efficiency and equity of
delivery of such programs. In 2015, fewer than 10 percent of the 30 percent of individuals estimated to be

                                                                                                   Page 7 of 27
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    FISCAL CONSOLIDATION & INCLUSIVE GROWTH (P159508)



living below the poverty line qualified for any type of social transfer (excluding non-contributory health
insurance for the poor). Furthermore, maternal and child mortality rates were much higher in Gabon than in
other countries with comparable health expenditure per capita.

Relevance to government priorities and Bank-supported strategy. The PDOs were aligned with Gabon's
development priorities as expressed through its Economic Recovery Plan (Plan de relance économique,
PRE), which focused on the objectives of supporting the country's economic and social progress with the
support of international financial institutions. All three objectives of the Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)
FY12‐FY16 (extended by two years), consisting of (i) improved governance and public sector capacity, (ii)
greater competitiveness and increased employment, and (iii) improved human development and
environmental sustainability, were addressed in part through this programmatic series. Furthermore, the two
objectives of the new Country Partnership Framework under preparation -- (i) promoting diversified growth
and competitiveness, and (ii) increasing the efficiency of social programs and strengthening social protection
-- were also addressed in part through this programmatic series.

The objectives pursued by the programmatic operation series remained relevant to Gabon's context
until the series closing date. The PDOs supported by the programmatic series supported the fiscal
consolidation process of Gabon and helped the country build fiscal buffers against shocks to its economy,
particularly important as the country dealt with the COVID-19 pandemic.


b. Relevance of Prior Actions

Rationale

There were eight PAs under Objective 1, five PAs under Objective 2, and seven PAs under Objective 3. The
de facto number of actions was 35, given that many PAs were comprised of sub-actions.

Relevance of Prior Actions for Objective 1 - Increasing revenue mobilization, stabilizing the wage bill,
and improving procurement practices

PA1 supported Gabon’s fiscal adjustment through a reduction in tax expenditures associated with the La vie
chère program (estimated at CFAF 55 billion or 0.9 percent of non-oil GDP) and to discretionary
administrative exemptions (estimated at CFAF 140 billion in 2017 or 2.5 percent of non-oil GDP).

      PA1(i): The La vie chère program, which was introduced by the government in 2012 following large
       demonstrations in neighboring countries, was intended to provide financial relief to low-income
       households confronted with high cost of living. Given that several products included in the original
       program did not constitute basic goods consumed by lower-income households and that the list of
       consumption items exempted under the program had grown over the course of the ensuing years
       without any consideration for the ramifications on tax expenditures, the World Bank recommended
       that the list of basic goods fully exempted from custom duties and taxes be reduced. As a result of this
       measure, the number of products fully exempted from taxation was reduced from 192 products to 42
       products, with the remaining 150 products being subject either to a reduced (but not exempted)
       consumption tax rate of 5 percent (116 products) or a normal consumption tax rate (34 products).
      PA1(ii): Gabon's government revenues were limited by significant tax expenditures related to tax
       exemptions or tax reductions on custom duties and the VAT, including a large number of import items
       taxed at a favorable rate of 5 percent, and tax advantages for the petroleum sector, the forestry

                                                                                                   Page 8 of 27
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    FISCAL CONSOLIDATION & INCLUSIVE GROWTH (P159508)



       sector, and Special Economic Zones (SEZ). This PA required the adoption of the Supplementary
       Finance Law on August 3, 2017, with Article 23 specifying that exemptions from taxation on cross-
       border transactions require authorization in the Finance Law and that any requests must be
       accompanied by estimates of foregone revenues.

PA2 (DPO2) followed on the reforms of PA1 (first DPO series) by supporting Gabon’s fiscal adjustment
process through additional reduction of tax expenditures and better coordination and oversight of tax
expenditure management by the Inter-Ministerial Committee.

      PA2(i) required the adoption of the 2019 Finance Law, which included Article 24 that abolished all tax
       relief and preferential rates that violate the customs code of the CEMAC. The PA did not remove all
       forms of tax advantages, however, with important exceptions being reduced tax rates and tax
       exemptions granted for the petroleum industry, the forestry sector, SEZ, the construction sector,
       and the education and health sectors. PA2(i) also included the preparation of a report on tax
       expenditures, which was relevant to supporting the overarching objective of strengthening the fiscal
       balance given that there was a lack of tax expenditure reporting in fiscal management. The scope of
       tax expenditure reporting was, however, limited to VAT exemptions. The government had expressed
       capacity issues in manually entering all the data into one file. The VAT form was comparatively
       shorter than that for other major taxes and required less time to enter manually in a file.
      PA2(ii) led to a further reduction in the number of products fully exempted from custom duties and
       taxes under the La vie chère program, from 42 products under PA1 to 36 products under PA2. The
       products that were fully exempted from custom duties and taxes under the program included meat,
       fish, vegetables, pasta, rice, milk, baby foods, and canned vegetables. The measure aimed to limit tax
       exemptions under the program to essential food products of mass consumption, thus eliminating
       import tariff exonerations on all other products.
      PA2(iii) expanded the mandate of the Inter-Ministerial Committee such that it assesses the fiscal
       impact of tax exemptions stemming from ministries when new contracts are being negotiated, and
       establishes a ceiling for new tax expenditures that are introduced into draft Budget Laws. Prior to the
       implementation of PA2(iii), the roles and functions of the Inter-Ministerial Committee were limited
       to the elaboration of the macro-fiscal framework and the formulation of economic policies, and the
       Committee had no means of assessing the anticipated impact of tax expenditures on the budget. With
       PA2(iii), the Committee was able to assess the fiscal impact of any new tax exemption granted by the
       government, and the results of these assessments could be annexed to Budget Laws and submitted
       to Parliament in support of greater transparency and accountability. Further, the Committee is
       expected to establish a ceiling for new tax expenditures that are introduced into draft Budget Laws.

The relevance of PA1 and PA2 is rated Moderately Satisfactory. The measures were intended to reduce tax
exemptions to strengthen the fiscal balance. However, there was no concrete estimate of their fiscal impact,
and therefore no direct evidence that either measure would make a meaningful contribution to the objective of
revenue mobilization. (Relevance of PA1=MS; Relevance of PA2=MS)

PA3 supported fiscal adjustment through revenue mobilization from excise taxes on additional goods and
services, and the introduction of a levy on the value of goods imported by small and
microbusinesses that are not registered as value-added taxpayers.

      PA3(i) introduced excise taxes on additional goods and services in the 2018 Amended Finance Law,
       including on luxury cars, and revised rates on existing excise items. With regards to cars, it imposed
       20,000 FCFA for new cars and cars less than 5 years old with more than 10 horsepower, and 30,000

                                                                                                  Page 9 of 27
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    FISCAL CONSOLIDATION & INCLUSIVE GROWTH (P159508)



       FCFA for cars more than 5 years old with more than 10 horsepower. The Bank indicated as part of the
       ICR Review that the higher excise tax applied on older luxury cars compared to newer cars was
       explained by the desire to deter imports of older cars. Chapter II Section C of the Law also featured
       new excise rates on alcoholic beverages, tobacco products, perfumes, and luxury food products.
      PA3(ii) activated a levy of 5 percent on the value of goods imported by small and micro-enterprises
       that are not registered as value-added taxpayers. Prior to thse operations, importers registered under
       the VAT were subject to VAT plus customs duties on the value of their imports. While small and
       micro-enterprises not registered under the VAT were supposed to be subject to a tax levy of 5 percent
       on the value of their imports, this measure was not applied by customs officials. PA3(ii) made it a
       requirement for customs officials to apply the tax levy of 5 percent for imports of small and micro-
       enterprises not registered under the VAT, which was not difficult to achieve administratively as the
       levy automatically applied to businesses that were not registered under the VAT.

The relevance of PA3 is rated Moderately Satisfactory. The measures were intended to raise revenue to
strengthen the fiscal balance. However, there was no concrete estimate of their fiscal impact, and therefore
no direct evidence that either measure would make a meaningful contribution to the objective of revenue
mobilization. (Relevance of PA3=MS)

PA4 sought to stabilize the wage bill in the short term by imposing a public sector hiring freeze for ministries,
departments, and agencies, as well as state-owned enterprises, for a period of 12 months, with the exception
of the ministries responsible for health, education, and national defense, for which hiring was allowed on a
case-by-case basis. These ministries were exempted from the public sector hiring freeze in order to ensure
that the key social functions of the government in the areas of health and education were maintained and to
ensure that the defense of the territory and the security of property and the population were maintained. The
12-month public sector hiring freeze began in August 2017. While this PA was intended to limit the rise in the
public sector wage bill, which had risen by 92 percent between 2009 and 2016, the PA did not specifically
control public sector wages. Furthermore, there was no concrete estimate of the estimated savings, and
therefore no direct evidence that the measure would make a meaningful contribution to stabilizing the wage
bill.

PA5 (DPO2) followed on the reforms of PA4 (first DPO series) by seeking to improve the fiscal balance by
controlling public expenditures through the extension of the public sector hiring freeze and launch of the
biometric census.

      PA5(i) extended the public sector hiring freeze of 12 months under PA4 to a period of 36 months
       effective between August 2018 and August 2021.
      PA5(ii) launched a biometric census in 2018, which was completed in 2020, in order identify ghost
       workers and establish a rigorous database of civil servants. The results of the biometric census
       indicated that roughly 5 percent of public servants consisted of ghost workers. This database also
       helped to inform the government’s medium-term training and recruitment plan, with the government
       being challenged by significant human resource gaps in the areas of health and education.

The relevance of PA4 is rated Moderately Unsatisfactory, for the reasons outlined above. The relevance of
PA5, which is comprised of two separate sub-actions, is rated Moderately Satisfactory with PA5(i) failing to
reverse the rise in the public sector wage bill, but PA5(ii) constituting an important step toward reducing ghost
workers in the public sector and reversing the previous upward trend in the number of civil servants.
(Relevance of PA4=MU; Relevance of PA5=MS)


                                                                                                    Page 10 of 27
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    FISCAL CONSOLIDATION & INCLUSIVE GROWTH (P159508)



PA6, which was supported by a wage bill RAS (P163632), was intended to support the overarching objective
of strengthening the fiscal balance by suspending automatic civil servant promotions until August 2021. This
PA addressed the challenge with the automatic promotion of public servants resulting in a significant rise in
the public sector wage bill, which was assessed to have risen by 70 percent in nominal terms between 2010
and 2015. As such, the relevance of this PA is rated Satisfactory. (Relevance of PA6= Satisfactory)

PA7 supported the strengthening of the fiscal balance by seeking to improve procurement practices
by modernizing procedures, increasing transparency, and limiting single sourcing through the passing of a
law on public procurement in line with the public financial management framework. This PA was supported by
a Public Financial Management Reimbursable Advisory Service (RAS) (P146379). Prior to the
implementation of this PA, the framework for the public procurement of goods and services contained
inconsistencies between the public procurement code, recent institutional changes in public procurement
management, and a new program budgeting approach that had been adopted. First, while the procurement
code adopted in 2012 delineated the roles and responsibilities between the regulatory function led by the
Public Procurement Regulatory Agency (Agence de Régulation des Marchés Publics, ARMP) and the control
function led by the General Directorate of Budget and Public Finances (Direction Générale des Marchés
Publics, DGMP), the DGMP was later replaced by the General Directorate of Budget and Public Finances
(Direction Générale du Budget et des Finances Publiques) created in 2015, creating a conflict of interest and
overlapping responsibilities with contracting authorities, and undermining the transparency and the efficiency
of the public procurement process. Further, the adoption of the program budgeting approach, which provides
program managers with the authority to manage the budget, was not reflected in the existing procurement
code. Finally, there was a lack of transparency in public procurement as evidenced by the 2016 PEFA and
the 2016 Systematic Country Diagnostic, with waivers to the provisions of the procurement code and the use
of direct contracting being common practice. The draft law on public procurement, leading to the approval of
a new procurement code, would strengthen the regulatory function of the ARMP and reinstate the roles and
responsibilities of the DGMP, entrusting the DGMP with the review and approval of procurement plans and
contracts of each ministry and control of contracts above a certain threshold. This effectively supported
increased transparency in the public procurement process and limited reliance on single sourcing. PA7
supported the amendment of the law on public procurement, allowing the new procurement code to be
adopted.

PA8 supported the objective of strengthening the fiscal balance by improving the efficiency and the
transparency of public spending through the publishing of the first annual report to include statistics on public
procurement contracts and the single source contracting rate, and the publishing of performance audit reports
of the National Fund for Health Insurance and Social Warranty (Caisse nationale d’sssurance maladie et de
garantie, CNAMGS).

      PA8(i): The implementation of the measure required that the details of single sourced public contracts
       be published in ARMP's annual reports, which raised the degree of transparency and accountability of
       these contracts. The annual report of the ARMP published in 2017 revealed that only 62 percent of
       the value of public procurement was regulated by the ARMP, and that 82 percent of the value of
       public contracts was procured through single source contracting, pointing to a potential lack of
       efficiency in public procurement due to a lack of competitiveness in the bidding process. PA8
       effectively supported the control and audit function of the ARMP through the publication of an annual
       report, constituting a first step in the process of controlling spending.
      PA8(ii): The implementation of the measure made it a requirement for the SAI to publish an annual
       report on the performance audit of the CNAMGS. The main issues with the CNAMGS, as identified in
       SAI's audit, consisted of an absence of procedures and mechanisms to prevent errors and fraud, the

                                                                                                   Page 11 of 27
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    FISCAL CONSOLIDATION & INCLUSIVE GROWTH (P159508)



       absence of written procedures related to the registration and control of health care offered to the
       population, the absence of procedures and mechanisms to ensure the quality of the services offered,
       and the absence of procedures and mechanisms to ensure the sustainability of the CNAMGS’s
       financing. Following the commissioning by the government of a five-year strategic framework for the
       health system which led to the Plan Stratégique Santé: Pour un système de santé performant et de
       qualité au Gabon, an action plan for the CNAMGS was adopted aimed at increasing revenue
       collection to ensure that regular payments for the delivery of health care service to the population
       could be made, which ultimately led to changes in the funding streams for the CNAMGS. This was
       particularly important given that the CNAGMS’ scheme for the poor, i.e., the GEF, was not financially
       sustainable.

The relevance of PA7 and PA8 is rated Moderately Satisfactory, as they were important first steps along the
results chain toward achievement of the overarching objective of strengthening the fiscal balance by
contributing to the transparency and accountability of public procurement. (Relevance of PA7=MS;
Relevance of PA8=MS)

Relevance of Prior Actions for Objective 2 - Improving the investment climate and strengthening
information and communication technology (ICT) services to enhance competitiveness

PA9 was intended to support the overarching objective of enhancing competitiveness by fast-tracking
business registration through the establishment of a one-stop shop. This PA was supported by the
Investment Promotion and Competitiveness Project, which facilitated the design of the one-stop shop and its
online platform. PA9 allowed all administrative entities involved in the creation of businesses in Gabon to be
brought together and for a single form for the creation of a business to be created, replacing the multiple
forms which existed previously, and to proceed with the digitization of the single form to further accelerate the
process of business registration. According to 2009 Enterprise Survey which collects data across the non-
agricultural formal private economy, 0.8 percent of firms identified business licensing and permits as their
biggest obstacle in 2009. The 2009 Enterprise Survey also indicated, however, that 21.3 percent of firms
reported business licensing and permits as a major constraint, which was higher than the Sub-Saharan Africa
average of 15.7 percent and the global average for all developing economies of 13.7 percent. Further,
according to the World Economic Forum Global Competitiveness report, Gabon ranked 128th across 141
countries assessed on business dynamism, with 31 days required, on average, to start a business, which
was longer than in 118 other countries. Finally, the 2017 Doing Business indicated that 47 days were
required to start a business in Gabon, which was about twice longer than the global average of 23 days, and
longer than the Sub-Saharan Africa average of 28 days.

PA10 (DPO2) followed on the reforms of PA9 (first DPO series) by operationalizing the one-stop shop for
business creation, which became effective in January 2018, and developing a new unified paper form for
business start-up for use by all agencies present at the one-stop-shop.

The relevance of PA9 and PA10 is rated Satisfactory to the achievement of the overarching objective of
enhancing competitiveness given that business licensing and permits did constitute a key constraint to firm
creation. (Relevance of PA9=S; Relevance of PA10=S)

PA11 sought to enhance private sector competitiveness by improving the investment climate through the
establishment of an inter-ministerial working group mandated to review and to agree on the contents of the
new investment code and incentive regimes. The Investment Charter, which had been in place since 1998,
set out principles for regulating investment but had no binding rules or incentive systems embedded in it. The


                                                                                                    Page 12 of 27
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    FISCAL CONSOLIDATION & INCLUSIVE GROWTH (P159508)



new Investment Code aimed to provide Gabon with an investment framework that raises the attractiveness of
the country by lowering profit taxes for a pre-determined period, stimulating investments in the country with
higher incentives being provided to investment in specific regions, and providing tax incentives for reinvesting
profits. The inter-ministerial working group was established in September 2018, and the new Investment
Code was presented by this group to the minister charged with investment promotion on October 5, 2021.
The new investment code is currently undergoing review by the government. Despite this progress, the
relevance of PA11 is rated Unsatisfactory, given that the PA itself consisted only of establishing a working
group rather than approving an investment code, and further, the PA did not establish the content of the new
investment code or establish a deadline for producing a draft of the investment code. (Relevance of
PA11=U)

PA12 sought to strengthen ICT services with the Council of Ministers approving (i) a draft law on the
regulation of electronic communications and (ii) a draft law on electronic transactions, including provisions for
a more competitive ICT sector and for more secure electronic transactions. PA12 sought to improve access
to and to reduce the cost of internet and telephony services through enhanced competition in the ICT sector,
which the PD (p. 19) highlights as a key constraint to competitiveness without providing explanatory detail.
Both draft laws were adopted by Parliament and promulgated into law in mid-2018. The law on the regulation
of electronic communications regulates the licensing regime for telecommunications, including provisions for
infrastructure sharing, interconnections, access to networks, number portability, universal services, consumer
rights, and privacy protection. The law on electronic transactions regulates electronic communications rights
and obligations, e-commerce contracts, security of e-commerce transactions, electronic signatures,
cryptography, and other aspects.

PA13 (DPO2) followed on the reforms under PA12 (first DPO) by operationalizing the Universal Service Fund
(USF) such that it disburses funds for rural ICT connectivity projects. This PA complemented an IPF that
financed backbone connectivity (i.e., the national fiber optic network), allowing rural villages to be connected
via middle and last mile connectivity. This PA was intended to increase access to telephony and internet
services in rural areas. As part of this measure, the government implemented a connectivity initiative in one
rural area funded by the USF, which is financed by contributions of telecom service providers, with a
contribution rate equivalent to 2 percent of their revenue. The connectivity initiative to provide telephony and
mobile broadband service coverage to 33 villages between the cities of Maskokou and Okondja began in
2016 and was completed by September 2018.

The relevance of PA12 and PA13 is rated Moderately Satisfactory to the achievement of the overarching
objective of enhancing competitiveness, as there was a credible results chain in principle connecting
enhanced telecommunications, including electronic communications, to supporting business activity and
enhancing the competitiveness of the private sector, but no information provided on the results chain specific
to Gabon. (Relevance of PA12=MS; Relevance of PA13=MS)

Relevance of Prior Actions for Objective 3 - Improving the efficiency of healthcare delivery and social
protection services in order to protect the poor

PA14 applied PBF to primary healthcare units in select health regions. This PA was supported by the E-
Gabon Project for the PBF reform. Prior to the implementation of PA14, regional hospitals absorbed most of
the budget allocation for the health sector, resulting in the underfunding of primary healthcare. Further, there
was a lack of incentive for medical staff to improve their performance or to assume positions in underserved
areas. As a result, patients routinely bypassed primary care clinics in favor of hospitals in search of quality
care. PA14 required that regulations specifying the key characteristics of PBF for public healthcare be applied


                                                                                                    Page 13 of 27
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    FISCAL CONSOLIDATION & INCLUSIVE GROWTH (P159508)



in select regions, leading to a reallocation of budget that would benefit primary healthcare units predominantly
used by the poor in underserved areas. The Bank together with the government calculated the minimum level
of activity achievable by type of primary healthcare facility, applying a different threshold for the facilities
located in underserved areas. Further, the allocation amount was to be determined based on the quantify and
the quality of healthcare delivery, thereby allowing facilities in underserved areas to receive an increased
allocation.

PA15 (DPO2) followed on the reforms of PA14 (first DPO) and sought to facilitate the gradual implementation
of the PBF reform in the select health regions starting in 2019 by defining the governance structure of the
PBF mechanism for the operationalization of the health districts (départements sanitaires) and completing the
mapping of health facilities for the purposes of implementing the reform.

The relevance of PA14 and PA15 is rated Satisfactory as the introduction PBF for the funding of primary
health care units was expected to lead to an improvement in the number of primary care facilities offering
cost-effective preventive services, quality of healthcare delivery, and efficiency of health spending through
redirection of funds from hospitals toward primary care. (Relevance of PA14=S; Relevance of PA15=S)

PA16 sought to ensure that PBF is effective through the Minister of Budget's issuance of an Arrêté that
establishes a dedicated PBF account for annual allocations and provides greater autonomy to service
providers through the creation of health facility bank accounts. This measure was implemented in mid-2017.
The relevance of PA16 is rated Satisfactory for the same reasons as those presented for PA14 and PA15.
(Relevance of PA16=S)

PA17 sought to better target and streamline social protection services through the Council of Ministers'
adoption of: (i) a draft law to change the operational definition of Economically Weak Gabonese (GEF) taking
into consideration household composition and the poverty line, and (ii) a decree simplifying the social security
and welfare system, including the specification of the priority target groups for monetary transfers and fee
exemptions, as well as the amounts and terms of transfers and exemptions.

      PA17(i) was intended to modify the poverty definition for the purposes of determining eligibility
       for social protection benefits, from a poverty measure that was strictly based on an income level
       below the minimum wage of CFAF 80,000 per month to a poverty measure that considers other
       variables such as household composition, assets, education, and health levels. Individuals would be
       subject to a proxy means testing model that would integrate various monetary and non-monetary
       measures of poverty. Other dimensions of poverty beyond income measures are considered by the
       government to be superior measures for assessing societal well-being to better target social
       protection benefits to households, and the Bank provided technical assistance, including analytical
       work, to develop the new targeting approach.
      PA17(ii) supported the adoption of a decree in March 2018 that targeted eligibility for social
       assistance benefits to those identified through the GEF database, with GEF status being conferred by
       the CNMAGS. PA17(ii) was an extension to the improvements in poverty measurement under PA17(i)
       as it required that social protection benefits be targeted toward the individuals identified through the
       GEF database.

PA18 sought to improve the targeting of GEFs and establish a multisectoral commission mandated to draft
and adopt the roadmap to implement the new targeting mechanism and update the GEF database. PA18




                                                                                                   Page 14 of 27
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    FISCAL CONSOLIDATION & INCLUSIVE GROWTH (P159508)



supported achievement of the objective to protect the poor as it shifted to a new poverty-based targeting
framework for the distribution of social safety and welfare benefits.

The relevance of PA17 and PA18 is rated Satisfactory, as they aimed to target social assistance benefits to
those individuals identified through the GEF database, which was based on an improved measure of poverty
and needs. (Relevance of PA17=S; Relevance of PA18=S)

PA19 sought to increase financial autonomy and accountability for the delivery of safety nets and non-
contributory health insurance by the CNAGMS.

      PA19(i) introduced performance contracts for the Minister responsible for social development and the
       CNAMGS to commit to a set of objectives to be achieved each fiscal year and to ensure that each
       entity had the financial resources at its disposal to achieve these objectives. These objectives
       consisted of improving the governance of health insurance by enhancing the collection of
       contributions and the regular payment of healthcare providers, enrolling individuals who were not yet
       enrolled in the CNAMGS, and strengthening controls to ensure the quality of services delivered to the
       poor. The management of the CNAMGS could be removed by the government if the organization
       failed to meet the established objectives. Prior to the implementation of this measure, the
       responsibility was shared between CNAMGS and the line ministry, and the government did not
       routinely disburse the budget allocated to the CNAMGS, which was based on civil servants'
       contributions from their salaries. This was adversely affecting the quality of services delivered to poor
       people, as healthcare providers were being reimbursed with significant delays.
      PA19(ii) provided the funding required for the CNMAGS to deliver health services to GEFs. Until
       2017, the Special Solidarity Contribution was financed through a special tax levied on mobile phone
       companies and on remittances from abroad. The revenue that was collected through this scheme was
       insufficient to meet health service needs provided by the CNAMGS, and the mobile telephony sector
       had to bear the brunt of the financing. Through the new contribution mechanism introduced through
       this PA in March 2017, a 1 percent tax is applied to all transactions subject to the VAT, with a few
       exceptions, such as on international travel and on local transformation of wood. This provided a more
       stable source of revenue.

The relevance of PA19 is rated Satisfactory, given the clear contribution of the actions toward the objective
of protecting the poor. (Relevance of PA19=S)

PA20 sought to improve effectiveness and efficiency in administering health insurance and delivering social
safety nets programs through the CNAGMS.

      PA20(i) allowed for the digitalization of services provided by the CNAGMS, which was important
       to improving the institution's efficiency.
      PA20(ii) allowed the CNAGMS to reach the ISO 9000 certification for quality management, which was
       an important step to improving the organization's management procedures; this was one of the
       recommendations and reform areas identified through the audit of the CNAMGS.
      PA20(iii) required a major CNAMGS expenditure area (purchase of cars) to be subject to competitive
       bidding, ultimately improving spending efficiency.

The relevance of PA20 is rated Satisfactory, given its likely impact on improved CNAGMS cash flow and
operational efficiency, enabling it to provide better services protecting the poor. (Relevance of PA20=S)


                                                                                                   Page 15 of 27
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      FISCAL CONSOLIDATION & INCLUSIVE GROWTH (P159508)




Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

4. Relevance of Results Indicators

Rationale

Rationale

The program included 10 Results Indicators (RIs). Objective 1 (Increasing revenue mobilization, stabilizing the
wage bill, and improving procurement practices) included four RIs. Objective 2 (Improving the investment
climate and strengthening information and communication technology (ICT) services to enhance
competitiveness) included three RIs. Objective 3 (Improving the efficiency of healthcare delivery and social
protection services in order to protect the poor) included three RIs. (Table 2)

RI1 (associated with PA1, PA2, PA3) measured the improvement in non-oil revenue as a share of non-oil GDP.
While the achievement of PA1, PA2, and PA3 was expected to lead to an improvement in non-oil revenue as a
share of GDP, the RI was too broadly defined to capture the impacts associated with the reduction in custom
duties and taxes on products related strictly to the La vie chère program and the introduction of excise taxes on
luxury products. RI1 could have better captured the impact of the PAs by measuring the reduction in tax
expenditures as a share of government revenues (Relevance of RI1=MU).

RI2 (associated with PA4, PA5, PA6) measured the proportion of pilot ministries having adopted workforce
and skills and performance evaluation systems. RI2 did not capture the expected impacts of PA4, PA5, or PA6,
which related to the implementation of public sector hiring and automatic promotion freezes and the clean-up of
human resource records (unrelated to the adoption of a workforce and skills plan or performance evaluation
systems) (Relevance of RI2=U).

RI3 (associated with PA4, PA5, PA6) measured the change in the public sector wage bill in real terms.
It measured the achievement of PA4, PA5, and PA6 through a credible results chain, with freeze in public sector
hiring and automatic promotion expected to lead to a zero percent increase in the public sector wage bill
measured in real terms. RI3 was well defined and had a clear target, and data were available to measure the
achievement of this RI over time (Relevance of RI3=S).

RI4 (associated with PA7, PA8) measured the proportion of public sector contracts above CFAF 100 million
that have been awarded through a competitive process. It measured the achievement of PA7 and PA8 through a
credible results chain, with the new procurement law and annual reporting on public procurement expected to
lead to increased transparency and competitiveness in the public procurement process. The task team indicated
during the ICR Review that the threshold was established at CFAF 100 million based on a recommendation of
World Bank procurement specialists, taking into consideration the comparable threshold established in other
CEMAC countries. RI4 was well defined and had a clear target, and data were available to measure the
achievement of this RI over time (Relevance of RI4=S).




                                                                                                   Page 16 of 27
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      FISCAL CONSOLIDATION & INCLUSIVE GROWTH (P159508)



RI5 (associated with PA9, PA10) measured the average number of days required to start a business before and
after the establishment of the one-stop shop window for businesses. The relevance of RI5 is rated Satisfactory
(Relevance of RI5=S).

RI6 (associated with PA11) measured the number of inquiries and expressions of interest received by the ANPI
from potential foreign investors considering investing in Gabon. There is no credible results chain linking an
inquiry or an expression of interest from a foreign investor to the PA's creation of a working group to assess a
proposed new investment code and incentive regimes. The impact of an improved investment code would have
been better captured through a measure of direct investment, not of inquiries. (Relevance of RI6=U)

RI7 (associated with PA12, PA13) measured access to internet and telephony services in Gabon. While RI7 was
well defined and had a clear target, and data were available to measure achievement over time, the
corresponding PA was limited to one rural area, and a more accurate measure of the impact of the PA would
have been restricted to the rural area of implementation. The overall growth in telephony services could not be
attributed to the PA, but was likely impacted by many other factors influencing demand (and potentially supply).
(Relevance of RI7=MU)

RI8 (associated with PA14, PA15, PA16) measured the proportion of PHC facilities in selected health regions
receiving performance payments through PBF allocations. While the RI captured the main aspect of the PA’s
intent (an increase in the units rolling out PBF schemes), which was the key element of the results chain, it did
not capture whether PBF allocations resulted in improved service delivery in PHC facilities, which would lead to
improved health outcomes for the poor or vulnerable and support the overarching objective of protecting the
poor. (Relevance of RI8=MS)

RI9 (associated with PA17, PA18) measured whether eligibility for social safety and welfare benefits
was determined based on the new GEF database derived under the new poverty-based targeting measure. It
represented a key step along the results chain toward assessing whether or not eligibility for social safety and
welfare benefits was based on an improved measure of poverty, thereby supporting the overarching objective of
protecting the poor. (Relevance of RI9=S)

RI10 (associated with PA19, PA20) measured the number of key performance indicators developed by
CNAMGS related to service quality in the health and social protection sectors. The RI did not specify the
performance indicators of the CNAMGS that would be included in the measurement of this indicator, which
constitutes a major shortcoming. (Relevance of RI10=U)

Table 2: Results Indicators



                                                                                    Actual
                                                                                    change in
                                               Baseline Target          Actual                  RI
                        Associated RI                                               RI relative
RIs                                            (including (including value as of                achievement
                        PA(s)      Relevance                                        to
                                               date)       date)        target date             rating
                                                                                    targeted
                                                                                    change
Objective 1: Increasing revenue mobilization, stabilizing the wage bill, and improving procurement
practices
Objective 1(a): Increase revenues mobilization and improve transparency

                                                                                                   Page 17 of 27
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     FISCAL CONSOLIDATION & INCLUSIVE GROWTH (P159508)




                                                                                   Over 100
RI1: Non-oil revenue (as
                         PA1, PA2,            17.0%                   17.8%        percent of
a percentage of non-oil            MU                    17.1% (2019)                         Substantial
                         PA3                  (2016)                  (2019)       targeted
GDP)
                                                                                   change

Objective 1(b): Stabilize the wage bill and improve workers’ performance
RI2: Share of pilot
ministries/institutions
having developed their (i) PA4, PA5,
                                      U         0% (2016) 80% (2019) 0% (2019) Nil          Negligible
workforce and skill plans, PA6
and (ii) performance
evaluation systems
                                                                                Over 100
                                                12%
RI3: Wage bill increase PA4, PA5,                         0% (2016-   -15%      percent of
                                      S         (2012-                                      High
in real terms               PA6                           2019)       (2019)    targeted
                                                2015)
                                                                                change
Objective 1(c): Improve efficiency and transparency in procurement practices
RI4: Percentage of                                                    11% of
contracts (in value, for                                              contracts
                                                                                93 percent
contracts above CFAF                            29% of    70% of      (2019)
                                                                                of targeted
100 million) allocated      PA7, PA8 S          contracts contracts                         Substantial
                                                                                change by
through competitive                             (2015)    (2019)      67% of
                                                                                2020
process                                                               contracts
                                                                      (2020)
Objective 2: Improving the investment climate and strengthening information and communication
technology (ICT) services to enhance competitiveness
Objective 2(a): Improve the business climate
                                                                                More than
RI5: Number of days                                                             100
necessary for business PA9, PA10 S              50 (2016) 35 (2019)   10 (2019) percent of High
registration                                                                    targeted
                                                                                change
RI6: Number of inquiries
                                                                                More than
expressions of interest
                                                                                100
received by ANPI from
                            PA11      U         6 (2016) 15 (2019)    35 (2019) percent of Modest
foreign investors
                                                                                targeted
showing interest in
                                                                                change
investing in Gabon.
Objective 2(b): Strengthen ICT services
RI7: (i) Access to Internet PA12, PA13MU        (i) 98%   (i) 110%    (i) 114%  More than Modest
services* (number of                                                            100
Internet subscribers -                          (ii) 175% (ii) 180%   (ii) 169% percent of
fixed plus mobile - per                         (2016)    (2019)      (2019)    targeted
100 individuals); ii)                                                           change on
Access to telephony                                                             (i),


                                                                                             Page 18 of 27
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  FISCAL CONSOLIDATION & INCLUSIVE GROWTH (P159508)



    services* (number of                                                                           regression
    telephony subscribers –                                                                        from
    fixed plus mobile - per                                                                        baseline
    100 individuals)                                                                               for (ii)

    Objective 3: Improving the efficiency of healthcare delivery and social protection services in order to
    protect the poor
    Objective 3(a): Improve the efficiency of health care delivery
    RI8: Share of PHC
    facilities in selected   PA14,
                                         MS         0% (2016) 40% (2019) 0% (2019) Nil            Negligible
    health regions receiving PA15, PA16
    performance payments
    Objective 3(b): Increase the efficiency of social protection services
                                                                The
                                                                recertification
                                                                process
                                                    Eligibility based on the
                                                    to GEF      new poverty-
                                                    database based
    RI9: Eligibility to GEF                                                     No
                                                    based on targeting
    database based on the                                                       households
                             PA17, PA18S            self-       mechanism                  Nil    Negligible
    new poverty-based                                                           covered
                                                    reported is completed
    targeting mechanism.                                                        (2019)
                                                    individual for at least
                                                    income      50% of
                                                    (2016)      households
                                                                in GEF
                                                                database
                                                                (Dec. 2019)
    RI10: Key performance
    indicators on service                                       Yes (Dec.       No
                             PA19, PA20U            No (2016)                              Nil    Negligible
    quality developed and                                       2019)           indicators
    used by CNAMGS


  Rating

  Moderately Satisfactory

   5. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               Increase revenue mobilization, stabilize the wage bill, and improve procurement practices



                                                                                                                Page 19 of 27
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   FISCAL CONSOLIDATION & INCLUSIVE GROWTH (P159508)




Rationale
Outcomes. The programmatic series met one of the two outcome targets related to the overarching objective
of stabilizing the wage bill. While the target for revenue mobilization was achieved, the RI was not sufficiently
focused to capture the impact of the PA. The outcome target related to the overarching objective of improving
procurement practices was not met in 2019 (the percentage of contracts by value allocated through a
competitive bidding process fell below the baseline), but it was substantially achieved in 2020.

      The target for RI1 on raising non-oil revenue as a percentage of non-oil GDP from 17.0 percent in
       2016 to a revised target of 16.9 percent in 2019 (the target was revised at DPO2 with the ratio falling
       to 14.1 percent in 2017) was achieved, with RI1 rising to 17.8 percent in 2019. While the target for RI1
       was achieved, the achievement of the RI1 target is downgraded given that RI1 was too broadly based
       and could not measure the achievement of PA1, PA2, and PA3, as elaborated in the Relevance of
       Results Indicators section (Rating of RI1=Substantial).
      The target for RI2 on the share of pilot ministries/institutions having developed their workforce and skill
       plans and performance evaluation systems was not achieved, with an actual achievement of 0 percent
       in 2019 against a target of 80 percent in 2019. Furthermore, RI2 did not measure the achievement of
       PA4 and PA5, as elaborated in the Relevance of Results Indicators section (Rating of
       RI2=Negligible).
      The target for RI3 on the wage bill increasing in real terms was achieved, with the public sector wage
       bill declining by 15 percent in real terms by 2019 against a target of no change over the 2016-2019
       period. This was achieved through the combination of the hiring freeze, as well as the census of civil
       servants which facilitated cleaning up of the civil service database (Rating of RI3=High).
      The target for RI4 on the percentage of contracts (in value, for contracts above CFAF 100 million)
       allocated through a competitive process was not achieved by 2019, with only 11 percent of contracts
       subject to a competitive process against a target of 70 percent of contracts. However, there was more
       substantial progress by 2020, when 67 percent of contracts above the threshold were awarded
       competitively (Rating of RI4=Substantial).



Rating
Moderately Satisfactory



OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Improve the investment climate and strengthen information and communication technology (ICT) services to
enhance competitiveness

Rationale
Outcomes. While two of the three outcome indicators were achieved for the objective of enhancing
competitiveness, one of the RIs (RI6) was downgraded to Modest given that it failed to provide evidence of
impact and achievement.



                                                                                                   Page 20 of 27
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   FISCAL CONSOLIDATION & INCLUSIVE GROWTH (P159508)




      The target for RI5 on the reduction in the number of days required to register a business was
       achieved, with the number of days falling to 10 in 2019 against a target of 35 in 2019 (Rating of RI5=
       High).
      The target for RI6 on the number of inquiries and expressions of interest received by the ANPI from
       foreign investors showing interest in investing in Gabon was achieved, at 35 in 2019 against a target
       of 15 in 2019. Efficacy is downgraded because the indicator did not provide relevant evidence of
       impact or progress toward the objective (Rating of RI6=Modest).
      The target for RI7 on access to Internet services and access to telephony services (number of
       telephony subscribers, fixed plus mobile, per 100 individuals) was not achieved. The target on access
       to Internet services (number of Internet subscribers, fixed plus mobile, per 100 individuals) was met,
       with an actual achievement of 114 in 2019 against a target of 110 in 2019. Achievement of access to
       telephony services went in the opposite direction of the target, with achievement of 169 in 2019
       against a target of 180 in 2019 and a baseline of 175. Efficacy is also downgraded due to the relatively
       low relevance of the RI (Rating of RI7=Modest).



Rating
Moderately Satisfactory



OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
Improve the efficiency of healthcare delivery and social protection services in order to protect the poor

Rationale
Outcomes. The operations made no progress toward any of the three outcome targets for the objective of
improving efficiency of service delivery in order to protect the poor. The PBF system was not introduced as
planned in 2019, as resources could not be effectively administered in a decentralized manner; a policy
priority to centralize all Treasury resources in one single account prevented the deployment of funds to
decentralized accounts (ICR, p. 21). Financing issues delayed until early 2021 the launch of a pilot survey
intended to test the criteria for identifying GEFs; GEFs continue to be identified through self-declaration.

      The target for RI8 on the share of PHC facilities in selected health regions receiving performance
       payments was not achieved, with 0 percent of PHC facilities receiving performance payments by 2019
       against a target of 40 percent and a baseline of 0 percent. Furthermore, RI8 did not measure progress
       toward achievement of the objective, as elaborated in the Relevance of Results Indicators
       section (Rating of RI8=Negligible).
      The target for RI9 on use of the GEF database based on the new poverty-based targeting mechanism
       was not achieved, with no households covered based on the new poverty-based targeting mechanism
       by 2019 against a target of at least 50 percent of households and a baseline of 0 percent (Rating of
       RI9=Negligible).




                                                                                                  Page 21 of 27
                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                      FISCAL CONSOLIDATION & INCLUSIVE GROWTH (P159508)




                        The target for RI10 on key performance indicators on service quality developed and used by
                         CNAMGS was not achieved, with no indicator having been assessed by 2019 against a target calling
                         for indicators to have been developed (Rating of RI10=Negligible).



                  Rating
                  Highly Unsatisfactory




OVERALL EFF TBL OLD




Overall Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
Rationale

The efficacy of the first objective to increase revenue mobilization, stabilize the wage bill, and improve
procurement practices is rated Moderately Satisfactory. The efficacy of the second objective to improve the
investment climate and strengthening information and communication technology (ICT) services to enhance
competitiveness is rated Moderately Satisfactory. The efficacy of the third objective to improve the efficiency of
healthcare delivery and social protection services in order to protect the poor is rated Highly Unsatisfactory.
Overall efficacy is consequently rated Moderately Unsatisfactory.



Overall Efficacy Rating

Moderately Unsatisfactory

6. Outcome

Rationale

With the relevance of PAs rated Moderately Satisfactory and efficacy rated Moderately Unsatisfactory, the
outcome of this DPO series is rated Moderately Unsatisfactory.


a. Rating

Moderately Unsatisfactory

7. Risk to Development Outcome



                                                                                                               Page 22 of 27
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      FISCAL CONSOLIDATION & INCLUSIVE GROWTH (P159508)



The main risks to sustaining development outcomes consist of:

Although there were significant increases in non-oil revenues associated with the operations’ tax policy
measures, these gains were reversed in 2020 due to the economic impact of the COVID-19 pandemic.
However, that reversal appears to have been temporary, with partial correction having taken place in 2021. The
mandates and functions of the Inter-Ministerial Committee for the Macroeconomic and Fiscal Framework to
coordinate and oversee tax expenditure management could be weakened through a political change, which
could reduce the government’s oversight on tax expenditures; frequent government reshuffles have hampered
administrative consistency in pursuing reforms. Furthermore, the reforms to the La Vie Chere program could be
reversed if economic conditions deteriorate and/or if social protection transfers to the GEF are insufficient and/or
not well targeted to the needs of the most vulnerable segments of the population.

Wage bill containment was sustained in 2020 and 2021. However, the government could be pressured to
engage in extensive public sector hiring following the public sector hiring freeze of four years if the poverty
and/or the unemployment rates deteriorate. Similarly, the government may be pressured to resume automatic
promotion of public sector workers, though the ICR (p. 33) states that meaningful steps have been taken toward
preparation of work and skill plans for the civil service and adoption of performance evaluation plans.

The National Investment Promotion Agency, a new, single coordinating body in Gabon, now facilitates
engagement between the government and private entrepreneurs, creating an institutional basis for further
improvements in the business climate. However, a number of critical areas remain under addressed, including
reform to the Investment Law, ensuring of contract enforcement, efficiency of the legal framework for settling
disputes, establishment of norms for safeguarding shareholders’ rights, improvements in the infrastructure for
promoting exports, and gender equality in accessing jobs and economic opportunities (ICR, p. 33).

The operations did not produce results in health management or reform to the targeting methodology for GEFs.
Moving forward, resources for PBF in primary health facilities, slated for introduction on a pilot basis in 2022,
could be inadequate, and access to primary healthcare units in underserved areas could be lower than
envisaged under PBF if these areas are unable to attract qualified medical personnel. Recertification of GEFs
based on a new poverty-based targeting mechanism, scheduled for 2023 following a piloting exercise and
census of the rural population, could face continued delays, and the targeting of social safety nets to the GEF
could fail to materialize without sufficient political support for the reform.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Bank Performance – Design

Rationale

The Bank relied on relatively sound analytical underpinnings for the various areas of reform as presented in
Table 5 of the ICR. Several of the PAs and many of the RIs, however, were not relevant to the achievement
and/or to the measurement of achievement of the operations’ objectives. PA4 and PA5 sought to freeze the
public sector wage bill rather than to reverse its upward trend. PA11 established an inter-ministerial working
group to review and to agree on the contents of a new investment code and incentive regimes rather than
approve the investment code or establish the content of the new investment code. RI2 and RI6 did not capture

                                                                                                     Page 23 of 27
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      FISCAL CONSOLIDATION & INCLUSIVE GROWTH (P159508)



the impact of the associated PAs, and RI10 did not specify the performance indicators of the CNAMGS that
would be included in the measurement of the indicator.

Further, some of the PAs, such as PA1 and PA2, were not based on a rigorous ex ante and ex post analysis of
the anticipated reduction in tax expenditures, and a distributional impact assessment was not conducted to
understand the impact of the measures across income groups. Further, the operations did not include social
protection reforms that would compensate the most vulnerable segments of the population affected by reduced
subsidies on essential goods as a result of the implementation of PA1 and PA2. Moreover, the Bank
underestimated the institutional barriers related to introducing a decentralized PBF system for health facilities,
explaining that achievement of this reform was hindered by the incompatibility of the allocation of government
resources to separate accounts outside the Treasury with the rules of the Treasury Single Account, as well as a
lack of common vision on the benefits of this reform by authorities, but that this reform may be launched later on
with new modalities for flows of funds. Finally, the Bank did not consider the risks to sustaining development
outcomes as elaborated above, and consequently did not take measures to mitigate against those risks.



Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

b. Bank Performance – Implementation

Rationale

Dialogue with the Bank was key to reforms on improving the business climate, including support through the
Bank-financed Investment Promotion and Competitiveness project. The ICR also describes “intense” dialogue
between the Bank and the government on procurement reform and strengthening ARMP (ICR, p. 31). However,
the Bank incurred significant delays in mobilizing technical assistance with regards to reforms related to
Objective 3. While the Bank scaled down the RI targets for Objective 3 between the two operations as a result of
these delays, the achievement of RI8, RI9 and RI10 is rated Negligible due to the complete lack of achievement
on these RIs. This outcome reflects the poor identification of mitigating measures to address technical capacity
constraints and ownership concerns not only at the design stage, but during the implementation stage of this
programmatic series. Some of these risks may have been averted as well through improved stakeholder and
donor coordination, which appears to have been lacking.



Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

c. Overall Bank Performance

Rationale




                                                                                                   Page 24 of 27
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      FISCAL CONSOLIDATION & INCLUSIVE GROWTH (P159508)



The overall Bank performance is rated Moderately Satisfactory, with Bank performance at design
and implementation stages each rated Moderately Satisfactory.


Overall Bank Performance Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

9. Other Impacts

a. Social and Poverty

None noted.



b. Environmental

None noted.



c. Gender

None noted.



d. Other

None noted.



10. Quality of ICR

Rationale

The quality of the ICR is rated Modest. First, the quality of evidence could have been strengthened with more
robust evidence on achievement, including in cases where results indicators did not adequately measure
progress toward the overarching objectives. Second, the quality of analysis could have been improved by
presentation of the policy actions through a credible results chain and further elaboration on the shortcomings
in relevance of some of the results indicators. Third, the outcome orientation of the ICR could have been
improved through a more critical discussion of the relevance of results indicators and of efficacy, as well as more
meaningful analysis of other impacts. Fourth, the ICR was not entirely consistent with guidelines; for example,
the section on the relevance of the policy actions did not provide a clear description of the actions and
their relevance through a credible results chain, and in some instances, outcomes were not clearly assessed.


                                                                                                    Page 25 of 27
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                       Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     FISCAL CONSOLIDATION & INCLUSIVE GROWTH (P159508)




a. Rating

Modest

11. Ratings
                                                                         Reason for
Ratings                    ICR               IEG
                                                                         Disagreement/Comments
                           Moderately        Moderately
Outcome
                           Unsatisfactory    Unsatisfactory
                           Moderately
Bank Performance                             Moderately Satisfactory
                           Satisfactory
                                                                     Five out the 10 RIs were rated
                                                                     Satisfactory or Moderately
Relevance of Results
                           ---               Moderately Satisfactory Satisfactory, with the remaining
Indicators
                                                                     RIs rated Unsatisfactory or
                                                                     Moderately Unsatisfactory.
                                                                     The quality of the ICR is rated
                                                                     Modest. First, the quality of
                                                                     evidence could have been
                                                                     strengthened with more robust
                                                                     evidence on achievement,
                                                                     including in cases where results
                                                                     indicators did not adequately
                                                                     measure achievement toward
                                                                     the overarching objective.
                                                                     Second, the quality of analysis
                                                                     could have been improved by
                                                                     presentation of the policy
                                                                     actions through a credible
                                                                     results chain and further
Quality of ICR             ---               Modest                  elaboration on the shortcomings
                                                                     in relevance of some of the
                                                                     results indicators. Third, the
                                                                     outcome orientation of the ICR
                                                                     could have been improved
                                                                     through a more critical
                                                                     discussion of the relevance of
                                                                     results indicators and of efficacy,
                                                                     as well as more meaningful
                                                                     analysis of other
                                                                     impacts. Fourth, the ICR was not
                                                                     entirely consistent with
                                                                     guidelines; for example, the
                                                                     section on the relevance of the
                                                                     policy actions did not provide a

                                                                                           Page 26 of 27
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      FISCAL CONSOLIDATION & INCLUSIVE GROWTH (P159508)



                                                                                 clear description of the
                                                                                 actions and their relevance
                                                                                 through a credible results chain,
                                                                                 and in some instances,
                                                                                 outcomes were not clearly
                                                                                 assessed.

12. Lessons

The ICR Review identifies three key lessons:

     1. The identification of PAs and RIs should be carefully considered to ensure that they are relevant to the
        achievement and/or to the measurement of achievement of the operations’ objectives. The identification
        of PAs should be grounded in sound analytical underpinnings;
     2. The relevance of a PA that leads to a fiscal impact should be supported by a rigorous ex ante and ex
        post analysis of the anticipated additional government revenues generated or the anticipated reduction in
        government expenditures; and
     3. Triggers, targets, and RIs should be appropriately adapted to lessons learned or changes in underlying
        conditions and risks.


13. Project Performance Assessment Report (PPAR) Recommended?

No




                                                                                                    Page 27 of 27
