     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BI-Social Safety Nets (Merankabandi) (P151835)



                                                                                   Report Number: ICRR0023444

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P151835                                    BI-Social Safety Nets (Merankabandi)

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Burundi                                    Social Protection & Jobs


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                 Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-D1540                                  30-Jun-2022                                            40,429,968.32

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 15-Dec-2016                                30-Jun-2022

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                       Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            40,000,000.00                                                 0.00

 Revised Commitment                             39,713,519.16                                                 0.00

 Actual                                         40,429,968.32                                                 0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator           Group
 Stuti Sachdeva              Salim J. Habayeb             Eduardo Fernandez                IEGHC (Unit 2)
                                                          Maldonado




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   As stated in the Financing Agreement and the Project Appraisal Document (PAD), the objectives of the
   project were to (a) provide cash transfers to poor and vulnerable families with children in select areas, and (b)
   strengthen delivery mechanisms for a social safety net program.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
                                                                                                     Page 1 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BI-Social Safety Nets (Merankabandi) (P151835)



  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   1. Support to the cash transfer program (Appraisal amount: US$ 26.7 million; Actual amount: US$ 31.64
   million):

   Develop and implement the first phase of the Merankabandi cash transfer program covering extremely poor
   and vulnerable (in terms of food insecurity) rural households with children under 12 years in Northern and
   Eastern regions.

         Transfer BIF 20,000 per household per month (~US$ 145 per year) to stabilize income flow,
          increasing consumption and investment in children’s human capital.
         Promote positive behavior among women and children to strengthen nutrition, early childhood
          development, and school attendance.

   2. Support to the key delivery mechanisms of a basic social safety net system (Appraisal amount:
   US$ 7.50 million; Actual amount: US$ 3.36 million):

   Identify the beneficiary database, enhance targeting efficiency, establish the basic management information
   system, and streamline Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E).

         Identify potential beneficiaries in four provinces based on monetary poverty and chronic malnutrition
          rates, informing analysis for implementing the database and improving targeting.
         Develop core modules of the Management Information System (MIS) encompassing beneficiary
          journey from identification and registration to payment disbursal and M&E, improving program
          design and fostering coordination among different programs.
         Institutionalize robust M&E practices including process and impact evaluations, informing program
          design during phase 2.
         Build capacity across central and local levels to implement the National Social Protection Strategy
          (NSPS).

   3. Project management (Appraisal amount: US$ 5.80 million; Actual amount: US$ 5.71 million):

   Collaborate with the Ministry of Human Rights, Social Affairs and Gender, Permanent Executive Secretariat,
   and the National Commission for Social Protection to support the implementation of the program.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   The amount at approval was US$ 40.00 million through an IDA Grant. However, the actual cost at closing
   was US$ 40.71 million (ICR Annexure 5, Table 2). The project was approved on December 15, 2016, and
   became effective on July 27, 2017. The project was restructured in March 2022.




                                                                                                   Page 2 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BI-Social Safety Nets (Merankabandi) (P151835)



   The restructuring was intended to reallocate funds from Component 2 to 1, making additional cash transfers
   available to beneficiaries, and hence promoting a graduation approach. This reallocation was based on the
   experience of other countries in the region that showed investing in Income Generating Activities (and
   obtaining relevant training) made the impacts on consumption last longer. Moreover, the project managed to
   save in Component 2 by efficiently negotiating large contracts for disbursing cash transfers, reducing costs
   from the original estimate of 7 percent to 3.75 percent.

   The expected results linked to activities remained unaltered with the restructuring.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
At the time of the appraisal, two-thirds of Burundi's population were classified as poor, making it the
second-poorest country in Africa, only behind Malawi. Inequality, as measured by the Gini index, had been
increasing, rising from 43.5 percent in 2006 to 46.3 percent in 2012. This indicated a clear need for a basic
safety nets program aimed at reducing poverty and inequality.

The social assistance landscape was, at best, characterized by fragmented small-scale programs financed
by donors. These included scholarships for tertiary education and subsidies for agricultural inputs and
livestock (ICR, p. 6). To potentially fill the gaps, the country put forth the National Social Protection Policy
and the Cadre Stratégique de Lutte contre la Pauvreté in 2011. Moreover, with support from the World
Bank and UNICEF, a National Social Protection Strategy was developed in 2015. The strategy prioritized
access to basic social services, food and income security, natural and social risks management, and
addressing children’s chronic malnutrition.

The country also faced a humanitarian and emergency context in some areas in addition to dealing with the
structural vulnerability of its poorest members. Safety nets interventions were, therefore, needed to address
both these tracks. As mentioned above, government funding for safety nets was limited, and the PAD (p. 4)
reported that donor funding was decreasing.

The project objectives, aiming at providing cash transfers to poor and vulnerable families with children in
selected areas, and strengthening delivery mechanisms for a social safety net program, were in tandem
with both the National Social Protection Strategy and the Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) at entry. In
particular, the project contributed to (a) the second and fourth goals of the Government’s Second Poverty
Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP II) from 2012, and (b) Pillars II and III of the World Bank Group’s Burundi
Country Assistance Strategy for FY 13-16 (Report 72334-BI). However, the objectives were output-oriented
and not adequately tied to the to the overarching development challenges faced by Burundi such as those
related to human capital and nutrition.

At project closing, objectives remained aligned with the Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for the
period FY 19-23, specifically with CPF Focus Area I on “Building Human Capital and Inclusion” under CPF
Objective 1.1 to “expand social protection and economic inclusion for poor and vulnerable groups”. While
both the project and the above CPF objectives used similar indicators related to increased numbers of
beneficiaries of safety net programs, enrollment percentages, and social registry, the project’s result
framework did not include indicators related to human capital development. Moreover, the CPF explicitly

                                                                                                       Page 3 of 14
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      BI-Social Safety Nets (Merankabandi) (P151835)



               highlighted the importance of linking social assistance to cognitive development, with longer-term effects on
               learning, health, and nutrition of individuals and ultimately their income-earning capacity.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To provide regular cash transfers to extremely poor and vulnerable households with children in selected
                             areas.

                             Rationale
                             A precursor to the national program, the project was to be implemented in phases. Phase 1 entailed providing
                             cash transfers to poor and vulnerable households with children under 12 years in Northern and Eastern
                             regions. Poor and vulnerable households were to be identified using community-based targeting followed by a
                             basic proxy-means test. To begin with, four provinces, i.e., 16 communes were selected based on monetary
                             poverty rate and chronic malnutrition rates. These communes were further sub-divided into zones and
                             collines, with an average 535 households per colline. The household-level selection targeted 30 percent of
                             the poorest households within the colline, where poverty was to be measured using access to land,
                             dependency index, and welfare indicators including food security.

                             Implementation was further phased, starting with 8 selected rural communes of Kuruzi and Ruyigi (PAD,
                             p.12). Beneficiary households would receive BIF 20,000 per household per month. Initially, funds were to be
                             transferred every three months for operational purposes. To ensure regularity of transfers, the project
                             prepared a schedule that was set-up in the operational manual.

                             The theory of change assumed regular cash transfers would stabilize incomes of poor and vulnerable
                             households, and potentially increase investment in children’s human capital, including nutrition. The latter was
                             assumed to be facilitated by behavior change communication activities. Beneficiary households were enrolled
                             for three years in the program which included two and a half years with cash and behavior change activities,
                             and 6 months with behavior change activities only. Behavior-change activities included promotion of positive
                             behavioral change towards maternal and child health, nutrition and early childhood development, and
                             retention of school age children in school, and were conducted by local non-governmental organizations.
                             Examples include household sessions for members above 15 years of age, mothers’ and father’s sessions;
                             and targeted messaging to community leaders and service providers. While beneficiary households were
                             required to attend, community leaders were encouraged to voluntarily participate. In the initial phase,
                             participation was tracked, however, the transfers were unconditional. The intended outcomes were planned to
                             be measured by the number of beneficiaries who received cash transfers, and those who participated in



                                                                                                                               Page 4 of 14
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BI-Social Safety Nets (Merankabandi) (P151835)



complementary activities. While aligned with objective 1, these indicators were more output-oriented and
didn’t capture the changes in intended outcomes.

Outputs and intermediate results

      Provision of cash transfers to poor and vulnerable women with children under 12 years. The target
         population included extreme poor and vulnerable (in terms of food insecurity) rural households with
         children under 12 years of age in Northern and Eastern regions of the country.
        Provision of behavior change communication activities, both via community assemblies and
         gatherings, and additional house visits and follow-ups to ensure solid comprehension and adoption of
         measures.
        98% (target: 70%) of the community members reported to be satisfied with this targeting process.
        100% of beneficiaries (target: 80%) received payments as per schedule in the manual.
        96% of beneficiary households (target: 80%) participated in complementary behavior change
         activities. Beneficiary households (both husband and wife) were expected to participate in all
         sessions, and the delivery partner (NGOs) tracked attendance. The estimate is based on average
         participation rate.
        In terms of regularity of cash transfers, 100 percent of beneficiaries received payments on the
         schedule set-up in the operational manual, exceeding the target of 80 percent. This consisted of a
         total of 15 payments received with the right frequency as planned (ICR, p. 34).

Outcomes

      56,106 (target: 48,000) beneficiaries received unconditional cash transfers, of which over 95% (target:
       50%) were female recipient households. Here, when a selected household had female member who
       was chosen as the direct recipient of cash transfers, the household was tagged as female recipient.
      96% (target: 40%) of beneficiary mothers of children under 2 breastfed according to the recommended
       protocol. The ICR does not report on the proportion of mothers who were breastfeeding prior to the
       intervention due to unavailability of baseline date. However, the team estimated impact by comparing
       treatment vs. control post intervention (15% vs. 95%).
      In addition, the ICR reported that 76.1% (target: 40%) of beneficiary households increased their food
       consumption by more than 10%. Impact was estimated based on a UNICEF evaluation comparing
       treatment vs. control post intervention. However, no impact on nutritional status has been reported.

Achievement is rated Substantial as the targeting helped to benefit the intended beneficiaries in selected
areas through the provision of regular cash transfers. While impact evaluations on complementary activities
were limited, the ICR reported that there was a significant increase in food consumption and positive behavior
change associated with breastfeeding based on ex-post studies comparing treatment vs. control and third-
party evaluations.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
                                                                                                 Page 5 of 14
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               BI-Social Safety Nets (Merankabandi) (P151835)




                            Objective
                            To strengthen delivery mechanisms for the development of a basic social safety net program.

                            Rationale
                            The first step in building the delivery mechanism for the social safety net program is to identify a pool of
                            potential beneficiaries. The project planned to develop a database for registry using a proxy-means testing
                            approach. The project used a formula that was developed by international consultants with limited in-country
                            appropriation. To get the process running, the project planned to develop core modules for the Management
                            Information System (MIS), set up a monitoring and evaluation framework, and put up the payment
                            mechanisms for cash transfers using a mobile platform. Lastly, to ensure smooth implementation, the project
                            intended to build capacity of implementing agencies. The intended outcomes were to be measured by the
                            proportion of households enrolled in the beneficiary database.

                            Outputs and intermediate results.

                                  100% (target: 90%) of households in the registry had updated information.
                                  Reports and modules were available in the management information system.
                                  Targeting processes were put in place, and payment disbursal via mobile phones were tested.
                                  A grievance and redress mechanism was institutionalized, which ensured that 40% of the grievances
                                   registered were resolved in a timely manner.
                                  Several process evaluations were initiated during implementation; however, not completed.

                            Outcomes

                                  135,872 households were recorded in the household database of whom 56,106 households benefitted
                                     from cash transfers and accompanying measures.
                                  Data showed that 99.4 percent of households enrolled in the beneficiary database were living below
                                   the extreme poverty line, exceeding the target of 70 percent, and that registered beneficiaries
                                   belonged to the lowest quintile (poorest 20 percent) of the income distribution.
                                  The project helped authorities update the National Social Protection Policy in 2022.

                            Key pillars and building blocks of the delivery system were set up such as targeting and payment
                            mechanisms, and registry development. These also helped to inform the Social Protection Policy. Going
                            forward, the country could benefit from in-country appropriation for key components of a basic social safety
                            net programs, as the transfer of knowledge was weak.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale

                                                                                                                             Page 6 of 14
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      BI-Social Safety Nets (Merankabandi) (P151835)



  Both the objectives of providing regular cash transfers to extremely poor and vulnerable households in
  selected areas and strengthening delivery mechanisms for the development of a basic social safety net
  program were almost fully achieved and rated substantial. The project's interventions were logically and
  plausibly connected to observed outcomes, however, the PDO was output focused.



  Overall Efficacy Rating
  Substantial



 5. Efficiency
The PAD’s economic analysis highlighted both the direct and indirect impact of the cash transfer program. The
former included the short-term effects of increasing income and consumption, and long-term effects of investing
in children’s human capital. The analysis quantified these potential impacts, for example, household income was
expected to increase by 15% over the transfer period and the monetary poverty gap was to shrink in half. In
addition, empirical evidence from other countries in the region suggested that cash transfers could lead to
increases in productive investment. The indirect impacts included (a) sharing economic gains associated with
higher demand, which was expected with higher income, and (b) increasing investments in productive capacity
of beneficiaries and improving their risk management capacity.

The ICR presented a cost-effectiveness analysis, which highlighted that the cost-effectiveness to deliver cash
transfers to beneficiaries were below the estimates at appraisal as the amount disbursed to households was
lower than estimated (US$ 124 vs. US$ 145 per household). Disbursing cash transfers costed 3.75% of the
amount disbursed as compared to 3.4% from international experience. Costs associated with updating and
maintaining the registry were well below the estimated costs at appraisal (US$ 6 vs. US$ 14 per household). In
addition, the cost efficiency gains associated with digital payments was estimated to be US$ 82 per household
as compared to the expected US$ 90 over three years. Project management costs, including administrative
costs and capacity building, were at the upper end of average operating costs. However, the ICR justified these
given it’s a first of a kind engagement in Burundi.

The project faced some minor design and implementation challenges, including procurement. The project kick-
off was delayed by four months due to delays in recruitment of a project coordinator, and complementary
activities were on hold due to suspension of international NGOs by the government. These were resolved over
time. Accountability issues on the government side stemmed from limited access to the government-owned MIS.
Access was limited in the sense that the project team could not update beneficiary information.

Overall, efficiency is rated as substantial in view of the cost-effectiveness of cash transfers delivery and because
project implementation was overall adequate with some shortcomings and delays.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial




                                                                                                      Page 7 of 14
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      BI-Social Safety Nets (Merankabandi) (P151835)



a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?              Point value (%)            *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                        0
Appraisal                                                     0
                                                                                         Not Applicable
                                                                                        0
ICR Estimate                                                  0
                                                                                         Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of Objectives is rated Substantial, as the PDOs were aligned with government’s priorities, and the
Country Partnership Framework at project closing, however, they were not sufficiently linked to the overarching
development needs of the country (outcomes vs. outputs). Achievement of Objectives is rated Substantial as
development objectives were almost fully achieved. Efficiency is rated Substantial as the cost of disbursing cash
transfers was aligned with international experience. Taken together, the outcome is rated Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

A well-rounded infrastructure for a social safety net program has been set up in Burundi with over 135,000
households registered in the database, a grievance redress mechanism, and a payment disbursement
process. However, there was high dependency on international consultants for the formulas used, with a lack
of in-country appropriation, limiting the country’s capacity to scale-up, both geographically and
demographically.

In addition, as emphasized in the ICR, the viability of the project was at risk from limited institutional capacity,
weak governance, fiduciary risks, and existing gender-based norms. In response to these, the project
undertook measures to build local capacity, appointed an internal auditor, and provided support to address
issues with gender norms.

In the larger context, the project contributed to the government’s efforts to place social protection at the
center of the national development agenda and contributed to institutional strengthening. Technical support
and intensive dialogue with the World Bank and other Development Partners on the implementation of the
National Social Protection Strategy helped the main actors in charge of social protection and reinforced
coordination mechanisms. However, the transfer of knowledge regarding the MIS and the payment platform
fell short according to the ICR (p. 19). In terms of mobilizing the private sector, the latter contributed to the
project by investing in the mobile operator’s infrastructure to increase service accessibility (ICR, p. 19).




                                                                                                         Page 8 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BI-Social Safety Nets (Merankabandi) (P151835)




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project was in line with government priorities as highlighted in the Cadre Stratégique de Lutte contre
  la Pauvreté (PRSP) and the National Social Protection Policy (PNPS) (2011). The government had also
  set up an inter-ministerial coordinating body in 2013, a secretariat in 2014, and developed the National
  Social Protection Strategy in 2015. The project brought together key international partners working in the
  country. For example, UNICEF was to provide technical assistance for behavior change curriculum, and
  African Development Bank was to complement efforts in the Ministry of Civil Service, Labor, and Social
  Security.

  The preparation of the project was based on an assessment of social safety nets in the country in 2014
  and a vulnerability assessment, however, the country had limited experience in cash transfers. The
  design was, therefore, informed by pilots run by NGOs and donors in the country, including those
  implemented by Concern Worldwide, Belgian Technical Cooperation, and International Fund for
  Agricultural Development (IFAD). Lessons learnt from other countries such as Nicaragua, Liberia, Sierra
  Leone, and Tanzania were also incorporated, such as the merits of good targeting, supporting the
  extremely poor, MIS development, donor coordination, partnerships with the civil society and NGOs, and
  providing cash to women to ensure that a larger share is spent on food and children’s needs (PAD, p. 16-
  17).

  The PDO formulation was closer to the output level rather than the outcome level, and the Results
  Framework did not fully capture the expected results of increased access to cash transfers and
  strengthened delivery mechanisms for a social safety net program. The ICR highlighted the shortcomings
  of the results framework at the design stage as well as the absence of a true impact evaluation study
  (ICR, p. 24). In addition to the lack of outcome-orientation, the ICR noted that outcome-level indicators
  did not measure all parts of the PDO, and that the core reporting indicators (beneficiaries of social safety
  nets) and their disaggregation were incorrectly interpreted (household level instead of individuals) and
  taking 50 percent “of which, female” instead of having a separate indicator to track female recipients
  within the household (ICR, p. 23)

  By and large, the design of implementation arrangements was adequate, with implementation to be led
  by the Permanent Executive Secretary under the authority of the Ministry of Human Rights, Social Affairs
  and Gender, and under the guidance of a steering committee. The Project Implementation Unit (PIU)
  included a central team, provincial and commune-level teams (PAD, p. 38). In addition, the Permanent
  Executive Secretariat of the National Protection Commission and the Directorate for Social Assistance
  and National Solidarity in the Ministry of Human Rights, Social Affairs and Gender were mobilized for
  coordination (PAD, p. 18).

  The main risk identified at the appraisal was related to the fact that the project was the first of its kind in
  Burundi. Additionally, both the Permanent Executive Secretariat for the National Social Protection
  Commission and the Direction for Social Assistance and National Solidarity were relatively unfamiliar with
  the World Bank’s procurement rules and financial procedures. To mitigate these risks, several strategies
  were employed, including leveraging the project implementation unit to ensure a smooth run, developing


                                                                                                       Page 9 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BI-Social Safety Nets (Merankabandi) (P151835)



  a manual of procedures aligned with the World Bank’s processes, and appointing an internal auditor.
  These mitigation measures proved to be largely adequate.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The ICR (p. 22) reported that the World Bank significantly contributed to the success of the project by
 adopting a participatory approach, improving communication and coordination among partners. The World
 Bank Team was proactive, restructured the project, and facilitated the adoption of a graduation approach
 for beneficiary households. This effort was informed by lessons learnt in other countries in the region that
 suggested that investing in Income Generating Activities (and obtaining relevant training) makes the
 impacts on consumption last longer.

 The World Bank provided close monitoring and supervision missions throughout the life of the project in
 close collaboration with government counterparts. The World Bank Task Team carried out nine supervision
 and implementation support missions with 3 virtual missions following the start of the COVID-19 pandemic
 (ICR, p. 23). These were followed by good quality reporting and recording, including comprehensive Aide-
 Memoires and recommended actions to government counterparts, and ISRs (ICR, p. 27). The missions
 were adequately staffed, with experts who provided technical assistance on social protection issues and
 training the PIU staff on fiduciary aspects. A Mid-Term Review (MTR) was conducted on schedule in
 November 2019 and came up with restructuring recommendations that strengthened project activities. The
 Task Team was proactive in facilitating the work of government counterparts in addressing implementation
 challenges, including procurement and financial management, and in facilitating mitigation measures,
 including the hiring of an accounting assistant and reviewing of manuals.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 As mentioned in the Quality at Entry section (section 8.a) the PDO formulation was closer to the output
 level rather than the outcome level. The M&E arrangements included process and impact evaluations, spot
 checks and beneficiary surveys. The process evaluations during the first phase were intended to inform
 expansion, and the impact evaluations were to be conducted using randomized control trials. The key
 delivery mechanism set up, i.e., the MIS was to enable regular M&E. M&E tools such as setting up the


                                                                                                   Page 10 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BI-Social Safety Nets (Merankabandi) (P151835)



 dashboard were appropriate as they allowed regular tracking of progress, and a dedicated M&E specialist
 was hired at the outset (ICR, p. 23).



b. M&E Implementation
  M&E was adequately implemented in some areas, but with shortcomings in others. Throughout
  implementation, there was systematic updating of the results framework to monitor progress (ICR, p. 27).
  While impact evaluations were kick-started, they were not completed during implementation. The project
  also carried out a technical audit of payments to assess the technical quality of the targeting and payment
  system (ICR, p. 24). Additional indicators were incorporated into the Complementary Activities
  Operations Manual developed by NGOs to monitor behavior change among beneficiaries. Other
  shortcomings included misinterpretation between household and individual beneficiaries; limited access
  to MIS that delayed the updates of beneficiary information in the system; and the poor quality of baseline
  data of the pilot that limited the robustness to establish the relationship between cash transfers and
  increased food consumption.



c. M&E Utilization
  The World Bank worked closely on M&E with the government and development partners. M&E utilization
  was extensive and adequately used for project monitoring. The ICR (p. 24) reported that data were
  consistently used to inform project management and decision-making on implementation progress and
  arising issues, and that the government and World Bank teams met regularly through videoconferences
  and frequent meetings to review and discuss M&E findings. Actions were mutually agreed to improve
  performance in areas that were lagging. The project informed and supported the National Social
  Protection Policy in 2022 (ICR, p. 16). In particular, it provided support to the government to build
  capacity for implementing and updating its social protection strategy.

  The ICR (p. 24) concluded that M&E implementation shortcomings did not significantly affect the project
  team’s ability to monitor progress and to assess the achievement of the stated objectives on the
  provision of cash transfers to intended beneficiaries, and on strengthening delivery mechanisms for a
  social safety net program. M&E arrangements, findings, close monitoring, and utilization were sufficient
  to assess the achievement of the stated objectives.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified under environmental category B. Safeguards issues are often minimal in social
   protection projects with no physical construction. However, given that one percent of the population was
   indigenous, OB/ BP 4.0 on indigenous people was triggered and the government prepared an Indigenous
   Peoples’ Planning Framework. The plan aimed to ensure the dignity, rights, interests, and cultural

                                                                                                  Page 11 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BI-Social Safety Nets (Merankabandi) (P151835)



   specificities of the Batwa population were respected, and they benefited from the project in the same way
   as other citizens. Activities included support for child and marriage registration, home improvements,
   capacity building in modern pottery and distribution of school kits. The project also developed a grievance
   and redress mechanism for all beneficiaries including the Batwa population. For ease of access, the project
   placed confidential complaint boxes at the colline level, complaint tables at payment sites, and set up a toll-
   free number for complains. Availability of field level personnel from the PIU also helped in handling
   complains in person for the Batwa population (ICR p. 25).

   In addition, promotional activities were developed to provide safeguards against possible adverse social
   impact arising from providing cash transfers to women, which went against the gender norms in Burundian
   society. The overall safeguards rating was recorded as Satisfactory in the Operations Portal.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   The ICR reported that Financial Management was handled effectively throughout implementation. While
   there were challenges associated with limited capacity, discrepancies between manuals and contracts, and
   poor quality of monitoring reports, the World Bank managed to mitigate most of these. The only
   recommendation from the financial supervision mission which was not incorporated was to host the MIS
   database on the project local server vs. cloud due to travel restrictions associated with the pandemic.

   Procurement performance was rated moderately satisfactory during implementation. While most
   procurement was as planned and the project effectively saved US$ 3 million, there were some
   shortcomings associated with contract management and procurement processes.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   While mobile payments per se were intended according to the PAD to promote accessibility and financial
   inclusion, and the payment study identified potential bank and mobile providers in all provinces, the ICR (p.
   19) reported that the project helped in mobilizing private sector financing. In particular, the private sector
   contributed to the project by investing in the mobile operator’s infrastructure to increase service
   accessibility and connectivity by installing new antennas and strengthening existing ones. According to the
   ICR (p. 20), more than 326 agents and super-agents were created by the payment agency during the
   implementation of the project.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment


                                                                                                    Page 12 of 14
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       BI-Social Safety Nets (Merankabandi) (P151835)



Outcome                           Satisfactory           Satisfactory
                                                                                     The PDO formulation was closer
                                                                                     to the output level rather than
                                                                                     the outcome level and the
                                                                                     Results Framework did not fully
Bank Performance                  Satisfactory           Moderately Satisfactory     capture what was expected as a
                                                                                     consequence of increased
                                                                                     access to cash transfers and
                                                                                     strengthen delivery mechanisms
                                                                                     for a social safety net program
                                                                                     M&E implementation was
                                                                                     inadequate for capturing the
                                                                                     expected results of increased
                                                                                     access to cash transfers and
                                                                                     strengthened delivery
                                                                                     mechanisms for a social safety
Quality of M&E                    Modest                 Substantial
                                                                                     net program, but it was generally
                                                                                     sufficient for assessing the
                                                                                     achievement of the stated
                                                                                     objectives. For this reason, as
                                                                                     per IEG and OPCS guidance,
                                                                                     M&E is considered Substantial.
Quality of ICR                    ---                    Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR (pp. 29- 30) identified “lessons” or insights that emerged from the experience of this project.
A few of these are echoed here.

        Pilots are useful for effectively scaling up targeted interventions to larger portfolios.
        Regular cash transfers work well with complementary behavior change activities/support to
         promote investment in households’ human capital and productive inclusion.
        Providing cash transfers to women under the social safety net program helps in empowering
         them and in addressing children’s needs and nutrition. However, appropriate efforts need to
         be taken to mitigate any risks associated with going against existing gender norms.
        Participatory approaches can work well in complex environments, especially when the
         project is first of its kind in the country as it helps in ensuring different development partners
         are working in tandem towards in building the country’s social safety net.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No


                                                                                                        Page 13 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BI-Social Safety Nets (Merankabandi) (P151835)



14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR was clear and candid. It adequately conveyed the storyline associated with laying the foundation of a
social protection system while lucidly articulating complex issues around governance and capacity prevalent in
Burundi. The evidence was of adequate quality, although it was output-oriented. The evidence supported
arguments made by the ICR and was sufficient to reach conclusions in assessing the achievement of stated
objectives. Lessons and recommendations were derived from project experience. The ICR was internally
consistent and followed guidelines, although its narrative was moderately lengthy and occasionally repetitive.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                 Page 14 of 14
