     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TZ-Intermodal & Rail Development Project (P127241)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0023484

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P127241                                     TZ-Intermodal & Rail Development Project

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Tanzania                                    Transport


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-54140                                   31-Jul-2019                                        270,762,000.77

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 24-Apr-2014                                 30-Sep-2022

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           300,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                            300,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Actual                                        270,762,000.77                                               0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Gouthami Padam              Vibecke Dixon                 Kavita Mathur                  IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The project development objective (PDO) as stated in the PAD (Page 9) and Financing Agreement (Schedule
   1, Page 5) was “to deliver a reliable open access infrastructure on the Dar es Salaam-Isaka rail
   segment”.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?

                                                                                                   Page 1 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TZ-Intermodal & Rail Development Project (P127241)



  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project included four components:

   Component A: Improvement of Rail Infrastructure (appraisal estimate - US$216.8 million plus US$15.7
   million in contingencies; actual cost at closing – US$244.18 million). This component aimed to do the
   following: i) rehabilitation, upgradation, and maintenance of selected railway track sections requiring urgent
   repairs on the 970 km long Dar es Salaam-Isaka line; ii) rehabilitation of "weak" bridges to increase the
   capacity to a minimum of 15 tons/axle load; iii) implementation of Train Control and Track Warrant Systems;
   and iv) track, bridge, maintenance, and installation works supervision.

   Component B: Rolling Stock (appraisal estimate - US$17.5 million plus US$1.8 million in contingencies;
   actual cost at closing – US$ 15.95 million). This included the procurement of three new locomotives, 44
   wagons, a track recording car and civil engineering rolling stock. New container block train rolling stock was
   to be dedicated as part of the introduction of a new intermodal Tanzania Railways Limited (TRL)-operated
   service between Dar es Salaam and Isaka.

   Component C: Development of Isaka Terminal, Ilala Terminal, and Dar es Salaam Port Platform
   (appraisal estimate - US$12.7 million plus US$2.6 million in contingencies; actual cost at closing – US$1.42
   Million). This component aimed to support the development of three intermodal container terminals to allow
   for more efficient modal transfers to and from the rail. Specifically, it included i) the design and civil works to
   construct rail exchanges in the terminal in Isaka; ii) the design and civil works to construct rail exchanges in
   the terminal in Ilala and iii) the design and implementation of civil works to upgrade and re-align rail
   exchanges in Dar es Salaam port particularly in and around the container depots in the port.

   Component D: Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Building (appraisal estimate - US$32.9 million;
   actual cost at closing – US$9.21 million). This component intended to support project preparation and
   additional technical support to the implementing agency - Reli Assets Holding Company (RAHCO), TRL and
   the Surface and Marine Transport Regulatory Authority (SUMATRA). The main elements were: i)
   Preparatory Design studies; ii) Enhancement of information technology tools including the establishment of
   a Management Accounting Information System (MAIS) for TRL, RAHCO and SUMATRA; iii) Setting up of
   the Project Implementation Team (PIT); iv) Capacity Strengthening of TRL; and v) other capacity
   strengthening measures for TRL, RAHCO, SUMATRA, and Ministry of Transport (MoT).



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project Cost. The actual project cost is US$ 270.76 million, lower than the appraisal estimate of US$300
   million. As explained below under project financing, this was mainly due to exchange rate fluctuation.

   Project financing. The project was financed by IDA, with a total project cost at appraisal of
   US$300.00 million. The actual cost at closing was US$270.76 million. This was mainly due to exchange rate
   fluctuation during project implementation that resulted in a reduction in USD allocation.


                                                                                                         Page 2 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TZ-Intermodal & Rail Development Project (P127241)



   Borrower contribution. There was no Borrower contribution at appraisal. During implementation, the
   project was required to pay value added tax (VAT), which was exempted during the second project
   restructuring of June 2019. This VAT payment of US$39.6 million on works contracts was borne by the
   Government as counterpart funding (ICR, para 11).

   Dates. The project was approved on April 24, 2014, and became effective on March 30, 2015, and
   scheduled to close on July 31, 2019. It was extended twice on June 12, 2019 (for 22 months) and on April
   21, 2021 (for 16 months). The final closing date was September 30, 2022.

   Other changes. There were three restructurings during the project lifetime. However, there were no
   changes to the project components or to the indicator values.

   During the August 15, 2014 project restructuring, there was a reallocation of disbursement categories. The
   amount of SDR 3,300,000 that was allocated for Project Preparation Advance (PPA) during appraisal was
   not disbursed and thus there was a reallocation of disbursement categories (ICR paragraph 19)

   During the June 12, 2019 project restructuring, the project closing date was extended by 22 months from
   July 31, 2019 to May 31, 2021 to allow for full completion of project activities. In addition, the following
   changes were made:

         One intermediate indicator was added following the merger of TRL and RAHCO to form Tanzania
          Railway Corporation (TRC), which became the implementing agency; and
         Targets for all indicators (two PDO indicators and eight intermediate indicators) were refined based
          on the implementation progress.
         The project components remained the same, but the component costs were adjusted to reflect
          changes in commitments and completion projections. The overall project cost of US$300 million
          remained unchanged.

   During the third restructuring of April 21, 2021, the final closing date was extended to September 30, 2022.
   The primary reason for this project extension was to allow for the completion of project activities that were
   impacted by the Coronavirus Disease (COVID-19) pandemic to achieve that PDO. This restructuring did not
   involve any additional changes to project indicators or components.

   Split rating. The PDO, project scope and its key indicator targets did not change during implementation. As
   a result, a split evaluation is deemed unnecessary.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country and sector context. Tanzania, with its vast size of approximately 947,000 km2 and a population
of 61.5 million, holds a prominent position as the largest country in East Africa. Surrounded by several
landlocked countries, Tanzania serves as a vital economic driver and acts as a maritime gateway and trade
hub for these neighboring nations, which rely on it for freight movement. When the Tanzania Intermodal &
Rail Development Project (TIRP) was identified, regional freight movement through Tanzania was
characterized by long transit time, extensive delays, and high transport costs. It was important to improve

                                                                                                     Page 3 of 14
                       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                       TZ-Intermodal & Rail Development Project (P127241)



the country's overall logistics performance to enhance productivity and competitiveness and enhancing the
country's rail network, particularly along the central corridor that connected from Dar es salaam to the
landlocked neighboring countries.

Alignment with Government strategy. The PDO aligns with Tanzania Development Vision 2025, which is
the country’s overarching strategy for growth and poverty eradication. The country’s current five-year
development plan FYDP III (2021/22 - 2025/26) specifically aims to strengthen private sector capacity and
facilitate investment and trade. TIRP's provision of railway infrastructure and policy reforms for third party
operations align with this objective.

Alignment with Bank strategy. The PDO aligns with the World Bank's Africa Regional Integration and
Cooperation Assistance Strategy (FY18-23), specifically priority 1, which aims to generate economic
dynamism along regional economic corridors. The strategic priority also aims to reduce infrastructure gaps
(including rail infrastructure), improve physical connectivity, and increase private sector leveraging in
regional infrastructure, which were all addressed in the project. In addition, the PDO is also consistent with
the World Bank's strategy for Tanzania outlined in the Country Partnership Framework (CPF) (FY2018-22).
One of the focus areas of the CPF is to “enhance productivity and accelerate equitable and sustainable
growth”. This includes specific objectives related to Tanzania's potential as a trade hub and improving
transport connectivity for rural areas. The CPF highlighted the need to upgrade the rail network connecting
the port to the rest of the country and neighboring countries, and this is in line with the TIRP.

Previous World Bank Experience. The project was expected to complement the Bank-financed East
Africa Trade and Transport Facilitation Project (Credit Number 4149-TA), which was under implementation
at the time of project appraisal, and ongoing economic and sector work on developing a Regional Transport
Intermodal Strategy and Action Plan in the countries of the East Africa Community (EAC), along the Central
and Northern Corridors, including Lake Victoria and Lake Tanganyika.

The project included investments aimed at providing a reliable rail infrastructure service and delivering open
access rail infrastructure. As discussed in the theory of change below, the links between the project
activities and intended outcomes were logical. The PDO was relevant to the Bank strategy and Government
Strategy and would also complement prior World Bank activities in the region and sector.

Level of the PDO. However, while there is clear alignment between the project’s development objectives
and the country- and WB strategies, the objective is pitched at a level that does not adequately reflect a
potential solution to a development problem. While acknowledging the difficulty of the operational
environment, a shortcoming here was that the objective was at a very low level (i.e. at the input/activity-
level) of the logical chain. “To deliver a reliable open access infrastructure on the Dar es Salaam-Isaka rail
segment” alone is not outcome focused and does not help in understanding what development results were
expected as a consequence of the project whether those results were improved trade efficiency and
improved income or other factors affecting community livelihoods. These may be longer term targets but
tracking them and identifying them is an important aspect of a successful development operation. Hence,
this review rates the relevance of the PDO as Substantial.


Rating Relevance TBL




Rating
Substantial


                                                                                                          Page 4 of 14
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  TZ-Intermodal & Rail Development Project (P127241)




   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               To deliver a reliable open access infrastructure on the Dar es Salaam – Isaka rail segment.

               Rationale
               Theory of change.

               The project did not present a theory of change (ToC) at appraisal because none was required at the time. The
               results framework provided the causal logic that linked the original inputs to outputs and outcomes. The ICR
               prepared a ToC. The project was to use the project’s inputs—IDA credit—to finance activities such as (a)
               rehabilitation, upgrade and maintenance of rail tracks, (b) procurement of rolling stock, and (c) development
               of intermodal terminals. The expected outputs were improved rail track, increased availability of rolling stock,
               and upgraded terminals. These outputs were expected to lead to the intermediate outcomes of improving rail
               operations and safety, and increasing commercial train speed, capacity and freight volume – thereby
               contributing to the achievement of the project objective of delivering a reliable service between Dar es
               Salaam – Isaka rail segment. The project was to finance institutional strengthening and capacity building
               activities, capacity strengthening of rail agencies and institutions, and clear direction for open access railway
               network (i.e., provision of non-discriminatory access to the railways network to third parties). These
               institutional strengthening activities would lead to outputs such as the enhancement of IT tools and the
               establishment of Management Accounting Information System (MAIS), strengthened capacity of the key
               institutions (TRC and MoWTC) and the implementation of an open access Rail policy, contributing to the
               delivery of a reliable open access infrastructure on the Dar es Salaam-Isaka rail segment.

               The causal links between project activities, outputs and intermediate outcomes were logical, clear and
               convincing and does not have any logical gaps. The indicators identified for the outputs and outcomes are
               measurable and logical. The part of the ToC related to Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Building did
               not have any corresponding indicators, and were thus not adequately monitored or reported on in the results
               framework (RF) or ICR.

               Outputs:

                     607.75 km out of the targeted 970 km of the railway track was rehabilitated. Target not achieved.
                     377 out of 389 targeted bridges were repaired. Target not fully achieved. The partial achievement of
                      these two indicators can be attributed to several factors. There was a delay in project effectiveness
                      and the procurement of contractors and goods, resulting in a gap between the initial assessment of
                      track and bridge conditions in 2012/13 and the actual start of work in 2018. Train operations continued
                      during this period, leading to further deterioration of the tracks and bridges. As a result, the available
                      budget for refurbishment was impacted, and the focus shifted to the sections that were in the worst
                      condition. These factors contributed to the reduced length of sections that could be refurbished within
                      the project timeframe.
                     Average commercial speed increased from 11 kph to 40 kph, which exceeded the target of 30 kph.

                                                                                                                  Page 5 of 14
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   TZ-Intermodal & Rail Development Project (P127241)




      149 wagons were made available on the train between Dar es Salaam Port and Isaka terminal to
         improve the loading capacity, not fully achieving the target of 160.
        The three intermodal terminals were not developed. Target not achieved.
        The average loading and unloading time per a train in each terminal remained at the baseline level of
         12 hours, not achieving the target of 4 hours.
        The axle load capacity went up from 13.8 to 18.5 axle-load tons (beyond the target of 15 axle-load
         tons) from Dar es Salaam to Tabora.
        The Management Accounting Information System (MAIS) was established and being integrated with
         the Government implemented Enterprise Resource Management System (ERMS) in line with all
         parastatal entities in Tanzania as indicated in the ICR. Target was achieved.
        Business unit for the block train was properly staffed and functioning, as targeted.
        A five-year Business Plan for Tanzania Railways Limited (TRL) was not put in place, and the target
         was thus not achieved.
        Maintenance program and internal arrangement between the Cost Center and Business Units were
         not achieved.
        The implementation of an open-access Rail Policy that would have helped reform railway operations
         to allow for third-party operators was not fully achieved. This required a legal amendment of the
         Tanzania Railways Act of 2017, which was not done by the time of project closure.

In addition to the achievements listed in the RF, the ICR also reported on the following achievements not
identified in the RF and hence without target values:

      Capacity Building was provided to the Land Transport Regulatory Authority (LATRA) through
       knowledge exchange with successful regulators of railway systems with similar institutional
       arrangements and work with a Regulatory Consultant to develop open access regulations for
       Tanzania,
      Fifteen technical staff from LATRA, TRC, MoWTC-Transport and TAZARA were trained on a range of
       transport planning and rail safety topics.

Outcomes:

The outputs described above were expected to result in increased reliability of rail service between Dar es
Salaam and Isaka and an effective implementation on open access environment, where there was adequate
capacity made available for third-party operators in rail operations.

The main outcomes realized were:

      366 containers (Twenty-foot equivalent units or TEUs) were shipped by direct project beneficiaries as
       opposed to a target of 6,000 per year. Baseline was 308. This was far below the target set because
       block train operations had not commenced. The construction of rail exchanges in the Isaka and Ilala
       terminals and the upgrade and re-alignment of rail exchange in the Dar es Salaam Port was also not
       completed.
      Open access rail operations had not started at the time of project closure and the target of having 2
       daily slots for third party block trains between Dar es Salaam port and Isaka terminal was not
       achieved.


                                                                                                  Page 6 of 14
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               TZ-Intermodal & Rail Development Project (P127241)



                            Overall, the project did not achieve any of the two outcome indicators and therefore was unable to achieve
                            the objective to provide delivery of a reliable open-access infrastructure on the Dar es Salaam-Isaka rail
                            segment. However, while the project did not achieve its planned outcomes, it did achieve some of its planned
                            outputs and it laid the groundwork necessary for achieving them (as outlined in the project team’s
                            correspondence to IEG (07/12/23)). The achievement of this objective is thus rated Modest.



                            Rating
                            Modest


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            As described above, the main outcomes were only barely achieved. Hence, the overall efficacy is rated
                            Modest.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating                                 Primary Reason
                            Modest                                                  Low achievement


   5. Efficiency
   Economic Efficiency.

   The efficiency of the project was evaluated based on an economic evaluation and a financial assessment of
   project implementation. The efficiency analysis reported in the ICR was based on an ex-post cost-benefit
   analysis (CBA) approach, which used the same methodology as the analysis at appraisal stage and was based
   on both financial and economic analyses at discount rates of 10 percent and 12 percent respectively. The
   economic model measured the economic impact of the project as net costs and benefits over a period of 25
   years (2014-2039), discounted at 12 percent discount rate. While the financial analysis assessed the financial
   returns on the investment after project execution over the same period, discounted at 10 percent discount rate.

   The economic evaluation showed that the project had a positive net present value (NPV) of US$49 million at
   completion, compared to the NPV at appraisal of US$79 million. Results from the financial analysis also showed
   positive returns, with an NPV of US$54 million at completion, as compared to an ex-ante NPV of US$42 million.
   An analysis of the risks was conducted assuming a one-year delay in the operationalization of the container train
   service and open access, failure in the implementation of both services and when the traffic levels are lower
   than forecasted by 40 percent. The results showed that the project was robust to the implementation delays of
   both container train service and open access operations but was sensitive to traffic fluctuations and failure to
   provide both the container and open access services (ICR, para 44).

   The ICR (para 45) observed that the lower ex-post NPV on the economic analysis was mainly due to significant
   changes in both costs and benefits between the preparation and appraisal period. The total investment cost was

                                                                                                                           Page 7 of 14
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      TZ-Intermodal & Rail Development Project (P127241)



lower at completion than at appraisal (US$340million as opposed to US$364million). The investment was
delayed, and there were changes in major operating costs such as salaries, fuel consumption, and
maintenance. Revenues decreased upon completion due to lower traffic at completion (416,866 tons) than
projected during the appraisal phase (750,000 tons).

Administrative and operational efficiency.

The project faced several administrative and operational challenges, including delays. Limited capacity of
RAHCO, procurement delays, delays in the operationalization of open access operations and the operation of
the new block train container service, exchange rate fluctuations between the US dollar and Special Drawing
Rights (SDR), have all contributed to some funding shortfalls and implementation delays. Many of the project’s
activities were delayed in their contracting and then during implementation, resulting in some activities being
scaled down and remaining partially incomplete when the project concluded.

The Efficiency is rated Modest. The delays led to an increase in costs and operational issues that brought down
the NPV, and the project was only able to achieve some of its planned outputs.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                    0
 Appraisal                                                15.50
                                                                                     Not Applicable
                                                                                    0
 ICR Estimate                                              0
                                                                                     Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The relevance of the PDO to the Government strategy and the current Bank strategy is rated Substantial,
efficacy was rated Modest due to low achievements, and efficiency was rated Modest. Hence, the project's
overall outcome is rated Moderately Unsatisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Unsatisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

                                                                                                    Page 8 of 14
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      TZ-Intermodal & Rail Development Project (P127241)




Institutional and Capacity Risk. There is a substantial risk that the Tanzania Railways Corporation (TRC)
might not be able to build capacity and improve its maintenance program and adopt modern asset
management techniques to ensure the sustainability of the assets and project outcomes.

Government commitment. Implementation of open-access rail operations, which is a core part of the
project, could not be completed by project closure as the amendment of the Tanzania Railway Act, 2017 was
not completed. There is a substantial risk that open access policy may not be implemented.

Environmental Risk. Flooding at the Kilosa-Gulwe section has happened before and can cause serious
damage to the train operations in that corridor also in the future. The ICR noted that this is a substantial risk
to the project's sustainability and finding a permanent solution would be crucial to prevent disruptions and
damages to train operations.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  During the preparation stage, the World Bank engaged important stakeholders to design the project, and
  also took into account lessons from previous railway projects in Tanzania and the region. A risk
  assessment was conducted, and it identified significant risks that included the lack of capacity in RAHCO.
  While some mitigation measures were taken, they proved to be insufficient. As a result, lack of readiness
  led to a one-year delay in the project becoming effective and additional delays occurred later. Unforeseen
  risks such as the global pandemic and budgetary constraints also impacted the project toward the end of
  the project period.

  The PDO was prepared with the assumption that serious delays would not hinder its achievement. Given
  that legislative measures were necessary to ensure an open access policy and the completion of the
  entire investment was needed before operations of block container train, this assumption was risky. It
  was also known that portions of the rail line were prone to intermittent flooding, and a strategy to address
  this issue was not in place.

  The quality-at-entry was Moderately Unsatisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The World Bank team was responsive to project demands during implementation but could have been
 more proactive and involved (ICR, para 82). During the implementation of the project, there were long
 delays that resulted in further deterioration of infrastructure and increased refurbishment costs. Issues such
 as inadequate wording in the new Tanzania Railway Act, misunderstandings regarding VAT arrangements,

                                                                                                        Page 9 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TZ-Intermodal & Rail Development Project (P127241)



 and coordination problems between TRC and the Tanzania Ports Authority were not identified in a timely
 manner. The ICR states that “while these issues were also the responsibility of other parties, the team’s
 supervision could have identified them in time”. Despite these shortcomings, the team conducted regular
 implementation support missions (at six-monthly intervals), additional technical missions and field visits as
 needed and provided support to increase capacity through training and workshops.

 The project had sustained support from the task team members who had familiarity and trust with the
 client. It had only three TTLs throughout its lifespan of nine years and benefitted from long engagement by
 most of its task team, with low turnover of technical, safeguards and fiduciary staff. Although a request for
 additional financing to complete pending activities was not approved due to a change in World Bank
 Environmental and Social Safeguards Policy, it was agreed to process a follow-on project (TIRP-2) to
 address incomplete activities and provide scaled-up support for maximizing development objectives
 achievement.

 The quality of supervision was Moderately Satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 During the project's appraisal, institutional arrangements were designed to ensure that the indicators would
 be measured, monitored, reported, and disseminated according to the operation’s methodology.

 While the PDO was pitched at the activity-level of the results chain, relevant intermediate results indicators
 were identified to monitor the progress towards achieving the objectives and completion of project
 activities. Indicators to measure institutional strengthening and capacity building were not identified, and
 activities related to these activities were not monitored or reported on. During the 2019 Level II
 restructuring, the results framework was revised to add an intermediate indicator. These indicators were
 specific, measurable, and targeted to assess the project's achievements.



b. M&E Implementation
  The MoT had the overall responsibility of monitoring and evaluating the project outcomes. The Ministerial
  Delivery Unit, established at the MoT, was also responsible for TIRP’s M&E. By project closure, two PDO
  indicators and nine intermediate results indicators were used to monitor the outcome of the project. Due
  to delays and lack of capacity, achieving the targets proved to be unrealistic within the timeframe set for
  the project and the M&E was not effectively carried out (ICR, para 71 & 72). Quarterly progress reports
  were supposed to be submitted by the Project Implementation Team (PIT) under RAHCO, but their

                                                                                                    Page 10 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TZ-Intermodal & Rail Development Project (P127241)



  delivery was not sustained. Other reports that monitored implementation, including Interim Financial
  Reports and the Consultant's monthly reports on works were satisfactorily delivered.



c. M&E Utilization
  Progress was tracked based on the Results Framework and all indicators were routinely updated and
  reported in the ISRs. However, one intermediate indicator “average loading and unloading time per train
  in each terminal” was incorrectly updated from the 17th ISR archived in August 2021 and this incorrect
  reporting continued in all the following ISR’s. This may be attributed to the inadequate follow-up of the
  M&E and the poor data recording at either the Dar es Salaam port or the terminals (ICR, para 73).

  Overall, M&E quality is rated Modest.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was assigned Environmental Category "B" and three safeguards policies were triggered. These
   included - Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01), Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) and
   Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12).

   The ICR stated that the project undertook various measures to address environment and social compliance.
   An Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) was undertaken during project preparation,
   Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs) and other Environmental and Social (E&S) tools
   were developed to guide implementation. All serious incidents and fatal accidents were registered in the
   Occupational Safety and Health Accident’s register/logbook, and reported to the World Bank. The project
   also developed and implemented a COVID-19 Contingency Plan to ensure the safety of the project’s teams
   and communities. A final inspection was conducted in December 2021 to ensure the closure of all
   outstanding issues by the contractors before handing over the decommissioned sites.

   A Grievance Redress Mechanism was effectively implemented in the project area and the ICR noted that all
   grievances were resolved. The contractor’s Gender-Based Policy, Labor Influx and Community
   Engagement Plans were cleared and well implemented. The Abbreviated Resettlement Action Plan was
   audited. All the plans were implemented.

   The PAD stated that “TIRP's rehabilitation and upgrading works may involve significant earthworks and
   therefore have the potential to trigger the Physical Cultural Resources safeguards policy” but the ICR did
   not report on measures taken to address this. The team informed IEG (June 15, 2023) that the Physical
   Cultural Resources safeguards policy was not triggered in practice as no chance-finds were encountered
   during project (works) implementation.




                                                                                                  Page 11 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TZ-Intermodal & Rail Development Project (P127241)



   The ICR reports that the Environmental and Social compliance was satisfactory.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management. The project provided quarterly Interim Financial Reports that were considered
   satisfactory and acceptable by the World Bank, and they were submitted in a timely manner. The ICR
   states that a total of seven audits were conducted by the Controller and Auditors General (CAG)
   throughout the project's duration, and no significant issues were reported. A final project audit is scheduled
   to take place after the end of the FY in June 2023, with the report expected by December 31, 2023.
   Internal control issues such capacity challenges in the Internal Audit department were identified during the
   project implementation. However, overall, the planning and budgeting, accounting, external audit, and
   disbursement arrangements were deemed satisfactory. A final financial management assessment
   concluded that the financial arrangements at TRC were adequate to support project operations, leading to
   the proposed TIRP-2.

   Procurement. The project experienced delays in processing procurement activities at the early stage of
   project implementation. The COVID-19 pandemic impacted goods that were to be shipped from abroad
   and a few procurement issues were reported. According to the ICR, other procurement contracts were
   completed within the contractual time. In total, the project processed and managed 58 contracts (38
   consultancies, two non-consultancies, twelve goods and six works) which were carried out in accordance
   with World Bank Procurement Guidelines.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
                                Moderately            Moderately
Outcome
                                Unsatisfactory        Unsatisfactory
                                                                                  There were significant
                                                                                  shortcomings in the Quality at
                                                                                  Entry, specifically in terms of
                                                                                  underestimating the high risks of
                                                      Moderately
Bank Performance                Satisfactory                                      limited capacity and long delays,
                                                      Unsatisfactory
                                                                                  and inadequate mitigation
                                                                                  measures. The quality-at-entry is
                                                                                  rated Moderately Unsatisfactory,
                                                                                  which gives an overall

                                                                                                    Page 12 of 14
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       TZ-Intermodal & Rail Development Project (P127241)



                                                                                   Moderately Unsatisfactory Bank
                                                                                   Performance rating despite the
                                                                                   Moderately Satisfactory
                                                                                   supervision rating.
Quality of M&E                    Modest                Modest

Quality of ICR                    ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

        Rail projects relying on railway reforms may experience significant delays if a strong
         buy-in from different levels of government is not sufficiently secured. It is crucial for rail
         projects relying on such reforms to have a strong buy-in from different levels of government
         when implementing challenging institutional reforms. In the case of TIRP, the determination
         and buy-in from relevant agencies and the ministry were evident through their efforts to
         amend the Tanzania Railway Act of 2017. In addition, intermediate targets that show
         progress on difficult institutional reforms help monitor and adjust the course of such reforms
         as required. Since the need for an amendment to the law only became clear during
         implementation and affected the timeline, intermediate targets on the progress of reforms
         tends to be useful.

        If sufficient flexibility is not built into the project design, its inability to respond to
         changes in institutional arrangements may impact its implementation. Teams should
         consider this risk, especially when working in an economy that is heavily investing in
         infrastructure and its related capacity and set up adequate mitigation measures including
         establishing requirements that will retain the trained or already experienced personnel for the
         transition period; and building extra time in project implementation to account for potential
         changes.

        M&E can be affected if the Institutional arrangements are not implemented as
         designed. Addressing this challenge would require enhancing the capacity of implementing
         agencies in developing and implementing robust M&E designs and frameworks. The project
         faced shortcomings in the M&E design and implementation and established institutional
         arrangements for results monitoring were not followed adequately, as described earlier.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is clear and provides a detailed overview of the project. The evidence and analysis presented is
adequate for evaluating the performance of the project. One shortcoming in the ICR is that the revised targets

                                                                                                       Page 13 of 14
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      TZ-Intermodal & Rail Development Project (P127241)



after the restructuring could have been specified properly, but the rest of the information that is needed to draw
conclusions is available. The report is results-oriented, and the discussion is based on what the project was
able to achieve on the ground. The ICR draws good lessons from the experience of implementing this project
and they were based on evidence and analysis. Overall, the quality of the ICR was Substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                    Page 14 of 14
