     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Seychelles COVID-19 Emergency DPF (P174198)



                                                                                Report Number: ICRR0023374

1. Operation Information



 Operation ID                              Operation Name
 P174198                                   Seychelles COVID-19 Emergency DPF

 Country                                   Practice Area (Lead)
 Seychelles                                Macroeconomics, Trade and Investment



 Non-Programmatic DPF

 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)                  Total Financing (USD)
 IBRD-91490                                30-Jun-2021                                          15,000,000.00

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 25-Jun-2020                               30-Jun-2021

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                              Co-financing (USD)

 Original Commitment                             15,000,000.00                                            0.00

 Revised Commitment                              15,000,000.00                                            0.00

 Actual                                          15,000,000.00                                            0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Alma Pekmezovic            Jennifer L. Keller           Gabriela Chamartin Escobar     IEGEC




2. Program Objectives and Pillars/Policy Areas
DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives

The Program Development Objective (PDO) is to support the Republic of Seychelles in its response and
recovery from the Coronavirus (COVID-19) crisis by (1) enhancing response mechanisms in health, social
protection and private sector; and (2) supporting sustainable post-crisis recovery through strengthened



                                                                                                 Page 1 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Seychelles COVID-19 Emergency DPF (P174198)



financial systems and climate resilience (Program Document (PD), p. 19). For the purpose of this ICRR, the
objectives of the operation (against which outcomes will be assessed) are taken to be the following:

Objective 1: To aid the recovery from COVID-19 through enhanced response mechanisms in health, social
protection and private sector.

Objective 2: To support sustainable post-crisis recovery through strengthened financial systems and climate
resilience.


b. Pillars/Policy Areas
The program had two policy areas/pillars:

    1. Pillar 1: Protecting Lives and Livelihood (consisting of PAs 1-4); and
    2. Pillar 2: Protecting the Future (consisting of PAs 5-6).

The policy areas corresponded to the objectives above (PD, p. 19), with the following prior actions under each
objective (PD, p. 28):

Objective 1 (to aid the recovery from COVID-19) had the following PAs (under Pillar 1):

      PA1: The Borrower, through its Cabinet of Ministers, has approved the Seychelles Response Plan to
       Covid-19 as laid out in Cabinet Memorandum C20/MEM/066, which defines the strategy for the
       immediate response to the first wave of COVID-19 and lays the foundation for subsequent reopening
       and testing strategies, and took adequate measures to prevent imported cases.
      PA2: The Borrower through its National Assembly and Cabinet of Ministers approved measures to
       support vulnerable households affected by COVID-19 through: (i) increase in allocation to social
       protection; and (ii) increase in the one-off assistance paid under the Social Welfare Assistance (SWA)
       benefit.
      PA3: The Borrower through its National Assembly approved: (i) guarantee salaries to all employees in
       companies affected by the COVID-19 pandemic for three months and (ii) postponement of taxes until
       September 2020 (Corporate Social Responsibility, Tourism Marketing Tax, Business Tax and taxes on
       Non-Monetary Benefits Income).and
      PA4: The Borrower, through its Cabinet of Ministers, approved the Central Bank Act, 2020
       (Amendment) and the Financial Institutions Act (Amendment), 2020, to allow the Central Bank to
       support the economy during the economic crisis created by the COVID-19 pandemic.

Objective 2 (to support sustainable post-crisis recovery) had the following two PAs (under Pillar 2):

      PA5: The Borrower through is National Assembly approved new anti-money laundering and combating
       the financing of terrorism anti-money laundering/combatting the financing of terrorism (AML/CFT) Act
       2020 and Beneficial Ownership (BO) Act 2020 to strengthen the domestic financial sector and to
       establish and maintain an up to date register of beneficial owners.
      PA6: The Borrower through its Cabinet of Ministers approved the first Climate Change Policy and,
       through it, the establishment of the National Climate Change Council. This was designed to facilitate a
       coordinated, coherent, proactive and effective response to the local, regional and global challenges


                                                                                                    Page 2 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Seychelles COVID-19 Emergency DPF (P174198)



       and opportunities presented by climate change, and to reduce Seychelles’ vulnerability to climate
       change impacts.


c. Comments on Program Cost, Financing and Dates

The operation was approved on May 1, 2020. It became effective on June 1, 2020, and closed a year later on
June 30, 2021, as planned. The operation was part of the World Bank’s COVID-19 support package that took
place in tandem with the International Monetary Fund’s (IMF) Rapid Financing Instrument There was no
discrepancy between approved and disbursed amounts.


3. Relevance of Design

a. Relevance of Objectives

 The objectives were highly relevant for the following reasons: (1) they aimed to support government’s efforts to
 mitigate the immediate social and economic fallout from the COVID-19 pandemic, by supporting actions that
 provided financial relief to affected households and firms. (2) The operation also sought to put in place
 measures to facilitate recovery and build buffers to future shocks, including through structural reforms to
 improve the transparency and accountability in the financial system and implementation of policies to address
 climate change. The objectives were aligned with the Government’s emergency response measures, as well
 as the Government's broader reform program.

 Country Situation and Crisis Response: The operation was developed in response to the Government's
 urgent request for financing to address the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic. At project appraisal,
 Seychelles’ economy was severely impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. Due to Seychelles' strong reliance
 on international tourism, the COVID-19 pandemic was anticipated to have a significant impact on the
 economy. Many countries had closed their borders, including Seychelles, resulting in a lockdown that was
 expected to cause a significant decline in the tourist sector, which was a vital component of Seychelles'
 domestic economy. This downturn was also expected to disproportionately impact vulnerable households and
 cause them to fall into poverty. The Government, therefore, requested emergency support from the IMF, the
 World Bank and other partners in order to temper the economic impact of COVID-19 and prevent the country
 from slipping into a macroeconomic and social crisis, Through the financing, the Government sought to
 address the corresponding loss of livelihood and subsequent increase in poverty. In addition, the Government
 sought to support its broader social and economic vision of a sustainable and inclusive future as outlined in its
 National Development Strategy 2019-2023, such as focusing on reforms designed to promote transparency in
 the domestic financial sector, and reforms to tackle the challenges posed by climate change.

 Alignment with WBG Africa Strategy and Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for FY18-FY23: The
 DPF was in alignment with the CPF which acknowledged that Seychelles’ geographic isolation increased costs
 and limited opportunities, thus weakening its capacity to absorb shocks (PID, p.3). The DPF addressed two
 areas of reform that were identified as high-priorities in the CPF: (1) reforming the institutional framework,
 legislation, and policies to improve sustainable and inclusive economic growth ; and (2) implement reforms in
 climate change mitigation. Climate change reforms were part of an ongoing dialogue between the Government
 and the World Bank. Specifically, policy measures included in PA2, PA3, PA4, and PA6 contributed to CPF
 focus area 1 (Growth for Shared Prosperity) while PA5 contributed to CPF focus area 2 (Fostering Inclusion
 and Public Sector Performance). In addition, the operation contributed to the implementation of the WBG

                                                                                                     Page 3 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Seychelles COVID-19 Emergency DPF (P174198)



Africa Strategy by promoting reforms that reduced the social and economic impact of shocks in the most
vulnerable populations from the disruption created by COVID-19 and maintained the viability of the productive
and financial sectors (PID, p. 3).


b. Relevance of Prior Actions

Rationale

The operation consisted of two objectives:

      Objective 1 was designed to support an economic recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic through
       increasing the capacity of the health care system, provide income to poor and vulnerable households,
       protect jobs, and provide financial assistance to affected businesses. The objective consisted of 4 prior
       actions (PAs): PA1, PA2, PA3 and PA4. These PAs aimed to prepare the country for the reactivation of
       economic activities, while supporting the most vulnerable households, and providing immediate liquidity
       needs to businesses and the financial sector to reduce employment and output losses.
      Objective 2 was designed to build longer-term resilience to future shocks by strengthening (i) financial
       systems, and (ii) climate resilience. Objective 2 comprised two PAs: PA5 and PA6. These sought to
       address medium to long-term development objectives, notably by improving transparency in the
       financial sector by creating a beneficial ownership registry (PA5) and approving a climate change policy
       that establishes a framework to mainstream climate change into sectoral planning (PA6).

Objective 1 (aiding the recovery from COVID-19) was supported by the following PAs:

Prior Action #1 (PA1). PA1 comprised of the Seychelles Response Plan for COVID-19, which defined
Seychelles’ strategy for the immediate response to the first wave of COVID-19. The Plan included a Covid-19
testing strategy to ensure that all new arrivals in Seychelles were properly screened and tested (requiring a
negative test 48 hours or less before entering the territory for all passengers). borders. The Plan was prepared
by the Department of Health in collaboration with the World Health Organization and other stakeholders such as
the Integrated Disease Surveillance and Response committee. Seychelles had limited capacity to respond to
infectious diseases during the initial outbreak of COVID-19, making the adoption of a Response Plan for
COVID-19 crucial to respond to the pandemic emergency.

Before the approval of PA1, the World Health Organization in a 2018 evaluation had found weak institutional
capabilities in dealing with health crises in Seychelles, with the country receiving a score of 1 or 2 out of 5 on 24
indicators out of 48 sub-technical fields. (PD, p. 20). The report emphasized that Seychelles needed to
formalize existing procedures and document existing processes, as well as strengthen its institutional capacities
to adequately address public health emergencies. Seychelles was ill-prepared in terms of antimicrobial
resistance and its capacity to prevent zoonotic diseases like COVID-19, and the country had weak emergency
preparedness response planning, which made it less able to rapidly respond to and control the spread of an
epidemic (Rapid Response). PA1 was crucial in articulating a testing strategy for addressing COVID-19.

In this context, PA1 played a critical role in articulating a testing strategy for COVID-19. The plan was critical to
the Government’s overall approach to contain the COVID-19 and to reopen the economy. (PA1=MS).




                                                                                                       Page 4 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Seychelles COVID-19 Emergency DPF (P174198)



Prior Action #2 (PA2) approved a set of measures to support vulnerable COVID-affected households through
both an increase in the social protection allocation and a one-time payment of social welfare assistance.

Prior to the COVID-19 pandemic, Seychelles had a well-established social protection policy in place, with the
Social Welfare Assistance (SWA) benefit serving as a major component of the policy. The Agency for Social
Protection (ASP) had also instituted a mechanism since 2017 to screen and potentially match SWA applicants
with available jobs. The Unemployment Relief Scheme was available for those who could not be matched with
jobs. The welfare assistance schemes were means-tested, with the imputed expenditures for a household of a
particular composition subtracted from total household income (PD, p. 21).

As part of PA2, the Seychelles Government increased the budgets for the SWA and Unemployment Relief
Scheme in response to the temporary shutdown of the tourism industry and the potential risk of high
unemployment. The SWA budget increased by 62 percent (from an originally budgeted Rs. 47.772 million to
Rs. 77.772 million) and the Unemployment Relief Scheme received double its previous allocation (of Rs. 10
million). The budget for both Schemes was increased to provide coverage to informal workers and to cover the
increased potential demand from those who were facing needs. The PD notes that approximately 16 percent of
the total labor force in Seychelles is employed in the informal sector. (PD, p. 8). Furthermore, informality is
particularly high in agriculture and fisheries, as well as in manufacturing and construction.

While there were no changes in the criteria to benefit from the schemes, since household income had fallen,
existing beneficiaries would receive an increase in the size of the benefit and the number of households
receiving a benefit. (PA2=S)

Prior Action #3. The Borrower through its National Assembly approved: (i) guarantee salaries to all employees
in companies affected by the COVID-19 pandemic for three months and (ii) postponement of taxes until
September 2020 (Corporate Social Responsibility, Tourism Marketing Tax, Business Tax and taxes on Non-
Monetary Benefits Income). These measures were approved in the supplemental budget as part of the
Government's COVID-19 response package, and in the form of a Financial Assistance for Job Retention
(FA4JR) scheme. The FA4JR was intended to last from April to June 2020.

The action aimed to support the Seychelles Government in managing the economic impact of COVID-19 by
guaranteeing salaries for formal private sector employees and reducing tax burdens for businesses. The
closure of local economic activities and the decrease in international tourism due to the pandemic affected the
private sector and the workforce. The measures implemented sought to mitigate these effects and allow
productive sectors to maintain their viability. The tourism sector directly accounted for 58 percent, 27 percent,
and 12 percent of tourism marketing tax, corporate social responsibility tax, and businesses tax, respectively.
(PD, p. 22). The postponement of taxes was expected to provide temporary relief to affected businesses.
(PA3=S)

Prior Action #4 (PA4) sought to contribute to the ability for the financial sector to provide relief during the
COVID-19 crisis. The Borrower through its Cabinet of Ministers approved: (1) the Central Bank Act (CBS Act),
2020 (Amendment), and (2) the Financial Institutions Act (Amendment), 2020). The aim of the legislative
amendments was to help establish an enabling legal environment to create and administer relief for MSMEs
(Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises), and thus mitigate the liquidity challenges they faced due to the COVID-
19 pandemic. In the short-term, many MSMEs faced liquidity constraints even if their business model had been
viable over the medium-to-longer term. The PD notes that MSMEs play a critical role in the Seychellois
economy and faced challenges in obtaining credit. This challenge was expected to be exacerbated as the crisis



                                                                                                    Page 5 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Seychelles COVID-19 Emergency DPF (P174198)



triggered by the pandemic was expected to cause a reduction in income for households and MSMEs and lead
to liquidity constraints, as well as a rapid rise of non-performing loans in the financial sector.

As part of PA4, the Government amended the CBS Act 2004 to permit the Central Bank, in the event of a force
majeure, to make loans, advances and rediscounts to banks and other financial institutions in Seychelles for
periods not exceeding 3 years (increased from 18 months in the original law) and to purchase or acquire
treasury bills and other securities guaranteed by the Government. financial system). Because of the
amendment to the Act the Central Bank was able to create and monitor the implementation of the Private
Sector Relief Scheme of SCR 500 million for MSMEs. (All of the 500 million was designated for MSMEs who
had to apply to access the scheme through designated commercial banks, the Development Bank of
Seychelles or the Seychelles Credit Union.) Without the amendment, the Central Bank would not have been
able to intervene in this way because the CBS Act of 2004 did not have a provision for the Central Bank to
intervene in the economy by providing financial assistance in times of crisis. The amendments to the Financial
Institutions Act, on the other hand, included changes to the definition of financial institutions (to include the
Development Bank of Seychelles and the Seychelles Credit Union), and to enable these institutions along with
seven commercials banks to administer the private sector relief scheme to MSME as well as large enterprises.
The Government wanted to use the latter two banks as vehicles for the distribution of the funds, in addition to
the commercial banks. The relief scheme was intended to assist eligible MSMEs to meet critical expenditures.

The policy actions under PA4 are rated Satisfactory. (PA4=S)

Objective 2 (supporting sustainable post-crisis recovery) was supported by the following two PAs:

Prior Action #5 (PA5). The Borrower through is National Assembly approved new AML/CFT Act 2020 and
Beneficial Ownership (BO) Act 2020 to promote transparency and better align the country’s legal framework
with international standards. Prior to policy action in this area, the Seychelles offshore financial sector and
broader financial industry fell short in complying with global transparency standards and AML regulations. This
also resulted in a curtailment in correspondent banking relationships in response to de-risking by US and
European banks. (PD, p. 25). The European Union added Seychelles to the list of non-cooperative jurisdictions
for tax purposes in February 2020, and France blacklisted the territory for insufficient provision of information on
offshore entities (PD, p. 25).

The new AML legislation - enacted as part of PA5 - included measures to strengthen entity transparency. The
BO Act sought to provide for identification and verification of beneficial ownership of legal persons and legal
arrangements and to establish and maintain an up-to-date register of beneficial owners. A National AML/CFT
Committee was also appointed to improve coordination among relevant agencies and implement the
recommendations of the 2018 Eastern and Southern Africa Anti-Money Laundering Group (ESAAMLG) mutual
evaluation report. Results were measured by the percentage of legal entities that had submitted verifiable
ownership information to the database maintained by the Financial Intelligence Unit (FIU). The relevance of
PA5 is assessed as Satisfactory. (PA5=S)

Prior Action #6 (PA6). The Borrower through its Cabinet of Ministers approved the new Climate Change Policy
to reduce Seychelles’ vulnerability to climate change impacts. Seychelles is vulnerable to climate change.
About 90 percent of its total population is clustered in the shoreline of the inner islands of Mahé, Praslin and La
Digue. Seychelles faces frequent coastal flooding and erosion, extreme rainfall and drought events. Climate
change is expected to make these hazards more frequent and more intense. Specifically, sea-level rise and




                                                                                                     Page 6 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Seychelles COVID-19 Emergency DPF (P174198)



 climate change induced changes in rainfall patterns may cause increased levels of damage to housing,
 infrastructure and agriculture

 The adoption of the national Climate Change Policy under PA6 is a step towards addressing the local, regional,
 and global challenges presented by climate change. The policy establishes the National Climate Change
 Council, to coordinate climate change objectives across government sectors and to mainstream climate change
 considerations into sectoral plans and policies. Such a framework was previously lacking, and its
 implementation is expected to improve the coordination and implementation of cross-sectoral goals for climate
 change adaptation and mitigation. The policy builds upon existing legislation and international commitments,
 including the UNFCCC and the Paris Agreement. The climate change policy included measures to "adapt, build
 resilience and minimize vulnerability to the impacts of Climate Change," but it does not clarify what those
 measures are and how they contribute to mitigating the risks from climate change.

 While the policy establishes the National Climate Change Council to coordinate climate change objectives
 across government sectors and mainstream climate change considerations into sectoral plans and policies, the
 PA is rated moderately satisfactory, as more concrete actions would be needed to prevent or mitigate the
 impacts of climate change. (PA6=MS)



Rating

Satisfactory


4. Relevance of Results Indicators

Rationale

Objective 1 (to aid recovery from COVID-19) had 5 RIs, with RI1 associated with PA1, RI2 associated
with PA2, and RI3 and RI4 associated with PA3 respectively. RI5 was linked to PA4.

Objective 2 (to support sustainable post-crisis recovery through strengthened financial systems and
climate resilience.) had two RIs, with RI6 and RI7 associated with PA5 and PA6 respectively.

Table 1: Results Indicators and actual achievements

                                                              Actual
     Results                            Baseline Target                Actual % of
                Associated     RI                                                       RI
    Indicator                                                           targeted
                   PA      Relevance                      (June                    Achievement
      Name                                (2019)   (2020)                change
                                                          2021)
 Objective 1: To Aid Recovery from COVID-19 through enhanced response
 mechanisms in health, social protection and private sector.
 RI1:
 Percentage of                                                    Target
 international      PA1         S        0%      95%      100%  exceeded                 High
 arrivals having                                                 (105%)
 been tested for

                                                                                                 Page 7 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                       Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Seychelles COVID-19 Emergency DPF (P174198)



COVID-19 in
accordance
with the
Department of
Health
protocol.
RI2: Percentag
e increase in
households
receiving social
                                                                      Target
protection or
                    PA2        S        0%       20%       42%      Exceeded         High
social welfare
                                                                     (110%)
support to
alleviate
COVID-19
impacts.
RI3: Number of
workers in the
private sector
having
benefited from                                                     Partially met
                    PA3       MS         0      25,000 11, 416                      Modest
salary                                                               (45.6%)
guarantee with
the objective to
reduce job and
income losses
RI4:
Percentage of
firms benefiting                                                   Partially met
                 PA3      S          0%        90%     36.9%                     Substantial
from                                                               (41%)
postponement
of taxes
RI5:
Percentage
uptake of the
credit line
                                                                   Partially met
facility under      PA4        S        0%       80%      22.40%                   Modest
                                                                      (28%)
the scheme to
help MSMEs
impacted by
COVID-19
Objective 2: To support sustainable post-crisis recovery through
strengthened financial systems and climate resilience.
RI6:                PA5        S        0%       80%      90.00%      Target         High
Percentage of                                                       exceeded
legal entities                                                       (113%)
that have

                                                                                               Page 8 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Seychelles COVID-19 Emergency DPF (P174198)



submitted
verifiable
ownership
information on
the database
held by FIU
RI7: Number of
government
sectors guided
on the
mainstreaming                                                              Partially met
                    PA6           U           0        10          3                       Negligible
of climate                                                                    (30%)
change in
sectoral
policies
through NCCC

RI1 was linked with PA1 which consisted of the Seychelles Response Plan for COVID-19 and focused on
ensuring that international arrivals were tested for COVID-19. Accordingly, the RI measured the
percentage of international arrivals tested for COVID-19 in accordance with the Department of Health
Protocol. As stated, the Seychelles Response Plan to COVID-19 included strong testing guidelines to
ensure that all new arrivals in Seychelles were properly screened and tested. The guidelines mandated a
negative test 48 hours or less prior to entry. Furthermore, all visitors were required to have a valid Health
Travel Authorization (HTA) for entry into Seychelles. From June 1, 2020, the Seychelles international
airport resumed operations only for private and charter flights carrying tourists with a negative COVID-19
test results taken within 48 hours from the time of boarding. Additionally, travelers were required to
provide proof of their accommodation at an approved establishment and were obliged to stay in their
hotel/guesthouse for the first 14 days of their stay. R1 used clear data sources and was reasonably
measurable. RI1 is rated Satisfactory. (RI1=S).

RI2 was linked with PA2 which sought to increase funding for social protection and provide SWA benefits
to assist vulnerable households affected by the pandemic. The RI measured the percentage increase in
households receiving social protection or social welfare support to mitigate the impact of the pandemic,
which was a reasonable measure for capturing the PA’s impact. . The indicator was reasonable and
measurable. RI2 is rated Satisfactory. (RI2= S).

RI3 was linked to PA3, which aimed to provide salary guarantees to employees in companies affected by
the COVID-19 pandemic for a period of three months. The RI measured the number of workers in the
private sector who benefited from this scheme to mitigate job and income losses. Initially, the scheme
(FA4JR) covered both national and foreign workers, with a budget allocation of SCR 1,090,531,200.

However, in July 2020, the eligibility criteria for the salary guarantee scheme were revised. Under the new
criteria, only Seychellois and permanent resident employees were covered, and funding was directed only
to businesses severely impacted by the pandemic. This adjustment was made to contain the intervention's
cost on the budget, given the prolonged duration of the pandemic beyond the initial three months.

Although the eligibility criteria were revised, RI3 was not redesigned to reflect these changes. The
baselines and targets for the indicator remained unchanged. As a result, the indicator's design did not fully

                                                                                                        Page 9 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Seychelles COVID-19 Emergency DPF (P174198)



align with the revised eligibility criteria and the intended focus on supporting only Seychellois and
permanent resident employees in severely affected businesses (rather than also foreign workers). RI3 is
assessed as Moderately Satisfactory. (RI3=MS).

RI4 was linked with PA3, which supported the postponement of taxes until September 2020. The Results
Indicator measured the percentage of firms benefiting from postponement of taxes to mitigate the impact
of COVD-19. Businesses that faced financial difficulty to meet the deadline to file their 2019 taxes were
able to request deferred payment for certain taxes (which initially was planned to include Business Tax,
Corporate Social Responsibility Tax, Tourism Marketing Tax and Non-Monetary Benefits Tax. This
measure was implemented from April 2020 to September 2020. RI4 adequately captured the impact of
PA4 which granted firms an extension to file. RI4 is rated Satisfactory. (RI4=S).

RI5 was linked with PA4, which supported legislative amendments to help establish an enabling legal
environment for the provision of relief to MSMEs during the COVID-19 pandemic. (As stated, the CBS
introduced the private-sector relief credit line facility to be administered by commercial banks and other
financial institutions to provide working capital support to businesses impacted by the COVID-19
pandemic. The CBS launched the facility dedicated to MSMEs in March 2020 for businesses with sales
turnover not exceeding SCR 25 million, at an interest rate of 1.5 percent) The result indicator specifically
measured the percentage uptake (that is, how much of the SCR 500 million made available for affected
individuals and businesses falling in the MSME category was disbursed) of the credit line facility under the
Private Sector Relief Scheme to help MSMEs impacted by COVID-19.

While there was a gradual increase in applications for the credit line facility over time, there was a
significant increase in applications after the termination of the FA4JR scheme, suggesting that MSMEs
were relying more on the FA4JR scheme than the private sector relief scheme. This could be due to the
substitutability between the two schemes, meaning that firms utilizing one scheme were less likely to take
advantage of the other. Taking this into account, The relevance of RI5 is rated Satisfactory. (RI5=S).

RI6 was linked with PA5, which approved the new AML/CFT Act 2020 and Beneficial Ownership (BO) Act
2020 to promote transparency and better align the country’s legal framework with international standards.
The RI measured the percentage of legal entities that have submitted verifiable ownership information on
the database held by Financial Intelligence Unit (FIU). The international standards require jurisdictions to
maintain beneficial ownership (BO) information. BO information can be made available upon request to
competent authorities for law enforcement purposes. This type of information is crucial for detecting and
investigating various crimes such as corruption, as well as tracing and confiscating crime proceeds.

RI6 was an appropriate results indicator for measuring the success of reforms under PA5. This indicator
was relevant for measuring both beneficial ownership (BO) and anti-money laundering (AML) efforts
because BO transparency plays a crucial role in the effectiveness of Seychelles' AML system. By having
transparent beneficial ownership information, authorities can more effectively prevent, detect, prosecute,
and sanction financial crimes such as money laundering and terrorist financing. Therefore, RI6 is
assessed as Satisfactory. (RI6=S).

RI7 was linked to PA6, which aimed to reduce Seychelles' vulnerability to climate change impacts through
the approval of a new Climate Change Policy. The indicator measured the extent to which government
"sectors" (i.e., Ministries) were "guided" by the National Climate Change Council (NCCC) in integrating
climate change considerations into their respective areas of responsibility. The concept of "guided" was
later clarified by the Task Team Leader (TTL) to mean receiving support, advice, or instructions from the


                                                                                                   Page 10 of 18
                   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                   Seychelles COVID-19 Emergency DPF (P174198)



               NCCC on incorporating climate change considerations. However, the lack of a precise definition for
               "guided" makes it challenging to accurately assess the actual impact or level of guidance achieved.
               Without clear criteria or specific actions associated with the guidance, it becomes difficult to evaluate the
               effectiveness of the NCCC's support provided to the government Ministries.

               Furthermore, RI7 failed to align with the primary objective of PA6, which was to mitigate climate change
               risks. Instead of measuring concrete climate change mitigation or adaptation actions, RI7 focused on
               measuring the level of guidance received by the government sectors. This approach did not adequately
               capture the intended impact of PA6.

               Considering these factors, RI7 is deemed unsatisfactory due to its ambiguous definition and its
               misalignment with the objective of mitigating climate change risks. Alternative indicators that directly
               measure tangible climate change mitigation or adaptation actions would have been more appropriate for
               assessing the progress of PA6. (RI7=U)



   Rating

   Moderately Satisfactory

   5. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
EFFICACY_TBL




                OBJECTIVE 1
                Objective
                To aid the recovery from COVID-19 through enhanced response mechanisms in health, social protection and
                private sector

                Rationale
                Enhanced Response Mechanisms in Health: This objective was supported by PA1 designed to improve the
                financial allocation of resources to the health sector. As stated, under PA1, the Government devised the
                Seychelles Response Plan to COVID-19 in order to deal with the first wave of COVID-19 and developed
                appropriate testing strategies and emergency action. The RI mapped to PA1 measured the percentage of
                international arrivals tested for COVID-19 in accordance with the Department of Health protocol. This target
                was exceeded, with 100 percent of international arrivals produced a negative COVID-19 test before entering
                Seychelles, against 95 percent targeted. Thus, the achievement of RI1 is rated high.

                Enhanced response mechanisms in social protection: Two PAs (PA2 and PA3) were designed to
                increase funding to social programs and a salary guarantee scheme to both private sector and non-
                governmental organizations’ employees. The RIs mapped to PA2 and PA3 measured progress against the
                percentage increase in households receiving social protection or social welfare support to alleviate COVID-19
                impacts (RI2), direct financial support to companies and workers through the guarantee of salaries (RI3). Both
                targets were only partially met.




                                                                                                                    Page 11 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Seychelles COVID-19 Emergency DPF (P174198)



From August 2020 to April 2021, the overall increase in beneficiaries of the social safety nets program was 79
percent, which exceeded the original target of 20%. Between May 2020 and April 2021, the number of
beneficiaries increased from 2,400 to 3,422. The achievement of RI2 is rated high.

The Government disbursed a total of SCR 1.26 billion (US$52 million equivalent) in salary guarantees
through the FA4JR scheme. As a result of revised eligibility criteria and a restricted list, only businesses that
were severely impacted by the pandemic received funding. The changes were implemented to contain the
costs of the salary guarantee scheme, given that the scheme would be needed for more than the initially
planned period of 3 months. The target for RI3 was therefore only partially met, in part, due to a revision of
the eligibility criteria. The achievement of RI3 is rated modest.

In total, 11, 416 persons benefited from the guarantee of salaries with a total of SCR 1.26 billion (US$52
million equivalent) disbursed, mostly to applicants qualifying under Form 1 (for employees’ salaries on a
business payroll), for which SCR 88.2 million was disbursed as payroll support to 1,068 businesses, covering
8,610 Seychellois employees. The funds were disbursed for accommodation and food service-related
activities, hotels, guest houses and restaurants. Under Form 2 (for self-employed individuals), 2,806 business
owners benefited, mostly from the tourism industry. The lower-than-expected uptake in the FA4JR is due to (i)
a revision to the eligibility criteria in July 2020 such that only Seychellois and permanent resident employees
would be covered, and thus, businesses were required to submit a copy of a payroll excluding expatriate
workers (predominately working in tourism related businesses); (ii) some applicants did not submit supporting
documents and were thus denied assistance; and (iii) the creation of a restricted list in June 2020 which
stipulated that all businesses except those in the tourism industry operating on the main island (Mahe) had to
justify their need for assistance. The combined effect of the revised eligibility criteria and the restricted list was
such a much smaller set of businesses received funds.

Enhanced Response Mechanisms in the Private Sector: The relevant PAs were PA3 and PA4. The PAs
were designed to assist business through deferral of payment of taxes (PA3); and amendments to legislation
to implement the private sector relief scheme to maintain liquidity and access to finance for MSMEs (PA4).

Under RI4 (mapped to PA3), 36.9 percent of firms benefited from tax postponement (rather than the 90
percent targeted). Most companies opted to pay their business taxes rather than apply for the deferment due
to strong 2019 returns. The deferment scheme for Corporate Social Responsibility and Tourism Marketing
taxes was not implemented in part due the success of the FA4JR scheme which helped businesses
remain viable; the lifting of travel restrictions in June 2020, and due to positive performance by
telecommunication companies and banks. For business tax, requests received were approved on a case-by-
case basis, except for tourism-related businesses (12 percent of total business taxpayers) which were
automatically deferred up to September 2020. The achievement of RI4 is rated substantial.

Through PA4 (and as part of the private sector relief scheme), SCR 145.7 million was disbursed to MSMEs
(representing 29.14 percent of the SCR 500 million facility). Instead of the private sector relief scheme, many
MSMEs utilized the FA4JR scheme, which led to fewer applications for the private sector scheme. The facility
was only taken up by 29 percent MSMEs (against 80 percent targeted). In total, only 459 applicants applied to
the scheme, of which 304 were approved for the amount of SCR 145.7 million. The low recourse to the facility
can be attributed to several factors, including: (i) non-availability of collateral from the businesses; (ii) strict
credit and business viability assessments by some participating institutions; (iii) applications withdrawn due to
improvements in economic activity; and (iv) ineligibility of some businesses to access the scheme. There was
a gradual increase in the applications to the scheme.


                                                                                                      Page 12 of 18
                         Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                         Seychelles COVID-19 Emergency DPF (P174198)




                      The overall efficacy is rated Satisfactory.



                      Rating

                      Satisfactory

                      OBJECTIVE 2
                      Objective
                      To support sustainable post-crisis recovery through strengthened financial systems and climate resilience.


                      Rationale
                      PA5 and PA6 targeted the percentage of legal entities that have submitted verifiable ownership information
                      on the database held by FIU (PA5), and the number of government sectors being guided by the NCCC in
                      their sectoral policies (PA6).

                      The RIs mapped to these PAs were RI6 and RI7. While the target under RI6 was exceeded (90 percent of
                      legal entities submitted the relevant operation, rather than the 80 percent targeted), RI7 was not achieved,
                      with only 3 out of 10 government sectors, i.e. Ministries, being guided by the NCCC. This low implementation
                      can be attributed mainly to two factors: (i) capacity constraints in the ministries and departments, and (ii) the
                      government’s short-term priority focused on stabilizing the economy. Further, RI7 did not adequately capture
                      the intended impact of PA6 on mitigating climate risk. Thus, the achievement of RI7 is rated negligible.

                      With one RI’s achievement rated high and the other RI’s rated negligible, the overall efficacy rating is
                      assessed as moderately satisfactory.



                      Rating

                      Moderately Satisfactory


OVERALL EFF TBL OLD




Overall Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
Rationale

Based on the ratings for achievement of the two objectives, overall efficacy is rated Moderately Satisfactory. The
PAs directly contributed to the achievements of the objectives. However, several targets were not met, and
several RIs were not adequate for capturing the intended impacts of the PAs.



Overall Efficacy Rating

                                                                                                                         Page 13 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Seychelles COVID-19 Emergency DPF (P174198)



Moderately Satisfactory


6. Outcome

Rationale

Given the Satisfactory relevance of prior actions and a Moderately Satisfactory efficacy, Outcome is rated
Moderately Satisfactory.

The operation was based on a set of relevant development objectives. Most of the PAs (with the exception of
PA5 and PA6) were designed to respond to the COVID-19 emergency crisis. On the other hand, PAs 5 and PA6
sought to support mid- to long-term development objectives. The PAs connected to each objective were
complimentary, though the relevance of the RIs was mixed, especially RIs connected with objective 1. Several
RIs were not achieved, although it is noted that the RIs were developed in response to an urgent emergency
request for funding by the Government.


a. Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

7. Risk to Development Outcome

Seychelles has demonstrated strong macroeconomic and fiscal management and implemented measures to
support the economy during the pandemic, positioning it well for tourism sector recovery. The economy
rebounded with a growth rate of 7.9% in 2021 and is projected to grow by approximately 11% in 2022. The
Government has also taken steps to control the fiscal deficit and borrowing.

However, challenges arise from the country's debt situation, which may impact the broader objective of
strengthening the financial system. The debt to GDP ratio increased in 2020 due to the economic contraction
and exchange rate depreciation. A significant portion of the debt is short-term and set to mature in 2021,
leading to higher interest rates, financing needs, and rollover risks. To enhance the stability and resilience of
the financial sector, the Seychelles Government, with support from the IMF Liability Management Operation
(LMO), has converted a portion of short-term T-Bills into bonds, extending the debt portfolio's maturity and
reducing rollover risks. These reforms contribute to enhancing the stability and resilience of the financial
sector

However, there are challenges associated with the institutional reforms supported by the program.
Specifically, one of the outcomes of the operation has been the establishment of the National Climate
Change Council. However, the climate change policy lacks clarity in the necessary measures to adapt, build
resilience, and minimize vulnerability to climate change. This lack of clarity may hinder the effective
coordination and implementation of cross-sectoral goals for climate change adaptation and mitigation. As a
result, without clear and specific measures outlined in the policy, the long-term sustainability of the National
Climate Change Council could be compromised.




                                                                                                     Page 14 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Seychelles COVID-19 Emergency DPF (P174198)



8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Bank Performance – Design

Rationale


Bank Performance (design) is rated as Moderately Satisfactory for the following reasons:

The DPF was designed as a standalone operation within a difficult environment characterized by
lockdowns, mobility restrictions, and limited timeframe due to the pandemic. The design was influenced by
World Bank guidance on crisis situations that recognized that there may not be sufficient time or country
capacity to address all design considerations. However, despite limited time and numerous constraints, the
World Bank’s country knowledge, analytical body of work and technical expertise, in the context of ongoing
policy dialogue, enabled the World Bank to produce an operation which supported critical responses to the
pandemic as well as addressed much needed reforms in AML/CFT and to address the impacts of climate
change. The framing of the PDO was relevant and appropriate to address the immediate and pressing
needs of the country as it grappled with the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic.

The design of the operation was based on rigorous analytical work which drew from international
experience in managing economic crisis. This included: The Economic Policy Response to the COVID-19
Crisis; COVID-19 Notes Finance Series; COVID-19 Outbreak: Implications on Corporate and Individual
Insolvency; Secured Transactions and Collateral Registry; Seychelles Financial Sector Development
Implementation Plan. The design also drew on analytical work that analyzed the impact of COVID-
19. This prior work was used to targeted vulnerable group for interventions.



Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

b. Bank Performance – Implementation

Rationale

The Bank collaborated closely with the government throughout the implementation period. It worked closely
with government officials from various ministries, such as the Ministry of Finance, National Planning and Trade,
the Ministry of Health, and the Seychelles Revenue Commission. The Bank team provided
implementation support, including technical assistance in needed reform areas, to ensure timely implementation
and adequate data collection and monitoring of indicators and outcomes of the program.

In this context, the Bank took steps to address issues surrounding data quality. While the majority of RIs had
clear definitions, calculations and data sources, in situations where data was either missing or unclear (e.g.,
lack of a clearly defined base for the RI related to postponement of taxes), the Bank employed a strategy of
extensive consultation with private sector actors and the government to develop targets. The DPF team
reached out to other development partners to assess he availability of data and to government counterparts to

                                                                                                   Page 15 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Seychelles COVID-19 Emergency DPF (P174198)



seek their input on the selection of the results indicator. In those specific cases, the team selected the RI
(including the base and target) based on the guidance of the government/input received from the government.



Rating

Satisfactory

c. Overall Bank Performance

Rationale

Overall, Bank’s Performance is rated as Moderately Satisfactory, due to issues concerning RI selection.
However, the results chain overall was well developed given the emergency response focus of the operation.


Overall Bank Performance Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

9. Other Impacts

a. Social and Poverty

In addition to mitigating the impacts of the pandemic on poor households, the ICR notes that the operation,
through strengthening Seychelles’ Climate Change Policy, helped protect the fishing industry which is critical to
food security in Seychelles. However, the ICR does not present concrete evidence to support this claim.

The ICR also notes that the Ministry of Health has prepared a National Health Strategic Plan for 2022-2026
which seeks to improve capacity to provide critical health and emergency services and Seychelles’ response to
health emergencies.




b. Environmental

The operation led to the establishment of the National Climate Change Council. The Council will be responsible for
mainstreaming climate in sectoral plans and policies and defining climate change adaptation and mitigation
targets. This is likely to have a positive environmental effect.



c. Gender


                                                                                                   Page 16 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Seychelles COVID-19 Emergency DPF (P174198)



The operation did not specifically target women, or included gender focused results indicators, nevertheless, a
positive outcome of the operation was that more women (in total, 10,706) were registered as beneficiaries of social
safety net programs, compared to men (in total, 8,772) and received financial assistance through social welfare
schemes. (ICR, p. 27).



d. Other

The program made a contribution to strengthen institutions for managing risks during the pandemic and to
strengthen Seychelles’ resilience to future health-related shocks and climate change. The program also made a
contribution to strengthen the AML/CFT regulatory landscape by passing the Beneficial Ownership and Anti-
Money Laundering laws (and the subsequent launch and population of the beneficial ownership registry).

No other intended outcomes and impacts.




10. Quality of ICR

Rationale

The ICR provides a good discussion of the country's situation at project appraisal, as well as prior economic
conditions. It presents the key objectives of the operation in a logical manner and discusses relevant evidence
to measure achievement of the objectives. Both pillars of the operation are discussed, and it is clear from the
report what the operation sought to achieve under each pillar. However, there are some information gaps. For
example, objective 1 (and the associated PA 1 and RA 1) would have benefited from a more thorough
discussion about the health sector in Seychelles. It would have been also helpful to include more information
about the bank implementation of the project. Some details about monitoring are included in the lessons of the
report, but could have also been mentioned in earlier sections of the report. Overall, the quality of the ICR is
rated as Substantial.



a. Rating

Substantial

11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                 Disagreement/Comments
                                Moderately
Outcome                                               Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
                                Moderately
Bank Performance                                      Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory


                                                                                                   Page 17 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Seychelles COVID-19 Emergency DPF (P174198)



Relevance of Results
                                 ---                   Moderately Satisfactory
Indicators
Quality of ICR                   ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

This Review draws attention to some of the lessons set out in the ICR:

It is important to set appropriate targets in a context of stretched government capacity (especially with
the pandemic ensuing), and capacity of the private sector to take advantage of available programs. For
example, PA5 did not take into account the degree of risk aversion of financial institutions or the limited capacity
of MSMEs. In some cases, the pool of MSMEs targeted were not eligible to access some of the targeted relief
measures. In future operations there could be a differentiation between different types of MSMEs and
consideration of how to reach this low-capacity group of MSMEs.

Importance of data for assessing program results and identifying good baseline data. Difficulty in getting
data impacted the ability to assess realism of the targets. At the time of the preparation of the operation, the
assessment had to rely on expert opinion and on experience from ongoing operations (with the experts
comprising World Bank TTLs of the respective area of reform, the PPST of the Ministry of Finance who was the
main counterpart for the DPF and representatives from the various ministries and institutions where available).
This assessment was undertaken in a context of high infection rates from the pandemic. The tendency was to
assess higher adverse effects and therefore higher impact of the program. (According to the macro forecasts
done at the time for Seychelles, the economic and social impact was assumed to be much larger than what
materialized.)


13. Project Performance Assessment Report (PPAR) Recommended?

No




                                                                                                     Page 18 of 18
