     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Third Punjab Education Sector Project (P154524)



                                                                                      Report Number: ICRR0023456

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                    Project Name
 P154524                                       Third Punjab Education Sector Project

 Country                                       Practice Area(Lead)
 Pakistan                                      Education


 L/C/TF Number(s)                              Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-86200                                    31-Dec-2021                                          292,310,000.00

 Bank Approval Date                            Closing Date (Actual)
 03-Jun-2016                                   30-Jun-2022

                                              IBRD/IDA (USD)                                        Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                             300,000,000.00                                                 0.00

 Revised Commitment                              300,000,000.00                                                 0.00

 Actual                                          292,310,000.00                                                 0.00




 Prepared by                   Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Livia Maria Angelica          Judyth L. Twigg               Eduardo Fernandez               IEGHC (Unit 2)
 Benavides Matarazzo                                         Maldonado




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The project development objective (PDO) was to support Punjab province to improve school participation,
   completion, and teaching-learning practices, with a particular focus on low-performing districts. The PDO
   was the same in both the Project Appraisal Document (PAD) and Loan Agreement.

   The ICR identifies three objectives as part of the PDO:

          a. To improve school participation with a particular focus on low performing districts.
                                                                                                       Page 1 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Third Punjab Education Sector Project (P154524)



        b. To improve completion rates with a particular focus on low performing districts.
        c. To improve teaching and learning practices with a particular focus on low performing districts.

   Although some funds were reallocated and indicators adjusted at three project restructurings, the scope of the
   project was not changed, and therefore a split rating methodology is not required.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Component 1: Improved access, quality, and education system management (appraisal: US$ 289.89
   million; restructuring with reallocation: US$ 277.89 million; actual: US$270.31 million)

   This component was to be implemented using results-based financing in support of the Government of
   Punjab’s 2018 Education Goals and Growth Strategy. Disbursements would be on a reimbursement basis
   and linked to nine agreed-upon disbursement linked indicators (DLIs). Given the focus on low-performing
   districts (LPDs), this component targeted children and schools in those jurisdictions, when relevant. The
   component was divided into three strategic areas and nine subcomponents, as follows:

   Strategic Area 1: Improving access to schooling for the poorest. The goal was to provide students from the
   poorest households with financial resources to attend schools at the primary and secondary levels. Under
   this strategic area, the project would support: (a) the provision of education vouchers for children aged 5-16
   to enroll in low-cost private schools. The targeting mechanism was to be improved to ensure that children in
   LPDs would be prioritized; (b) strengthening the public-private partnership (PPP) program run by the Punjab
   Education Foundation (PEF) to increase enrollment and quality of schools, using the same targeting
   mechanism for LPDs as in (a); and (c) the provision of stipends to secondary school girls to increase their
   transition from the primary level and their retention through to graduation. The project was to continue
   supporting the girls' stipend program, as in previous Bank-financed projects, in sixteen pre-defined districts,
   nine of which coincided with the LPDs.

   Strategic Area 2: Ensuring quality teaching and learning for all. The goal of this strategic area was to raise
   the quality of teaching and learning through: (a) the strengthening of early childhood education (ECE) in
   order to improve the cognitive, socioemotional, and physical development of children and facilitate their
   transition into primary school; (b) ensuring the merit-based recruitment of teachers to vacant posts; (c)
   improving teaching quality and learning in primary schools through teacher professional development, with
   a particular focus on multi-grade classrooms and classrooms with a large number of children, and through
   the development of a tool on a pilot basis (covering 100 schools) to provide structured learning activities for
   grades 1-3; and (d) improving the education assessment system to enhance quality of education through
   the development of an assessment policy framework, enhancing the quality of items and tests, and
   improving analysis and usage of assessment data.

   Strategic Area 3: Improving leadership, management, and accountability. Under this strategic area, the
   project would strengthen: (a) the system of allocation and accountability in the use of non-salary budgets

                                                                                                     Page 2 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Third Punjab Education Sector Project (P154524)



  (NSBs), including a greater focus on rural schools, many of which are located in LPDs; and (b) the
  integration and usage of education data to improve evidence-based decision making and overall
  management of the education system.

  Component 2: Capacity building, project management, monitoring, and evaluation (appraisal: US$
  9.36 million; restructuring with reallocation: US$21.36 million; actual: US$19.03 million)

  This component was to support the implementation of Component 1 through the provision of critical and
  strategic technical assistance (TA) and of capacity building activities. This component would also support
  effective and efficient project management, including monitoring and evaluation activities. The component
  would be implemented under the traditional modality of fund advancements and submission of statements
  of expenditures.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  The project was approved on June 3, 2016, became effective on October 5, 2016, had the mid-term review
  on April 23, 2019, and closed on June 30, 2022, six months after the original closing date of December 31,
  2021.

  The World Bank loan of US$300 million was embedded within the overall provincial government education
  budget. As described above, about 97 percent of the loan was designed to be disbursed as results-based
  financing, with reimbursements upon compliance with agreed DLIs and against eligible expenditures. The
  overall yearly provincial education budget was about US$13 billion, so that even if the project were to be
  disbursed in one year, it would be no more than 2.3 percent of the total budget. In addition, the Government
  of the United Kingdom, through the Department for International Development (later renamed as Foreign,
  Commonwealth and Development Office, FCDO) provided parallel financing of approximately US$150
  million (GBP100 million).

  The project was restructured three times in addition to a closing date extension of six months. The first
  restructuring after the mid-term review (June 2019, US$115.58 million disbursed) addressed a change in
  the professional development model in the province, including the replacement of the Directorate of Staff
  Development with the new Quaid-e-Azam Academy for Educational Development (QAED), as well as the
  creation of new roles and functions for staff in the organization. As a result of this institutional
  reorganization, DLI 6 (addressing continuous professional development for teachers) was not met for more
  than two years after the launch of the project. The DLI was rephrased to better focus on the new
  professional development model designed around promoting behavioral change to improve the teaching
  process. In addition, the results framework was updated, including three PDO indicators: (a) quality score of
  primary teaching-learning practices was modified in line with the changes made to DLI 6; (b) the school
  participation indicator did not change, but the methodology did; and (c) the school readiness indicator,
  which was missing at appraisal, was defined, and baseline and end-of-project targets were included. In
  addition, two intermediate outcome indicators were revised.

  The second restructuring (June 2020, US$186.41 million disbursed) focused on assisting the Province of
  Punjab to address challenges posed to the education system due to the COVID-19 pandemic, while also
  adjusting some DLIs (now renamed performance-based conditions, PBCs). Funds were transferred from
  Component 1 to Component 2 to finance activities aimed at compensating for school closures, such as
  dissemination of information on the disease, and providing distance education and mobilization campaigns

                                                                                                  Page 3 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Third Punjab Education Sector Project (P154524)



   and support to schools once they reopened. This reallocation also was to allow for improved data
   management to ensure data integration. In addition, two PBCs were revised. PBC 3 on girls’ stipends was
   revised to improve the registration and disbursement of stipends. PBC 7 on student assessment was
   restructured to be aligned with the then-new assessment policy framework developed in the province. The
   intermediate results indicators were revised to consider the impact of the pandemic on school enrollment,
   particularly in private schools, some of which were expected to permanently close.

   The third restructuring (June 2021, US$224.59 million disbursed) modified the scope of four PBCs to
   respond to challenges posed by COVID-19 and contribute to effective implementation for the remaining life
   of the project. The restriction, due to fiscal constraints, on hiring of new teachers meant that the remaining
   US$6.44 million remaining under PBC 5 would not be disbursed. Out of these funds, US$3 million were
   reallocated to PBC 4 on ECE to provide a new remote platform to train monitoring officers, teachers, and
   caregivers on early learning. The remaining funds, US$3.44 million, were reallocated to PBC 8 on NSBs to
   purchase cleaning supplies and personal protection equipment, among other items. PBC 7 on student
   assessment was also revised (with no change in funding) to reflect delays due to school closures because
   of the pandemic.

   Finally, the project was extended in December 2021 by six months to June 30, 2022. The purpose of this
   extension was to allow for the completion of contracts under Component 2 of the project.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The project objectives were highly relevant to the sectoral context in the Province of Punjab. Even though
Punjab was the most populous and richest province in Pakistan, its capacity to deliver services faced a
number of challenges. At the time of preparation, 21.9 percent of children were out of school, and in the
case of LPDs, the number was 31 percent. Outcomes for school completion, dropouts, and learning
outcomes were also poor, and enrollment had plateaued. Factors contributing to this weak
performance included demand-side constraints, limited availability of quality ECE and of public classrooms
and teachers, and a poor learning environment due to low teacher capacity.

The project was well aligned with the FY2015-19 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS), the most recent for
Pakistan, which recognized challenges in the education sector at both the national and provincial
levels. The CPS aimed to support an increase of gross primary enrollment rates by at least 10 percent as
well as the adoption of education quality assessments and improved learning outcomes, recognizing that a
special effort would need to be made with respect to girls, given their vulnerability and the fact that they
were lagging behind boys in education attainment. A Country Partnership Framework is currently under
preparation, but it is important to note that the 2020 Systematic Country Diagnostic identifies education as
one of the critical sectors, where girls particularly are underserved.

 The project was also aligned with the Punjab Education Sector Plan (2013-2017) and the subsequent “The
New Deal” (the sector plan for 2018-2023, under the then-new government). Both these plans focused on
improving access, retention, and quality of education in Punjab. Project indicators were also aligned with
these plans, including the strengthening of PPPs as a strategy to improve access, improving teaching
practices and student assessments to strengthen education quality, and establishing a management

                                                                                                     Page 4 of 18
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Third Punjab Education Sector Project (P154524)



               information system to strengthen education management. Punjab’s education reform program was also
               supported by donors, notably the FCDO.

               The World Bank has had a long-standing engagement with the Province of Punjab in the education sector
               since 2003. Prior to this project, the World Bank supported two investment project financings (IPFs), the
               Punjab Education Sector Reform Program (FY2003-12), and the Punjab Education Sector Project II
               (FY2012-2017), as well as four development policy financings (DPFs) between 2004 and 2007 (see
               Implementation Completion and Results Report [Report No. ICR00003955] for a Second Punjab Education
               Sector Project, PESP II). The PESP II provided support in similar areas to this project, particularly focusing
               on improving the quality of teaching, and providing demand-side financing to increase access to education,
               including stipends for girls, student testing, supporting school councils, and strengthening budget
               management. PESP II was also a results-based operation using DLIs with a TA component. This project,
               PESP III, built on the lessons and experience gained with the prior two projects, continuing to support the
               Government of Punjab’s reform agenda and including new areas such as the expansion of ECE
               and PPPs. There was a short overlap between the two projects, ensuring continuity in the engagement with
               the School Education Department of the Government of Punjab.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To improve participation rates with a particular focus on low performing districts.

                             Rationale
                             This objective would increase school participation through the enrollment of children ages 6–15 years old in
                             primary, middle, and secondary schools, as well as children ages 3-5 in ECE. Given the limited availability of
                             adequate classrooms and teachers in the public sector for primary through secondary levels, the PEF would
                             expand its PPP program and provide education vouchers to out-of-school children to allow them to enroll in
                             low-cost private schools. In addition, girls ages 11-15 would receive a stipend to ensure that they would stay
                             in school.

                             At the time of project launching, only 30 percent of children attended pre-school programs, but these were
                             mostly informal spaces focusing on child care rather than on readiness for primary education. Only 1,125
                             primary schools had an ECE classroom with a trained teacher and appropriate teaching-learning materials.
                             Under the project, enrollment would be increased through the opening of new classrooms meeting agreed-
                             upon quality teaching-learning standards.




                                                                                                                               Page 5 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Third Punjab Education Sector Project (P154524)



Outputs and Intermediate results

Overall, the number of additional children ages 6-16 who were provided with vouchers was exceeded as
compared to the revised targets (as per the June 2020 restructuring which responded to the COVID-19
pandemic). A total of 211,139 children received vouchers, as compared to a revised target of 150,000
children. Of these, 114,015 were boys (target was 75,000) and 97,124 were girls (target was also
75,000). The number of new PPP initiatives supported by PEF under a quality assurance system was 1,380,
above the target of 1,125. The number of additional children enrolled in PPP initiatives supported by PEF
under a quality assurance system was 923,836 (target was 900,000 and was not revised due to the COVID-
19 pandemic), of whom 498,871 were boys (target 450,000) and 424,965 were girls (target was 450,000),
thus overachieving the target for boys but partially underachieving the target for girls. An external evaluation
showed that PEF schools tended to cater to poorer students and enrolled more girls than public schools (ICR,
p. 13). There was no formal output indicator linked to the girls’ stipend, as this was a long-standing program
and the project aimed to ensure continuity of this program in the sixteen selected districts in Punjab.

With respect to ECE, the project aimed to enroll 210,000 children (50 percent of whom would be girls) in
newly opened schools that met specific quality standards. At the endline of the project a total of 126,789
children had been enrolled in these schools, of whom 65,017 (51 percent) were girls. This underachievement
of the target is attributed to the COVID-19 pandemic. School closures had a serious impact across Pakistan,
where overall pre-school attendance fell from 33 percent in 2018 to 23.7 percent in 2020. On the other hand,
the project aimed to support 7,000 ECE classrooms, and the endline number was 7,067 classrooms that met
the quality standards. Teachers were trained remotely, using an EdTech platform, and were also provided
with in-person support. Of the 7,067 classrooms, 2,532 were in LPDs.



Outcomes

The overall expected outcome for this objective was to increase the participation rate of children 6-15 years
old from a baseline of 75.8 percent to a target of 79 percent, and in the LPDs from 68.5 percent to 73 percent.
Both outcomes were achieved, as they reached 79.6 and 73.01 percent, respectively. When broken down by
age and gender, the results for girls show that targets were exceeded, while for boys targets were not met:

      Participation rate boys (6-10 years): baseline was 85.4, the target 87, and the latest value was 85.45
       percent
      Participation rate girls (6-10 years): baseline was 77.8, the target was 80, and the latest value was
       81.97 percent
      Participation rate boys (11-15 years): baseline was 75.4, the target was 79, and the latest value was
       76.62 percent
      Participation rate girls (11-15 years): baseline was 64.6, the target was 68, and the latest value was
       72.33 percent

The increase in participation rate for girls aged 11-15 is particularly noteworthy. This increase is partly
attributed to the long-running stipends program, which is implemented in 16 districts, 9 of which coincide with
the LPDs. During project implementation the stipend amount was tripled to increase the incentive for girls to
enroll and stay in school. The payment system was also improved, using digital mobile phone payments.



                                                                                                  Page 6 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Third Punjab Education Sector Project (P154524)



School participation in stipend districts increased by 6.1 percentage points during project implementation,
while it decreased by 0.02 percentage points in non-stipend districts.

At the pre-school level, the outcome was measured through the school readiness indicator, which measures
pre-literacy, pre-numeracy, fine motor skills, and the child’s level of language and socio-emotional
development. At the start of the project, school readiness was two percent, while at the end of the project
readiness was 8.35 percent, exceeding the expected target of 6 percent. This is attributed to the
implementation of a new ECE policy that included a play-based, two-year curriculum and well-defined quality
standards and a corresponding quality assurance mechanism.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To improve completion rates with a particular focus on low performing districts.

Rationale
The theory of change for this objective held that expanding girls' stipends at the secondary level would
encourage girls to complete primary school, and that increases in the NSB linked to completion rates would
provide incentives for school directors to focus on completion. The logic underpinning the demand side was
further linked to assumptions that improvements in the quality of primary education would encourage parents
to ensure that their children attended and completed primary levels, and that effective communications
campaigns could inform parents and communities about the availability and importance of quality primary
education. These inputs would be expected also to increase student motivation and retention. The objective
focused on completion rates for primary schools, i.e. completion of grade 5. Primary completion in Punjab
was low, with only 71 percent of children enrolling in grade 1 in government schools surviving to complete
grade 5. While the project contributed both to government schools as well as to private and PPP schools,
completion rates were only monitored in public government schools.



Outputs and intermediate results

The main outputs for this objective were intertwined with those from both objectives 1 and 3, with inputs
related to these objectives contributing to completion rates. In particular, the girls’ stipend program (see
objective 1) provided an incentive to ensure completion of primary so that they could progress to secondary,
in order to earn said stipend. Also, the NSB (see a more detailed discussion under objective 3) provided a
small discretionary budget at the school level allowing school directors to purchase inputs such as furniture,
cleaning materials, and learning items. Notably, the allocation formula placed a premium on retention rates. In
addition, an SMS (text messaging) campaign had a positive impact on enrollment and retention. Finally,
quality inputs are likely to have had an impact on completion rates. These included hiring of better qualified
teachers, the redeployment of teachers to classrooms with high teacher-to-student ratios (greater than 40



                                                                                                  Page 7 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Third Punjab Education Sector Project (P154524)



students per teacher), and the implementation of a new teacher development program focused on improving
the teaching-learning process.



Outcomes

At the provincial level, completion rates for grade 5 were exceeded as a whole, and also separately for boys
and girls, as follows:

      Completion rate, grade 5: baseline was 67, the target 70, and the latest value was 78 percent
      Completion rate, grade 5 boys: baseline was 69, the target was 71, and the latest value was 76
       percent
      Completion rate, grade 5 girls: baseline was 66, the target was 69, and the latest value was
       81 percent

In the case of LPDs, targets were not determined at appraisal, but estimates were available through the
Annual School Census. Results were as follows:

      Completion rate, grade 5: baseline was 49 percent and the latest value was 69 percent
      Completion rate, grade 5 boys: baseline was 52 percent and the latest value was 68 percent
      Completion rate, grade 5 girls: baseline was 46 percent and the latest value was 71 percent

The results for girls, both at the provincial level and in the LPDs, are exceptional, particularly in the context of
COVID-19. This high result is attributed to several factors. Schools in Pakistan are commonly separated by
gender, and girls’ schools appear to function better than boys’ schools. Also, girls responded better to SMS
messages promoting learning at home during the COVID-19 lockdown and, later, to the call to return to
school, once schools reopened. Finally, the stipend for girls at the secondary level provided incentives for
primary school completion and subsequent progression to secondary school.

As explained above, the project supported public schools, as well as PPP and private schools. The ICR and
further conversations with the Task Team explained that there was a private school census in 2016, but a
follow-up census could not be carried out. Data were therefore not available to determine completion rates for
PEF-supported schools.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
To improve teaching-learning practices with a particular focus on low performing districts.

Rationale


                                                                                                      Page 8 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Third Punjab Education Sector Project (P154524)



This objective was to focus on improving quality of teaching and learning at the ECE and primary level across
the province of Punjab. At the ECE level, the objective would be achieved through the implementation of an
ECE policy that would adopt a play-based, two-year curriculum that would meet international standards and
would have a quality assurance mechanism. At the primary level, the project would support a renewed
teacher professional development program, hiring of new teachers, redeployment of teachers to reduce
overcrowded classrooms, improvements in the student assessment process for decision-making, and
allocation of NSB to schools in order to finance inputs to improve the quality of learning in the classroom.
School councils were also to be supported in order to ensure community participation to improve children’s
learning process and have an accountability mechanism in the use of NSB.



Outputs and intermediate results

The project supported the opening of 7,067 new ECE classrooms under the new policy’s quality standards
that included teacher training, ECE kits, age-appropriate furniture, and wall posters. An independent
assessment of ECE classrooms found that teachers were provided with support and inputs in line with the
provincial policy on ECE.

As of the first restructuring, the School Education Department (SED) reformed the teacher development
program and implemented a new Continuous Professional Development program that included classroom
observation and mentoring by trained specialists, a platform for digital learning, and face-to-face facilitated
discussions with mentors. While this program was initially meant to be implemented in 18 districts, it was
scaled up to all of the 36 districts in the province. The endline survey for the project showed significant
improvement on indicators such as positive classroom behavior and student understanding of content.

Fiscal constraints linked to the COVID-19 pandemic forced the government to restrict the hiring of new
teachers, starting in year four of the project. Still, during the first three years over 96,000 new teachers were
hired under a merit-based system. A survey showed that these teachers had higher qualifications and had
better content knowledge than teachers hired under the traditional system.

The project supported the development of an assessment framework that aimed at standardizing data, thus
making it comparable across schools. The Punjab Examination Commission (PEC), responsible for student
assessments, was strengthened and qualified staff was hired. By end of the project, the PEC had carried out
two rounds of the new assessments (both school-based and large-scale) and a study on learning losses. The
project also supported development of the Integrated Education Dashboard that monitored 27 indicators,
allowing for informed decision making at the provincial and district levels.

Non-teacher inputs were financed through the NSB that was transferred to each school. The project
contributed to the simplification of the transfer process to ensure more expedient availability of these
funds. Still, there were challenges in its implementation and, at end of the project, only 56 percent of the
budget had been spent versus a target of 69 percent.

At the community level, a school council mobilization strategy was developed to increase community
participation at the school level. The purpose of the School Councils was to have oversight in the use of the
NSB, to promote child health and nutrition, and to contribute to attendance and retention. A total of 505,092



                                                                                                     Page 9 of 18
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Third Punjab Education Sector Project (P154524)



                            School Council members were reached through citizen engagement initiatives, far exceeding the target
                            of 212,000.



                            Outcomes

                            At the outcome level, the ECE intervention was measured by level of school readiness, which assessed the
                            child’s readiness for primary school, including pre-literacy, pre-numeracy, fine motor skills, language level,
                            and socio-emotional development. The average value for school readiness improved beyond the target of 6
                            percent, from 2 percent up to 8.35 percent. Further, a survey carried out in the winter between 2021 and 2022
                            found that children who had attended pre-school answered 73 percent of age-appropriate questions, while
                            children who had not participated in ECE were able to answer only 60 percent of the same questions.

                            At the primary level, outcomes were measured through the quality score of primary teaching-learning
                            practices. This score was based on classroom observation that included teaching-learning practices such as
                            classroom organization, instructional support, and emotional support. The baseline for this indicator was 2.53
                            and the target was 2.65. The project achieved a value of 2.59, halfway achieving the targeted outcome. There
                            are three underlying reasons that probably led to the partial achievement of this outcome. First, hiring of new
                            qualified teachers was stopped at the third year of the project due to fiscal restrictions. Second, the Teacher
                            Development Program launch was delayed and started only towards the third year of the project, thus
                            reducing the available time to achieve an impact on teaching-learning practices. Third, schools were closed
                            for at least ten months (in some cases more) because of the lockdown resulting from the COVID-19
                            pandemic, interrupting children's learning processes.

                            Although there were notable improvements in teaching-learning practices at the ECE level, the shortcomings
                            were significant at the primary level. Achievement of this objective is therefore rated Modest, with recognition
                            of the substantial achievements at the ECE level.



                            Rating
                            Modest


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Objectives 1 and 2 are rated substantial due to achievement of most outcomes and targets. Objective 3 is
                            rated modest due to only partial achievement of the teaching-learning practices outcome at the primary level,
                            although the ECE readiness outcome was fully achieved. The overall efficacy of the project is therefore
                            rated substantial.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating

                                                                                                                              Page 10 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Third Punjab Education Sector Project (P154524)



  Substantial



 5. Efficiency
The PAD included a cost-benefit analysis of the project using the present discounted value method. The
expected benefits from this project were: (a) additional primary and secondary students completing their
education from public, private, and PPP schools who would earn higher wages than those who did not complete
school; (b) improved relevance and quality of education that would lead to youth with better learning skills and
therefore higher earning potential; and (c) lower repetition rates and dropouts from public schools, resulting in
less wastage of both public and private resources as students would complete their schooling in a shorter
period. The overall costs of the project included the NSB expenditures carried out during the project,
expenditures under the new interventions of the PESP III project, and private costs, including out-of-pocket
costs and opportunity costs from not having children contributing to the family income.

The assumptions that were used to estimate the net present value (NPV) of project benefits, the benefit-cost
ratio, and the internal rate of return (IRR) were: (a) an estimated one million additional children would be
enrolled through the PPP and education voucher programs; and (b) inputs from the proposed project would
increase grade promotion by 3 percent and reduce repetition by 3 percent with respect to the baseline. Without
the project, the analysis estimated that promotion rates would decrease by 3 percent and repetition would
increase by 3 percent with respect to the baseline. With respect to ECE, the analysis assumed that annual
intake would increase by 2 percent per year during the life of the project.

Project costs were forecasted based on data for the 2016-2017 fiscal year expenditures for NSB. Additional
expenditures under the project were also costed and included in the estimate. As a whole, PESP III overall costs
were estimated to be US$3.77 billion in nominal terms. On average, the private household expenditures for a
child were US$29 per year for the primary grades and US$59 per year for children in secondary school. Based
on existing data at the time, the analysis assumed that 7 percent of children of primary age and 22 percent of
secondary school age would be involved in wage labor if they were not enrolled in school. The analysis
estimated that US$399 million would be spent by households, and US$553 million would be the opportunity cost
of foregone wages for the life of the project.

Benefits due to increased lifetime labor earnings were estimated at US$728 per annum for children completing
as compared to those who did not complete primary school, and for secondary the estimate was US$1,107 per
annum for those who completed as compared to those who did not. Efficiency benefits due to reduced repetition
were estimated at a reduction of 1.3 student years for primary and 1.2 student years for secondary students.
The discount rate was 12 percent, and yearly inflation was calculated to be 5 percent per year.

Based on the above reasonable assumptions, the estimated NPV of economic benefits for the project was
US$4.25 billion with an IRR of 26 percent. The sensitivity analysis using varying quality premiums in
employment rates resulted in a range of US$3.36-5.15 billion for the NPV and 23-29 percent for the IRR.

The ICR focused its benefits estimates on enrollment data for public, private, and PPP schools. When compared
to the economic analysis carried out at appraisal, this would be a lower bound given that benefits from quality
inputs were not taken into account. On the cost side, a similar analysis was carried out as that of the PAD,
taking into account public and private investment costs, as well as opportunity cost for additional enrollment of
children at the primary and secondary level. The resulting NPV for the project was estimated at US$3.06 billion,


                                                                                                   Page 11 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Third Punjab Education Sector Project (P154524)



with an IRR of 27 percent. Given that the benefits were underestimated, results are similar to the ones at
appraisal.

 In terms of implementation, the project suffered some initial delays due to political changes in government, the
need to contract TA to support project implementation, and the processing of an initial restructuring to reflect an
institutional reform linked to teacher professional development. An extension of six months was required to close
the project. In the context of a pandemic, where schools were closed for more than ten months and government
processes were disrupted, this extension was reasonable.

Throughout project implementation and, as part of the three restructuring processes, DLIs/PBCs were revised in
order to reflect changes in project design (for example the creation of a new agency responsible for teacher
continuous professional development) or to respond to COVID-19 and to macro-fiscal constraints. Of the total of
nine PBCs, seven were fully disbursed and two were partially disbursed. These were PBC 4 on girls’ stipends
(US$4.35 million was not disbursed) and PBC 8 on NSB (US$3.34 million was not disbursed). Overall, project
disbursement was US$289.98 million, i.e. 97 percent of the total loan. The Government of Punjab spent an
estimated US$10.83 billion, and the FCDO program financed, under its full program, GBP430 million (98 percent
of the original GBP427 million).


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     100.00
 Appraisal                                                 29.00
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     100.00
 ICR Estimate                                              27.00
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The relevance of objectives is rated high, as the objectives were fully aligned with the Pakistan Country
Partnership Strategy (FY 15-19), the Government of Punjab’s Education Sector Plan (2013-2017), and the
subsequent “The New Deal.” Efficacy is rated substantial as most of the outcomes were obtained, with the
exception of teaching-learning outcomes at the primary level. The cost-benefit analysis resulted in high returns,
with some limited implementation shortcomings and a six-month project extension, producing an efficiency
rating of substantial. Taken together, the overall Outcome rating is Satisfactory, reflecting only minor
shortcomings in the project's preparation, implementation, and results.




                                                                                                     Page 12 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Third Punjab Education Sector Project (P154524)



a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The risk to development outcome is deemed low for several reasons. First, the project financed only a small
fraction of the overall program, and therefore it is likely that interventions will continue. Second, the long
history of reforms, partly supported by four DPFs and three IPFs, demonstrates a strong commitment to
improving coverage and quality of education in the Province of Punjab. Third, the project invested in
strengthening several of the institutions within the SED. For example, the project supported the creation of
the Teacher Development Program under the QAED, the establishment of a revamped ECE program, and
the reform of student assessments under the PEC. Finally, the development of a strong information system
allows for better decision-making and targeting of critical issues.

However, Pakistan is facing a difficult macro fiscal environment that is forcing some restrictions in funding for
the social sectors, including the education sector. At the same time, the number of school-age children
continues to grow, demanding an increase in expenditures to provide these children with a spot in a
classroom, be it in a public, private, or PPP school.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  Project design built on the Bank's experience with the education sector in Punjab, including a series of
  DPFs and investment projects. The project took into account prior knowledge and supported activities
  that had been successful and needed continuity (for example, the provision of stipends for girls) and
  introduced new reforms (such as the classroom observation tool and the ECE program). In addition, the
  project benefited from having an ongoing project management unit tasked with managing all donor and
  multilateral funding. This meant that implementation capacity was in place at the time of project
  launching. Given that achieving improvements in quality of education is a long-term endeavor, this is an
  appropriate support strategy.

  The project was designed to focus on results. This was done by planning disbursements based on
  achievement of DLIs/PBCs. In addition, funds were directly disbursed to the SED, avoiding the need to
  open a designated account for the project. Project funds were allocated to provide technical assistance to
  the various institutions under the SED in order to support the achievement of the reforms, as well as
  supporting project implementation, monitoring, and evaluation.

  At appraisal, two key outcome indicators were not available: quality score of primary teaching-learning
  practices and level of school readiness for ECE. In the case of the first indicator, there was no global
  agreement on measuring teaching-learning practices. In the case of ECE, the intervention model had not
  been fully designed, and consequently the indicator could not be finalized. The team expected that these
  indicators would be available by December 2016, but they were only agreed upon in the third year of the
  project, as part of the restructuring of June 2019, and were set up only after an ECE monitoring system

                                                                                                     Page 13 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Third Punjab Education Sector Project (P154524)



  was established and a survey to measure teaching-learning practices made available in March 2018 and
  July 2016, respectively.

  The definition of indicators could have been more accurate. For example, the project objectives stated
  that there would be a focus on LPDs, but this focus was not translated into all the PDOs. Data were
  disaggregated mainly for school participation, but not for other PDO indicators. Also, the project
  supported the education sector as a whole, including ECE, primary, and secondary. However, not all
  indicators covered all these levels. For example, completion rates were measured only for primary
  education. Furthermore, primary completion was measured only in government schools, while the project
  invested substantially in private and PPP schools.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The World Bank supervision team was composed of headquarters and field staff who provided fiduciary
 and TA support throughout project implementation. The team responded to changes in the institutional
 framework and to the lockdowns imposed by the COVID-19 pandemic through three project restructurings
 and one project extension. Institutional changes included the replacement of the Department of Staff
 Development (DSD) with the QAED, introducing a completely new teacher professional development
 model. Also, there were major changes in student testing strategies and the introduction of a new ECE
 program. The team supported these changes, but there were still substantial delays in the implementation
 of the teacher training program and the rolling out of ECE. There were also changes in leadership in the
 SED and the Project Management and Implementation Unit (PMIU), particularly during the first two years of
 project implementation. This had implications for the continuity of project implementation. In response, the
 World Bank team promoted the strengthening of the Project Steering Committee and the preparation of
 action plans to improve project implementation.

 Coordination with FCDO flowed well, with joint meetings in the quarterly roadmap stock-taking
 exercise that was led by the Chief Minister. Also, the team secured US$1 million Externally Financed
 Output from FCDO to assist with TA work linked to the implementation of education reforms in Punjab.

 The World Bank responded to the COVID-19 pandemic well and in a timely manner. The team worked
 closely with the client in the weeks prior to the declaration of a pandemic emergency and the consequent
 school closures, putting in place a distance learning program and a communications strategy to support
 parents. The team supported the client in the development of surveys to parents and a survey to schools
 once they reopened to assess dropout rates, among other issues. This is how they detected that 21
 percent of adolescent boys and 8 percent of adolescent girls were lost from the education system. The
 World Bank also supported measuring learning losses once schools reopened. There was a six-month
 extension of the project, which seems reasonable, in the context of major disruptions resulting from the
 pandemic.




                                                                                                 Page 14 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Third Punjab Education Sector Project (P154524)



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Highly Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The project's monitoring and evaluation design relied mainly on existing institutional monitoring systems
 that were under the purview of the various institutions of the SED. Several of these systems had been
 developed with support from the World Bank as part of prior operations. In total, twelve systems were relied
 upon for project M&E, three of which were specifically introduced in the PESP III project design. The
 project contributed to the School Information System, the 2016 Private School Census, and the Assistant
 Education Officer Classroom Observation Tool. The project's design also included third-party verification
 of expenditures for the girls’ stipend program, the PEF model (education vouchers for private schools and
 PPPs), NSB, and School Council mobilization. Project design included both baseline and endline surveys.

 The project objectives specified that LPDs would be a focus of the project; however, most PDO indicators
 were not designed to measure the impact specifically on LPDs as opposed to other districts in Punjab.
 Also, while the project encompassed ECE, primary, and secondary levels, most indicators focused on the
 primary level. In addition, the project made a substantial investment in strengthening the PEF model; still,
 data for private and PPP schools were not available to estimate completion rates, such that the
 indicators measured results stemming from only part of the project's intervention. In addition, while the
 project invested substantial amounts of funds on quality inputs, and the province had experience in student
 testing, no indicators were defined on improved learning.



b. M&E Implementation
  Overall, the M&E systems were implemented as designed. A public school census was carried out on an
  annual basis, and Monitoring and Evaluation Assistants carried out monthly visits to schools to collect
  data for the information system. A private school census was carried out in 2016, but there was no
  follow-up census thereafter. Third-party assessments were carried out as planned for the four
  expenditure programs, thus allowing for disbursements for the corresponding DLIs/PBCs. Two impact
  assessments were carried out for the girls’ stipends program and for the SMS re-enrollment
  communications campaign in response to COVID-19 school closures. In addition, household surveys
  assessed the impact of COVID-19 on children’s enrollment in schools once they reopened. The endline
  survey was also carried out as planned.

  Data collection and management was carried out through government systems, thus ensuring their
  sustainability. Depending on the type of data, the responsible agency took on the task. The project
  supported the development and implementation of a Data Center within the PMIU to enhance data
  collection, integration, and storage. The ICR does not provide information on student assessments,
  beyond the fact that two full rounds of student testing under the new system were carried out.



                                                                                                  Page 15 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Third Punjab Education Sector Project (P154524)




c. M&E Utilization
  The monitoring systems developed under the project were implemented by the relevant units,
  providing them with information for the decision making process. The Integrated Education Dashboard,
  for example, is available at the district level and provides information on 27 indicators in real time. This
  dashboard pulls information from the Annual School Census, from the PEF (private and PPP schools),
  from the QAED teacher training program, classroom observation data, etc. The dashboard also has
  options to analyze data as needed. The PMIU provided training to district officials in all 36 districts on
  use of the dashboard. The Data Center, also supported by PESP III, is being linked to the National
  Database and Registration Authority, thus strengthening the institutionality of data management.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project did not trigger social and environmental safeguards. It did not operate in area with indigenous
   people. The project was Category C for environmental assessment, as it did not involve any civil work or
   school rehabilitation.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Fiduciary compliance was satisfactory. Funds were disbursed directly to government
   accounts. Counterpart funds were always available as needed. As of the writing of the ICR, however, there
   was still US$2.3 million pending justification under Component 2 of the project, in addition to overdue
   interim financial reports and internal audit reports. To date, as reported by the Task Team, all expenditures
   have been fully documented, but final reimbursement of remaining funds is still pending, together with the
   final financial reports.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None reported.



d. Other
    ---


                                                                                                      Page 16 of 18
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Third Punjab Education Sector Project (P154524)



11. Ratings
                                                                                   Reason for
Ratings                           ICR                    IEG
                                                                                   Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                           Satisfactory           Satisfactory

Bank Performance                  Satisfactory           Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                    Substantial            Substantial

Quality of ICR                    ---                    Substantial


12. Lessons

Long-term engagement with a client can secure results in a sector such as education. Investments
in education are long-term endeavors and, as such, require substantial commitment and availability
of resources. This project came after a DPF series and two investment projects, allowing the client
and the World Bank to build on prior interventions and learn from prior experience.

Results-based lending allows teams to focus on outcomes instead of processes, but it requires
robust information and fiduciary systems. This operations model relies on government systems to
procure, contract, and deliver goods and services. Management and information systems must
therefore be in place and operate under clear accountability mechanisms.

Private schools provide a means to increase access in an environment of substantial population
growth, but accountability is important. As observed in this project, low-cost private schools tend to
cater to poor children, perform well, and serve vulnerable groups (such as girls). However, these
schools need to be accountable to authorities by allowing regular monitoring and student
performance assessments. This is not always the case. As reported for this project, private schools
do not always allow government authorities to enter premises.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR was well written and provided extensive information on a large and complex project. The document
appropriately divided the PDO into three objectives and carried out an in-depth analysis for each of them,
enriching the analysis with additional information from studies carried out by the project to assess specific
interventions. The ICR was candid, noting that there were gaps between the proposed focus on low-performing
districts in the objectives and the lack of necessary monitoring data to assess them.




                                                                                                     Page 17 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Third Punjab Education Sector Project (P154524)



However, the theory of change proposed in the ICR was not aligned with project objectives and outcomes,
leaving out some very important project interventions, most notably ECE. As a result, the analysis of the
objectives was sometimes not well organized and difficult to understand. In addition, the ICR did not assess
much of the work supporting PEC in reforming the student assessment program and the implementation of
several rounds of performance testing. Finally, the document could have benefited from some final editing,
including a complete acronym list. Notwithstanding these shortcomings, the quality of ICR is rated as
substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                  Page 18 of 18
