     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Senegal Tourism & Enterprise Devt (P146469)



                                                                                Report Number: ICRR0023454

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P146469                                   Senegal Tourism & Enterprise Devt

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Senegal                                   Finance, Competitiveness and Innovation


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-60190                                 30-Jun-2022                                         74,872,651.84

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 26-Apr-2017                               30-Jun-2022

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           74,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                            74,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Actual                                        74,872,651.84                                              0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Antonio M. Ollero          Ebru Karamete                Avjeet Singh                   IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Program Document (paragraph 15, page 5), the Financing Agreement (Schedule 1, page 4),
   and the ICR (paragraph 11, page 8), the project development objective of the Senegal Tourism and
   Enterprise Development Project was "to create conditions necessary to increase private investment in tourism
   in the Saly area and strengthen enterprise development in Senegal."

   This ICR Review parses the objective as follows:


                                                                                                 Page 1 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Senegal Tourism & Enterprise Devt (P146469)



   1. To create conditions necessary to increase private investment in tourism in the Saly area.
   2. To strengthen enterprise development in Senegal.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  16-Jul-2020

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   The project had three components.

   1. Sustainable Tourism Development (EUR47.2 million or US$50 million equivalent estimated at
   appraisal, US$49.5 million disbursed at closing) aimed to support efforts to address coastal
   vulnerability under the Government's Integrated Coastal Zone Management Plan by: (a) providing technical
   assistance for – the design and implementation of beach restoration and erosion mitigation infrastructures;
   the installation of an operation and maintenance system to protect the foregoing investments;
   strengthening the integrated coastal zone management mechanism; the conduct of technical studies in
   support of coastal management planning in the Saly beach zone; and destination planning, promotion, and
   management using Petite Cote (the area from Dakar peninsula to Sangomar zone) as a pilot program; (b)
   funding works to preserve hotel infrastructures and to protect the fisherman village at Saly Niakh Niakhal
   against coastal erosion (by installing breakwaters and groins and dredging for beach recharge); and (c)
   supporting capacity building, advisory services, and technical workshops for the Ministry of Tourism and Air
   Transport, the Senegalese Tourism Promotion Agency, and the Senegal Coastal and Tourism Zones
   Development Agency on generating investment for select tourism zones.

   2. Support for Enterprise Creation and Growth (EUR18.4 million or US$19.5 million equivalent
   estimated at appraisal, US$17.1 million disbursed by closing) aimed to improve the investment climate,
   including that outside the Dakar metropolitan area, by: (a) providing grants and technical assistance for the
   administration of the Senegal Market Access Facility matching grant scheme for enterprises – the grants
   would fund a portion of costs for business development services to help enterprises define and implement a
   strategy to enter export markets; (b) providing grants and technical assistance for the administration of a
   Business Plan Competition for entrepreneurs – the grants would be provided as seed capital (equity) to
   winners of the competition to help "idea-stage entrepreneurs" to launch new businesses with an export
   potential or "existing start-ups" to expand their export activities (added after mid-term review); (c) supporting
   capacity building at the SME Development Agency; (d) providing technical assistance for analytical work;
   (e) supporting capacity building at the Agency for the Promotion of Investments and Major Works and other
   agencies to supply skills for One Stop Shops, which would offer streamlined administrative services to
   businesses; (f) funding information technology, office equipment, and computerization services at select
   regionals offices for connectivity to central systems in Dakar; and (g) funding the computerization of

                                                                                                      Page 2 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Senegal Tourism & Enterprise Devt (P146469)



   the commercial and collateral registry established under the Organization for the Harmonization of Business
   Law in Africa at each regional One Stop Shop; and (g) supporting capacity building at the Agency for the
   Promotion of Investments and Major Works and other agencies to implement this project component.

   3. Project implementation (EUR4.2 million or US$4.5 million equivalent estimated at appraisal, US$3.8
   million disbursed by closing) would provide technical and operational support to the Agency for the
   Promotion of Investments and Major Works for overall project coordination, work planning, financial
   management, procurement, environmental and social safeguards management, monitoring and evaluation,
   and reporting and communication.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project Cost. The project was estimated to cost SDR 69.8 million (US$74 million equivalent) at
   appraisal.

   Project Financing. The project was financed with an International Development Association (IDA) credit of
   SDR 69.8 million (US$74 million equivalent) to the Republic of Senegal. The actual disbursement was
   US$74.9 million by closing (the difference in US$ terms was due to changes in the SDR/US$ exchange
   rate).

   Borrower Contribution. There was no financial contribution from the Government for this project.

   Dates. The project was approved on April 26, 2017, became effective on August 31, 2017, underwent a
   mid-term review on January 13, 2020, was restructured on July 16, 2020, and closed as scheduled on June
   30, 2022.

   Restructuring. The restructuring in July 2020, with US$37.8 million disbursed (51 percent of the final
   disbursed amount of US$74.9 million): (a) revised the results framework (see Section 9.B), and (b)
   reallocated project funds among project sub-components (US$1.6 million originally allocated for four
   Business Plan Competitions – only two would be implemented – was shifted to the Senegal Market Access
   Facility) and disbursement categories (more was allocated to technical assistance than initially planned
   for the Senegal Market Access Facility and the Business Plan Competition).

   Split Evaluation. This ICR Review will conduct a split evaluation because of a change in key outcome
   targets during implementation (see Section 2.B and 2.C).




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The project development objectives were highly relevant to the country's development strategies and
priorities.




                                                                                                 Page 3 of 22
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Senegal Tourism & Enterprise Devt (P146469)



Binding Constraints to Development. The project development objectives were relevant to the binding
constraints to tourism development and enterprise development in Senegal.

      Senegal’s economy had under-performed over the long run, with Gross Domestic Product per capita
       increasing by 17 percent from 1990 to 2015, compared to the average of 45 percent in the Sub-
       Saharan Africa region, reflecting weaknesses in the business environment, deficiencies in sector
       policies, and gaps in infrastructure (World Bank, 2018, Systematic Country Diagnostic of Senegal).
      Tourism Development. An important source of private sector jobs (10 percent of all employment in
       2013) and foreign exchange receipts (16 percent of export earnings), the tourism sector (12 percent
       of GDP) had posted little to no growth in real terms in the past decade, reversing a previous second
       rank to Kenya in top tourist destinations in the region (World Travel and Tourism Council, 2015,
       Senegal Country Report). Tourism faced heightened climate change risks arising from stormier
       seas, coastal zone erosion, and beach area degradation, exacerbated by the absence of an
       integrated coastal zone management strategy. The sector also faced declining coastal tourism
       traffic, with no new tourism investments and poor destination management. These problems were
       reflected in the main tourist station of Saly-Portudal (the resort accounted for half of all leisure
       tourism in the country), where the shoreline was receding by six meters per year in most affected
       sites, hotels had been forced to close down, and protective actions by some had aggravated the
       problem for many. A Bank study in 2013 concluded that, with the baseline forecast for sea level
       rise, some 60 percent of current beaches in Saly could disappear by 2080, and the temporary or
       permanent marine submersion could exact damages estimated at CFA franc (CFAF) 10 billion
       (US$20 million equivalent) in net present value terms, also by 2080. Meanwhile, the creation of
       elevated artificial beaches would lead to a neutral economic balance (where the cost would be equal
       to the damage avoided).
      Enterprise Development. Informality continued to account for a large portion of economic activity,
       with the formal business sector (there were only 8,210 registered businesses in 2012) contributing
       just around 60 percent of GDP. Moreover, only 15 percent of formal firms participated in export
       activities, and direct exports constituted only 2.5 percent of total sales (World Bank, 2017,
       Senegal Investment Climate Assessment). Yet, exporting firms had unit labor costs and total factor
       productivity that compared favorably with those in the region. In general, enterprise formation and
       business activity were hampered by a poor investment climate, deficiencies in the legal and
       regulatory environment, gaps in infrastructure and human capital, and weaknesses in innovation
       and technology.

Country Development Priorities. The project development objectives were consistent with the country’s
development priorities as expressed in the Emerging Senegal Plan (Plan Sénégal Emergent) adopted in
2014. The Plan focused on private sector-driven growth to enhance productivity and the competitiveness of
the economy, for which tourism, agriculture, export generation, construction, mining, and information and
communication technology were identified as critical sectors. Private sector-driven growth would be
achieved by tackling key constraints to firm formation and growth, especially among micro, small, and
medium enterprises (MSMEs), protecting economic activity and investment against climate impacts, and
identifying and dismantling other sectoral constraints.

Bank Country Strategy. The project development objective was aligned with the Bank Group strategy in
Senegal at appraisal and at closing.

      The Country Partnership Strategy (2013-2017) for the Republic of Senegal (CPS) committed Bank
       Group support for the country’s development priorities focused on two pillars: “Accelerating inclusive

                                                                                                   Page 4 of 22
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Senegal Tourism & Enterprise Devt (P146469)



                                        growth and creating jobs” and “Improving service delivery”. The first and second project objectives
                                        were aligned with the first CPS pillar.
                                       The Country Partnership Framework for the Republic of Senegal for the Period FY20-FY24 (CPF)
                                        committed Bank Group support for the country’s development priorities organized around three
                                        focus areas: “Build human capital to enhance productivity and ignite the demographic dividend”,
                                        “Boost competitiveness and job creation through private sector-led growth”, and “Increase resilience
                                        and sustainability in the context of growing risks.” The first project objective was aligned with the
                                        second and third CPF focus areas. The second project objective was aligned with the second CPF
                                        focus area.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To create conditions necessary to increase private investment in tourism in the Saly area.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change. Two strategies were vital to increase investment in tourism in the Saly area. The first,
                             coastal zone resilience interventions, would address threats triggered by climate change, including stormier
                             seas, coastal zone erosion, and beach area degradation, exacerbated by the absence of an integrated
                             coastal zone management strategy. The interventions – technical assistance and funding for beach
                             restoration and erosion mitigation infrastructures, the installation of an operation and maintenance system to
                             protect the remedial investments, and strengthening the integrated coastal zone management mechanism –
                             would produce three outputs – groins and breakwaters that were installed, institutional and financial
                             arrangements for infrastructure maintenance that were operationalized, and an integrated coastal
                             management plan that was adopted, with a unit for its implementation established. The target outcome of this
                             strategy would be some 25,000 square meters of beach area in Saly that were restored. The second, tourism
                             destination development, would address challenges posed by scant new investments, declining coastal
                             tourism traffic, and poor destination management. The interventions – technical assistance for destination
                             planning and management at the pilot, Petite Cote, and institutional and technical capacity building at the
                             Ministry of Tourism and Air Transport, the Senegalese Tourism Promotion Agency, and the Senegal Coastal
                             and Tourism Zones Development Agency – would produce two outputs – an effective public-private dialogue
                             mechanism for destination management that was established and tourism sector beneficiaries who found the
                             interventions relevant. The target outcome of this strategy would be a two percent increase in private
                             investment in tourism in the Saly area.

                             Outputs. The project achieved the target for four of the five output indicators defined for the objective to
                             create conditions necessary to increase private investment in tourism in the Saly area.


                                                                                                                                   Page 5 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Senegal Tourism & Enterprise Devt (P146469)




      Integrated coastal management plans had not been developed, and a dedicated unit for its
         implementation had been established by closing, failing to meet the target. (Note – this indicator was
         dropped at restructuring. The data cited here is as of June 2020. The value of the indicator was not
         reported after restructuring).
        Institutional and financial arrangements for exploiting and maintaining the infrastructures of the
         beaches had not been defined and operationalized at closing. The project team subsequently reported
         that institutional structures were defined following a study financed by the project and Saly
         municipality as well as SAPCO have been including their contributions in their budgets and working to
         mobilize the tourism establishments’ contributions.
        The number of groins and breakwaters that were installed was 19 by closing, partially achieving the
         original target of 21. However, the project team clarified that following technical studies completed
         after project approval confirmed that only 19 groins and breakwaters were needed, and the target was
         revised during the restructuring.
        The ICR reported that effective public-private dialogue mechanisms for destination access and
         management were not established by closing. However, the project team clarified that this was indeed
         established.
        The percentage of tourism sector beneficiaries who considered the project responsive to their views
         (citizen engagement) was 100 percent, exceeding the target of 75 percent.

Outcomes. The project achieved the target for the two outcome indicators defined for the objective to create
conditions necessary to increase private investment in tourism in the Saly area, based on the additional
information shared by the project team.

      The net area of beaches gained due to protection and restoration investments under the project in the
       intervention areas (sand beach for swimming, and fisherman village areas) was 375,000 square
       meters, exceeding the target of 25,000 square meters.
      There was no baseline data to determine the increase in private investments in tourism in the Saly
       area, failing to meet the target increase of 2 percent. (Note – this indicator was dropped at
       restructuring). The ICR (Annex 8), however, reports that the beach restoration generated plans for
       significant new private investment in hotel renovation and new construction estimated at
       around US$350 million (for 12 projects), according to data from the Senegal Coastal and Tourism
       Zones Development Agency. The project team subsequently reported that since the ICR was
       published, many of the plans have materialized, and additional investments have started or been
       announced, by four different hotel chains. It was reported that the OSS in Saly facilitated the
       registration of 33 tourism investments in Saly and Thies, either for extension of existing businesses or
       the creation of new ones. In Saly alone, investments totaled US$17m for an estimated 700 jobs to be
       created.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
To create conditions necessary to increase private investment in tourism in the Saly area.

                                                                                                  Page 6 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Senegal Tourism & Enterprise Devt (P146469)




Revised Rationale
Theory of Change. The project development objective and the theory of change were not
revised. For coastal zone resilience interventions, the original output indicator "an integrated coastal
management plan adopted with a unit for its implementation established" was dropped. The outcome
indicator "increase in private investments in tourism in the Saly area" was dropped ostensibly because it
"goes beyond the PDO which is to create the conditions necessary for increased private investment in tourism
in the Saly area," according to the Restructuring Paper. For tourism destination development, a new output
indicator was added, "an environmental and social management unit at the Senegal Coastal and Tourism
Zones Development Agency that was functioning."

Outputs. The project met the target for all the five output indicators defined for the objective to create
conditions necessary to increase private investment in tourism in the Saly area.

Institutional and financial arrangements for exploiting and maintaining the infrastructures of the beaches had
not been defined and operationalized by closing, failing to meet the target. The project team subsequently
reported that institutional structures were defined following a study financed by the project and Saly
municipality as well as SAPCO have been including their contributions in their budgets and working to
mobilize the tourism establishments’ contributions.

      The number of groins and breakwaters installed was 19 by closing, meeting the revised target of 19.
      Effective public-private dialogue mechanisms for destination access and management had not been
       established by closing, failing to meet the target. However, the project team clarified that this was
       indeed established.
      The percentage of tourism sector beneficiaries who considered that the project was responsive to their
       views (citizen engagement) was 100 percent, exceeding the target of 75 percent.
      There was a functional environmental and social management unit within the tourism development
       and planning company Senegal Coastal and Tourism Zones Development Agency, meeting the
       target. (Note – this was a new indicator, introduced at restructuring.)

Outcomes. The project met the target for the outcome indicator defined for the objective to create conditions
necessary to increase private investment in tourism in the Saly area.

      The net area of beaches gained due to protection and restoration investments under the project in the
       intervention areas (sand beach for swimming, and fisherman village areas) was 375,000 square
       meters, exceeding the target of 25,000 square meters.
      The project team noted that the project has been hailed as an example to follow in the sub-region,
       particularly in terms of its impact on climate change adaptation, restoring livelihoods, and reviving
       tourism – especially in light of COVID19.



Revised Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2

                                                                                                    Page 7 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Senegal Tourism & Enterprise Devt (P146469)




Objective
To strengthen enterprise development in Senegal.

Rationale
Theory of Change. Three initiatives would address two overt deficiencies in private enterprise development
– the lack of business development support for SMEs, which impinged on their access to markets, access to
skills, and access to finance, and the lack of business development support for exporters, reflected in weak
market information, poor product certification, and lack of marketing skills. The first initiative, the Senegal
Market Access Facility, would provide matching grants to help enterprises define and implement a strategy to
enter export markets. The impact of this initiative would be measured, at the output level, by the number of
beneficiary firms that exported to a new market, the value of the additional exports earned by the firms, and
the number of new workers employed by the firms. The target outcome was that 25 percent of firms would
increase their exports by at least 2 percent. The second initiative, a Business Plan Competition, would award
equity grants to help winning entrepreneurs launch new businesses with an export potential. The impact of
this initiative would be measured, at the output level, by the number of entrepreneurs assisted with writing
business plans, the number of beneficiaries (competition winners), and the number of new workers employed
by the winning entrepreneurs. The target outcome was that 80 percent of new enterprises would still be
operational six months after receiving their seed capital (equity grants), and 40 percent, 24 months after. The
third initiative, Local Business Environment Reforms, would assist the Agency for the Promotion of
Investments and Major Works to supply skills for One Stop Shops, the SME Development Agency for
capacity building, and regional One Stop Shops for the computerization of their commercial and collateral
registries, among other measures. The impact of this initiative would be measured, at the output level, by the
number of regional investment platforms established per One Stop Shop and the number of services
available at each regional investment platform. The target outcome was for a 25 percent reduction in the time
to complete a business-to-government service on investment platforms per One Stop Shop.

Outputs. The project achieved seven of the ten output targets defined for the objective to strengthen
enterprise development in Senegal.

      The number of beneficiary firms that exported to a new market after receiving support from the
       Senegal Market Access Facility was 0, failing to meet the target of 25. (Note – this indicator was
       dropped at restructuring. The data cited in the ICR is as of June 2020. The project team
       subsequently reported that the final target as per the PAD was exceeded: out of 142 Small and
       Medium Enterprises (SMEs) supported through the SMAF, more than half (i.e., 74 SMEs) received a
       grant with the objective of exporting to a new market. In August 2023, ADEPME ran a quick survey
       among beneficiaries and received 72 responses. Of the 72 SMEs, 59 had exported to a new market,
       representing 42 percent of all beneficiaries, thereby exceeding the end target for this indicator.
      The value of additional exports by businesses supported under the Senegal Market Access Facility
       (from survey of 57 of 142 firms, which had received at least 40 percent of their grants by March 2022,
       and which had been exporting for two years) was CFAF 2,061 or US$3.5 million, Footnote 9 of the
       ICR report indicates that total exports by all SMAF recipients jumped from a baseline of CFAF4.76
       billion (2019 or 2020) to CFAF11.48 billion in 2021, the equivalent of US$11.24m in additional exports.
       While this is still below the original end target of US$25m, it represents a 140 percent increase and is
       a significant result considering the negative impact of COVID19 on exporting and small firms.
      The percentage of female entrepreneurs who received training and support to write a business plan
       under the Business Plan Competition was 10 percent, failing to meet the target of 100 percent. (Note



                                                                                                  Page 8 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Senegal Tourism & Enterprise Devt (P146469)



         – this indicator was dropped at restructuring, as the indicator is not appropriate: i.e. it is not logical to
         expect that all female applicants are selected for training, The data cited here is as of June 2020. ).
        The number of Business Plan Competition beneficiary enterprises was 146 for the first competition
         and 145 for the second competition, failing to meet the target of 500. (Note – this indicator was folded
         into the indicator measuring “the number of firms benefiting from private sector initiatives” at
         restructuring). The original plan was for four competitions; only two were conducted.
        The number of new workers employed by enterprises (full-time positions) supported under the
         Business Plan Competition (the first competition) and the Senegal Market Access Facility (sample of
         firms) was 359 by closing, exceeding the target of 200.
        The number of firms benefiting from private sector initiatives increased from 1,890 in the baseline to
         19,121 by closing, exceeding the target (upwardly revised at restructuring) of 3,365.
        The share of women-led firms benefiting from private sector initiatives was 32 percent by closing,
         exceeding the revised target (downwardly revised at restructuring) of 25 percent and the original
         target of 30 percent.
        The number of SMEs accessing registration and business advisory services at regional investment
         platforms (potential and existing) was 665, failing to meet the target of 1,000. (Note – this indicator
         was folded into an overarching indicator measuring the ‘number of firms benefiting from private sector
         initiatives’ at restructuring. The data cited here is as of June 2020. ).
        There were at least three regional investment platforms per One Stop Shop that was established
         and operational, meeting the target. The Government had established three regional One Stop Shops
         outside of Dakar to offer streamlined administrative services to businesses: at Saly, serving the
         Center/West Region including Thiès and Diourbel; at Ziguinchor, serving the Southern Region
         including Sédhiou and Kolda; and at St. Louis, serving the Northern Region including Matam and
         Louga. (Note – this indicator was revised at restructuring).
        There were not at least five services available on investment platforms per One Stop Shop, failing to
         meet the target, according to the ICR. (Note – this indicator was dropped at restructuring. The data
         cited here is as of June 2020. ). The project team noted that: “By the end of the project, the target of at
         least three operational OSSs was met, and an operational OSS means at least five services are
         offered which implies that the original indicator met its end target.

Outcomes. The project achieved three of the four outcome indicators defined for the objective to strengthen
enterprise development in Senegal.

      The share of enterprises supported under the Senegal Market Access Facility that increased
       their annual volume of exports by at least 2 percent from the time of provision of support was 0
       percent, failing to meet the target of 25 percent. (Note – this indicator was revised at
       restructuring. The data cited here is as of June 2020. The value of the indicator was not reported
       after restructuring).
      The share of new enterprises supported under the Business Plan Competition that were in
       operating six months after receiving their full payment was 100 percent by closing, exceeding the
       target of 80 percent. (Note – this indicator was dropped at restructuring. However, the data cited here
       is as of March 2022. The data pertains only to the first of two competitions implemented, which
       focused on "idea-stage entrepreneurs.") The first competition awarded 146 grants. This results
       indicator measures the 6-month survival rate of the newly formed enterprises.
      The share of new enterprises supported under the Business Plan Competition that were operating 24
       months after receiving their full payment was 69 percent by closing, exceeding the target of 40


                                                                                                       Page 9 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Senegal Tourism & Enterprise Devt (P146469)



       percent. (Note – this indicator was dropped at restructuring. However, the data cited here is as of
       March 2022. The data pertains only to the first of two competitions implemented, which focused on
       "idea-stage entrepreneurs.") The first competition awarded 146 grants. This results indicator
       measures the 24-month survival rate of the newly formed enterprises.
      The average reduction in time it took to complete government-to-business services on investment
       platforms per One Stop Shop was 47.5 percent, exceeding the target reduction of 25 percent.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
To strengthen enterprise development in Senegal.

Revised Rationale
Theory of Change. The project development objective and the theory of change were not revised. For
the Senegal Market Access Facility, the output indicators "number of firms benefiting from private sector
initiatives" and "value of additional exports by businesses supported under the Senegal Market Access
Facility" were dropped. The outcome indicator "share of enterprises supported under the Senegal Market
Access Facility that increased their annual volume of exports by at least 2 percent from the time of provision
of support" was revised to become "share of enterprises supported under the Senegal Market Access Facility
that increased their annual volume of exports from the time of provision of support from this project," deleting
the reference to "at least 2 percent." For the Business Plan Competition, the output "percentage of female
entrepreneurs who received training and support to write a business plan under the Business Plan
Competition" was dropped. The outcome indicator "Percentage of new enterprises supported under the
Business Plan Competition that were in operation six months and 24 months after receiving their full
payment" was dropped because the second competition would focus on "existing start-ups." The survival rate
would no longer be an applicable measure, and this indicator would be replaced by a new outcome indicator,
"the average increase in annual firm revenue among Business Plan Competition beneficiaries." For Local
Business Environment Reforms, the output indicators "number of SMEs accessing registration and business
advisory services at regional investment platforms" and "at least five services available on investment
platforms per One Stop Shop" were dropped, while the outcome indicator "at least three regional investment
platforms per One Stop Shop that was established and operational" was revised to become "average number
of operational regional investment platforms established per One Stop Shop." The outcome indicator
"average reduction in time it took to complete government-to-business services on investment platforms per
One Stop Shop" was clarified. Two services would be covered: (a) the time to create a business and (b) the
time to process requests under the Investment Code.

Outputs. The project achieved the targets for the four output indicators defined for the objective to
strengthen enterprise development in Senegal.

      The number of firms benefiting from private sector initiatives increased from 1,890 in the baseline to
       19,121 by closing, exceeding the target (upwardly revised at restructuring) of 3,365.



                                                                                                 Page 10 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Senegal Tourism & Enterprise Devt (P146469)




      The share of women-led firms benefiting from private sector initiatives was 32 percent by closing,
       exceeding the revised target (downwardly revised at restructuring) of 25 percent and the original
       target of 30 percent.
      The number of new workers employed by enterprises (full-time positions) supported under the
       Business Plan Competition (the first competition) and the Senegal Market Access Facility (sample of
       beneficiary firms) was 359 by closing, exceeding the target of 200.
      The average number of operational regional investment platforms established per One Stop Shop was
       three by closing, meeting the target. The Government had established three regional One Stop Shops
       outside of Dakar to offer streamlined administrative services to businesses: at Saly, serving the
       Center/West Region including Thiès and Diourbel; at Ziguinchor, serving the Southern Region
       including Sédhiou and Kolda; and at St. Louis, serving the Northern Region including Matam and
       Louga. (Note - this was a revised output indicator introduced at restructuring).

Outcomes. The ICR reported that the project achieved the target for one of the three outcome indicators
defined for the objective to strengthen enterprise development in Senegal. However, additional data provided
by the team points to achievement of all the indicators.

      The share of enterprises supported under the Senegal Market Access Facility that increased
       their annual volume of exports from the time of provision of support from this project reached 50
       percent by closing, exceeding the target of 25 percent – albeit this result applies only to a sample of
       firms (under 25 percent of the total). The Facility planned to help 100 firms and ten associations with
       export development services to raise their annual exports by 25 percent by closing. Launched late in
       October 2019, the Facility eventually assisted 142 firms and ten associations, but the project
       approvals were staggered over 2020 (60 in November), 2021 (57), and 2022 (16). The 50 percent
       figure reported here were for 35 firms that had utilized at least 40 percent of their grants by project
       closing. The rest – as their projects were approved late in the implementation period – could not be
       evaluated for their export performance. The project team subsequently reported that: “: In August
       2023, ADEPME ran a quick survey among beneficiaries and received 72 responses. Of the 72 SMEs,
       all except one had managed to implement at least 50 percent of their international development plans,
       and 59 SMEs reported additional export volume in 2022 and/or 2023. This represents 42 percent of
       the total SMAF beneficiaries, which exceeds the final target”.
      The average increase in annual firm revenue among Business Plan Competition beneficiaries was 0
       percent by closing, failing to achieve the target increase of 2 percent. (Note - this was a new outcome
       indicator introduced at restructuring). This outcome indicator was designed for the second
       competition, which focused on "existing start-ups" (i.e., with one to seven years of operation), versus
       "idea-stage entrepreneurs" for the first competition (see Section 4 - Objective 2). The second
       competition awarded 145 grants, versus 146 grants for the first competition. But as the grant
       agreements for this second competition were signed only in December 2021, there was not enough
       time between December 2021 and the closing of this project in June 2022 to judge the annual revenue
       performance of the "existing start-ups." The project team shared new data from ADEPME, which
       revealed that the average increase in annual sales among all 145 BPC beneficiaries (second round)
       as of June 30, 2022, was 6.52 percent compared to the baseline on November 30, 2020, which
       exceeds the end target.
      The average reduction in time it took to complete government-to-business services on investment
       platforms per One Stop Shop was 47.5 percent, exceeding the target reduction of 25 percent.



                                                                                                Page 11 of 22
                                 Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                 Senegal Tourism & Enterprise Devt (P146469)



                              The project team noted that while not captured by the results framework, the project supported the
                              operationalization of a digital tax payment solutions for DGID, which improved Senegal’s performance on the
                              Paying Taxes indicator of the Doing Business report, as a result the time needed to pay taxes went down
                              from 416 to 197 hours.

                              Furthermore, the project team noted that the project provided much needed firm support with the onset of
                              COVID19 which disproportionately affected SMEs and exporting firms. As such, the required matching grant
                              contribution from all 142 SMAF beneficiaries was reduced from 50 percent to 20 percent, the rules were
                              relaxed to allow funds to be used for working capital, and the length of contracts with firms was extended. -
                              The second round of BPC was positioned as ‘COVID19 recovery grants’ to help firms get back on their feet
                              and retain their employees and benefited 145 startups given that young firms were disproportionately affected
                              by COVID19,

                              Based on the additional information provided by the project team, the achievement of the objective is rated as
                              Substantial.



                              Revised Rating
                              Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The efficacy of the project to achieve the outcome of the first and the second objective is Substantial. Thus,
                            the overall efficacy is rated Substantial.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial

                  OBJR1_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
                            The efficacy of the revised project to achieve the outcome of the first objective and the second objective,
                            Substantial. The overall efficacy is rated Substantial.



                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating
                            Substantial



                                                                                                                              Page 12 of 22
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Senegal Tourism & Enterprise Devt (P146469)



 5. Efficiency
Economic Efficiency. The Project Appraisal Document prepared a pro-forma cost-benefit analysis of the
project, expressing the results in Net Present Value (NPV) terms. Using a 6 percent discount rate, the ex-ante
NPVs, were positive for all project components and for the project overall – US$219.6 million.

      Saly Beach Restoration – US$43 million, assuming that the number of tourists increases by 55,000 over
       five years, 400 additional jobs are created, 500 jobs are maintained, and the average hotel turnover
       increases by CFAF 42 billion annually, with estimated net profits of CFAF 400 million in two years and
       CFAF 1.5 billion in five years.
      Senegal Market Access Facility Matching Grant Scheme – US$48.9 million, assuming that exports per
       firm (albeit unclear if gross or net) increase by 38.9 percent, jobs per firm grow at 5 percent, the
       monetary value of each job created reaches CFAF 1.19 million.
      Business Plan Competition – US$64.5 million, assuming that sales grow 5 percent per year.
      Investment Climate Improvements – US$62.2 million, assuming that business creation rises by 5
       percent, 250 additional businesses are created over a three-year period, and 8 additional jobs are
       created per firm.

The ICR did not conduct an equivalent cost-benefit analysis to validate the calculations at appraisal because: (a)
far less observable results were available, compared to the five years of pro-forma data; (b) the COVID-19
pandemic affected tourism activity in Saly and other destinations; (c) delays in the award of grants affected the
results of the Senegal Market Access Facility matching grant scheme; (d) delays with the launch of the
second the Business Plan Competition left the second competition without any results to report; and (e) the
COVID-19 pandemic also affected the results of the Senegal Market Access Facility matching grant scheme and
the Business Plan Competition. Instead, the ICR offered the following ex-post metrics:

      Saly Beach Restoration – A study concluded that the restoration prevented a loss of US$30 million (from
       hotel closures and job losses that would have occurred without the project). While some hotels closed,
       the restoration convinced at least nine hotels to remain open and invest in improving and expanding their
       facilities. Moreover, three international chains have announced plans to establish large hotels in Saly,
       with investments valued at around US$350 million.
      Senegal Market Access Facility Matching Grant Scheme – Although it would be premature to assess the
       efficiency of the matching grant scheme, the following could be stated: (a) for the 57 of the beneficiary
       firms that were surveyed, the additional exports were US$1.1 million while the cost of the program for
       this cohort was US$1.8 million; (b) every US$1 of grant awarded generated US$8 in additional exports;
       (c) the unit benefit was less than in the similar program in Tunisia; and (d) the results are complicated by
       the COVID-19 pandemic which dented not just domestic economic activity but international trade as well.
      Business Plan Competition Scheme – A planned economic efficiency analysis was constrained by the
       lack of relevant data. Only two of the four competitions planned were implemented, and results were
       available for only one. For the first competition: (a) in which 69 percent of 146 new enterprises were
       operational 24 months after grant award – the average grant (i.e., program cost per firm) was
       US$11,000, compared to US$25,000 for the similar program in Cote d'Ivoire and US$50,000 in Nigeria;
       (b) in which 221 permanent jobs were created – the average cost per job created was US$19,200,
       compared to US$8,500-US$10,000 for the similar program in Nigeria.
      Investment Climate Improvements – Assessments of the economic impact of investment climate
       improvements were constrained by attribution issues and a lack of data. For example, while the time to



                                                                                                     Page 13 of 22
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Senegal Tourism & Enterprise Devt (P146469)



       obtain government permits and licenses was significantly reduced, it was not possible to estimate the
       resulting benefits because the relevant studies, including beneficiary surveys, were not conducted.

Based on the foregoing, the economic efficiency of the project is rated modest.

Operational Efficiency. The operational efficiency of the project is rated modest. The financing was fully
disbursed. The project was completed as originally scheduled. However, many activities were delayed, setting
back the time for benefits to start accruing.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?              Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     0
 Appraisal                                                  0
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     0
 ICR Estimate                                               0
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The outcome of the project is rated moderately unsatisfactory, based on a split evaluation.

Rating Dimension                                     Original Objectives          Objectives after
                                                                                  Restructuring
Relevance of Objectives                              High
Efficacy
Objective 1 - To create conditions necessary to      Substantial                  Substantial
increase private investment in tourism in the
Saly area
Objective 2 - To strengthen enterprise development   Substantial                  Substantial
in Senegal
Overall Efficacy                                     Substantial                  Substantial
Efficiency                                           Modest
Outcome Rating                                       Moderately Satisfactory      Moderately Satisfactory
Outcome Rating Value                                 4                            4
Amount Disbursed, US$ million                        37.8                         37.1
Disbursement, percent                                51                           49

                                                                                                     Page 14 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Senegal Tourism & Enterprise Devt (P146469)



Weight Value                                          2.04                       1.96
Total Weights                                         4
Overall Outcome Rating                                Moderately Satisfactory




a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The risks to the sustainability of the project outcomes range from modest to substantial but should be
mitigated by measures taken after project closing.

      The future of the tourism sector, figuring prominently in the Emerging Senegal Plan, is generally
       encouraging, evidenced by a rebound in activity from the COVID-19 downturn. The Senegal Coastal
       and Tourism Zones Development Agency appears capable of managing the expansion of beach
       tourism to new locations on the coast, following two plans developed by this project for Mbodiene and
       Kafountine. The Senegalese Tourism Promotion Agency should be able to implement its new
       marketing strategy. Questions remain about the institutional capacity of the Ministry of Tourism, but
       its new status as a stand-alone ministry separate from Air Transport should help improve its focus.
       The Saly Ville Verte plan, prepared under this project, will likely be supported by a new Bank
       operation focused on secondary cities.
      Substantial risks remain for beach maintenance: (a) waves, currents, and storm surge displace
       substantial amounts of sand every year, posing recurring problems to the restoration and protection
       works; (b) the breakwaters and groins have a 10-year guarantee from the contractor, but should last
       several decades longer with some maintenance; (c) the lack of a firm agreement on financing the
       maintenance cost (estimated CFAF 200 million or US$0.3 million equivalent annually) is a major
       concern. Following negotiations after project closing, the tentative proposal calls for a 15 percent
       contribution from the Saly municipal government, 35 percent from the central government, and 50
       percent from hotels and residences. Contributions from commercial establishments are being
       solicited, and Senegal Coastal and Tourism Zones Development Agency should be able to manage
       the negotiations.
      The early export performance by a sample of Senegal Market Access Facility matching grant
       beneficiaries suggest a potential for future growth, although the original target for additional exports
       was not met (see Section 4 - Objective 2). Business activity should continue to improve with the end
       of the COVID-19 pandemic. The Government has also taken several steps to strengthen the
       entrepreneurship ecosystem, mitigating risks to the sustainability of the project results: (a) Parliament
       passed the Startup Act in 2020 to provide the legal framework for entrepreneurship and innovation;
       (b) the Government created the Délégation Générale à l'Entreprenariat Rapide to help startups
       overcome constraints to entrepreneurship, including by fostering support structures, accelerators, and
       access to early-stage funding; and (c) the Government approved a three-year tax exemption for start-
       ups in 2020.



                                                                                                    Page 15 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Senegal Tourism & Enterprise Devt (P146469)



     New businesses formed following the first Business Plan Competition have posted strong survival
      rates so far (69 percent 24-month survival rate into March 2022, against a target 40 peof rcent). The
      record appears even stronger considering that the period spanned the duration of the COVID-19
      health and economic crisis. The sustainability of the result is not assured (attrition among start-ups
      may rise), but the heady performance appears promising relative to international benchmarks
      (globally, only 30 percent of new enterprises survive 36 months). The focus of the second Business
      Plan Competition is on "existing" start-ups (i.e., with one to seven years of operation) rather than
      "idea-stage" entrepreneurs (the focus of the first competition) should produce more sustainable
      businesses (although the results could not be assessed by closing). Forecasts of positive economic
      growth in the near term (4.7 percent in 2023, 9.9 percent in 2024, and 5.2 percent in 2025) (World
      Bank, April 2023, Macro Poverty Outlook - Sub-Saharan Africa) offer upside risk.
     The One Stop Shops established by the Agency for Promotion of Investment and Major Works in
      three regions should be sustainable, given the strong demand for their services. The Agency has a
      business plan for the operation of the regional One Stop Shops and has the institutional capacity to
      implement the business plan. As budgetary support could be a risk factor, the Agency might have to
      charge fees for some of its services.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  Analytical Underpinnings. The project was informed by analytic work produced by the Bank and other
  sources, including about similar projects in other countries. In particular, evaluations of a matching grant
  program in Tunisia and a business plan competition in Nigeria helped inform the design of the Senegal
  Market Access Facility matching grant scheme and the Business Plan Competition.

        The Economic and Spatial Study of the Vulnerability and Adaptation of Coastal Areas to Climate
         Change in Senegal (World Bank, 2013) examined the impact of climate change on the
         Senegalese coast (focused on three areas) and concluded that, with the baseline forecast for sea
         level rise, some 60 percent of the current beaches in Saly could disappear by 2080.
        The Senegal Enterprise Survey 2014 collected and analyzed data from 601 establishments in the
         non-agricultural formal private economy to obtain feedback on the state of the private
         sector, build a panel of enterprise data, track changes in the business environment over time, and
         allow impact assessments of reforms.
        Ex-Post Impact Evaluation of an Export Promotion Matching Grant: Tunisia’s EMAF II (Gourdon et
         al., 2011, World Bank MENA Knowledge and Learning Quick Notes Series No. 40) examined the
         impact of matching grants in supporting exports in the Tunisia Export Market Access Fund II
         Project and found that: the annual export growth was 38.9 percent higher for EMAF II-assisted
         firms compared to control firms with similar propensity scores in 2004-2008.
        Identifying and Spurring High-Growth Entrepreneurship: Experimental Evidence from a Business
         Plan Competition (McKenzie, 2017, American Economic Review, 107 (8): 2278-2307) assessed
         the impact of a business plan competition in Nigeria which randomly assigned US$34 million in
         grants providing each winner with approximately US$50,000. Winning led to greater firm entry,
         more survival, higher profits and sales, and higher employment, including increases of over 20


                                                                                                    Page 16 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Senegal Tourism & Enterprise Devt (P146469)



         percentage points in the likelihood of a firm having ten or more workers (almost all firms in
         developing countries had less than ten workers).

  Operational Risks and Mitigation Measures. The Bank considered technical design risk, fiduciary risk,
  environmental and social risk, and external risk (arising from international crises, terrorist threats, and
  health epidemics) as substantial. Mitigation measures for fiduciary risk (procurement and financial
  management) and environmental risk were well considered and were consistent with Bank
  standards. The Project Appraisal Document, however, did not discuss technical design risk or external
  risk enough and did not cite any mitigation measure to address these risks.

  Implementation Arrangements. Plans for environmental and social safeguards compliance,
  procurement, and financial management were adequate.




  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Implementation Support. The Bank supervised the project regularly. It filed 11 Implementation Status
 and Results Reports (two reports a year, the average for Bank investment project financing operations) and
 eight Aide Memoires (for eight implementation supervision missions between April 2019 and April 2022).

 Mid-Term Review. Following the Mid-Term Review in January 2020 (prior to the restructuring in July
 2020) and the outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic in March 2020, the Bank and the Government revised
 the thrust of some project activities: (a) because of delays in the implementation of the parts of the tourism
 component (e.g., destination management), the responsibility for several activities was reassigned from the
 Ministry of Tourism and Air Transport to the Senegalese Tourism Promotion Agency and the Senegal
 Coastal and Tourism Zones Development Agency and obtained agreement on detailed work programs with
 clear timelines; (b) as the economy soured with the COVID-19 pandemic, the proportion of enterprise
 contribution to the Senegal Market Access Facility matching grant scheme was reduced from 50 to 20
 percent, the program eligibility was expanded to include some non-exporting firms (e.g., firms producing
 medical supplies), the length of grant agreements with firms was extended, and grant awards were
 allowed to be used for working capital; and (c) in an uncertain economic environment, the focus of the
 Business Plan Competition was shifted from "idea-stage entrepreneurs" in the first competition to "existing
 start-ups" in the second competition. The adjustments were realistic.

 Restructuring. The Bank approved the restructuring of the project in July 2020 (see Section 2.E). There
 would, however, be questions about the soundness of the revisions to the results framework made at
 restructuring (see Section 9.B).

 Impact Evaluation. The impact evaluation, planned at design, was not conducted as the Bank was not
 able to raise the trust fund resources for the evaluation.



                                                                                                   Page 17 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Senegal Tourism & Enterprise Devt (P146469)




  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The Bank defined 15 output indicators and five outcome indicators to measure the achievement of the two
 project objectives (see Section 4, Objective 1 and Objective 2).

       The original outcome indicators were generally adequate to measure the impact of the project
        activities and to reflect the achievement of the project objectives.
       Some of the targets were too low however: (a) the target for net beach area restored was just
        25,000 square meters on a project budget of US$43 million (the actual net beach area
        restored would be more than 15 times the target); (b) the target for the increase in private
        investment in tourism in the Saly area was set at just 2 percent – considering the poor state of the
        area before the project and the US$43 million public investment in restoration, a 2 percent target
        increase in private investment would be too conservative.

 Under M&E plan, the Project Coordination and Monitoring Unit at the Agency for Promotion of Investment
 and Major Works would be responsible the project M&E, with the Ministry of Tourism and Air Transport
 providing M&E data for the tourism component, and the SME Development Agency, for the Senegal Market
 Access Facility and the Business Plan Competition. The Project Steering Committee, chaired by the
 Ministry of Tourism and Air Transport and comprising all implementing agencies, private sector
 representatives, and other stakeholders, responsible for overall strategic and policy direction, would
 examine the M&E results at regular meetings. The Government would prepare bi-annual Project Reports
 and submit them to the Bank within a month after the end of each reporting period.

 The M&E plan also called for impact evaluations of the Senegal Market Access Facility and the Business
 Plan Competition. The project would cover the costs of data collection, and the Bank would provide
 technical assistance and funding for researchers' work, travel, and activities involving impact evaluation
 design, implementation, analysis, and the results dissemination.



b. M&E Implementation
  The Bank revised the results framework at restructuring (see Section 4, Objective 1 - Revision 1 and
  Objective 2 - Revision 1).

        Of the 15 original output indicators, eight were dropped and replaced with two new indicators, with
         the targets for three of the final nine outcome indicators revised.


                                                                                                   Page 18 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Senegal Tourism & Enterprise Devt (P146469)



  However, it is not clear from the changes made at restructuring that the results framework was stronger
  than at appraisal.

        The original outcome indicator "Increase in private investments in tourism in the Saly area" would
         have been highly relevant to the objective "to create conditions necessary to increase private
         investment in tourism in the Saly area." This indicator should have been retained. Absent data in
         the baseline, it could have been restated to target a gross US$ figure at closing (rather than a
         percentage increase from baseline to closing).
        Similarly, the original outcome "Percentage of new enterprises supported under the Business
         Plan Competition that were in operation 6 months and 24 months after receiving their full
         payment" would have been highly relevant to measure the impact of the first competition and to
         reflect the achievement of the objective "to strengthen enterprise development in Senegal." This
         indicator should have been retained to measure the outcome for the first competition, while
         introducing a separate outcome indicator for the second competition.
        The new outcome "Average increase in annual firm revenue among Business Plan
         Competition beneficiaries" would be appropriate to reflect the impact of the second
         competition. However, the second competition was launched late and there was not a basis to
         measure the results by closing.

  The impact evaluation, planned at design, was not conducted as the Bank was not able to raise the trust
  fund resources for the evaluation.



c. M&E Utilization
  M&E data were used in the Mid-Term Review and in the restructuring.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Environmental Safeguards. The project was classified as an environmental assessment category “A”
   project at appraisal (full, comprehensive Environmental Impact Assessment following all the requirements
   specified in OP/BP 4.01 for Category A) and triggered environmental safeguards policies OP/BP 4.01 -
    Environmental Assessment, OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats, and OP/BP 4.11 - Cultural Physical
   Resources. The infrastructure works would have positive impacts on fisheries and tourism in the short-
   term, but potentially negative impacts on the coastline in the long term. The works could influence the
   configuration of the shoreline and change the beach profile by inducing sediment transport. In which case,
   poorly designed structures could disrupt the longshore current and result in beach erosion down-drift. The
   Bank prepared Environmental and Social Impact Assessments and Environmental and Social Management
   Plans for the beach restoration works and the dredging operations, including the extension to a second
   village.


                                                                                                 Page 19 of 22
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Senegal Tourism & Enterprise Devt (P146469)



  The ICR cited several activities completed by the project to address environmental issues: (a) the beach
  restoration plan was redesigned to mitigate local impacts – rather than haul sand from quarries (using some
  100 trucks a day), the project would dredge sand from offshore sources and transport the haul by barge; (b)
  mangrove forests along the coast at Joal Fadiouth were strengthened to offset any potential increase in
  storm surge; (c) underwater reefs were constructed to promote the recovery of marine life; (d) additional
  equipment was provided to the Senegal Coastal and Tourism Zones Development Agency and the Saly
  municipal government for waste collection in-town and at the beach; (e) the project funded the preparation
  of the Saly Ville Verte plan to make Saly a "green" resort; and (f) the project helped establish a social and
  environmental unit at the Senegal Coastal and Tourism Zones Development Agency.

  The ICR noted delays in applying the Environmental and Social Management Framework to the Senegal
  Market Access Facility and the Business Plan Competition, resulting in an Overall Safeguards rating of
  moderately unsatisfactory in October 2019 and January 2020. To address the issues, the SME
  Development Agency: (a) classified 150 Business Plan Competition projects into three environmental
  categories; (b) organized four workshops on the environmental aspects of the project; (c) hired a
  safeguards specialist; (d) assisted competition winners to prepare environmental action plans; and (d)
  signed an environmental and social charter with the competition winners. The Overall Safeguards rating
  improved to moderately satisfactory in June 2020 and to satisfactory in December 2021.

  Social Safeguards. The project triggered social safeguards policy OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary
  Resettlement. A Resettlement Policy Framework was prepared prior to project approval, and
  a Resettlement Action Plan was approved the year after. The Government engaged a non-governmental
  organization to manage communications with the local communities. Individual, businesses, and community
  organizations were informed of the beach restoration project and invited to submit compensation claims for
  losses. A Grievance Redress Mechanism was operational by October 2019. Funding for compensation
  would be provided by the Government, resulting in delays, but the Agency for Promotion of Investment and
  Major Works provided some initial funding. All compensation payments were completed and only one case
  was rejected (a hotel which could not provide adequate documentation for its claim).

  Overall Safeguards was rated satisfactory in the last ISR of June 28, 2022.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Procurement. The ICR did not report any major issues with procurement.

  Procurement was rated moderately satisfactory in the last ISR of June 28, 2022.

  Financial Management. The first Business Plan Competition reported several problems: (a) counterpart
  funding from the Government was delayed; (b) many competition winners failed to justify the use of their
  first grant payments; (c) payments worth CFAF 304 million or US$ 0.47 million lacked adequate
  documentation; (d) no further payments were made to the offending enterprises. The second Business
  Plan Competition introduced an effective remedy – cash advances were eliminated. The external auditor
  issued an unqualified opinion for the 2020 financial statement.

  Financial Management was rated moderately satisfactory in the last ISR of June 28, 2022


                                                                                                 Page 20 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Senegal Tourism & Enterprise Devt (P146469)




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   No unintended impacts were reported.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                   IEG
                                                                                Disagreements/Comment
                                Moderately
Outcome                                               Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
                                Moderately
Bank Performance                                      Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                  Modest                Modest

Quality of ICR                  ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

Three lessons are drawn from the ICR, with some adaptation.

Consultation with stakeholders in project localities early during the project design process
can produce major benefits for the stakeholders. In this project, early consultation and
collaboration with the beneficiaries of the Saly beach restoration and protection – hotels and fishing
villages – led to the redesign of the original approach of quarrying for sand onshore in favor of
sourcing sand offshore. The decision led to less disruption of economic activity in the project areas,
less air and noise pollution, lower compensation cost for affected property owners, and higher
beneficiary satisfaction.

When the capacity and readiness of project implementing agencies are thoroughly assessed
prior to project approval, interventions can be designed to address their institutional
shortcomings. In this project, the quality and pace of project implementation was significantly
affected by deficiencies with the implementing agencies. The capacity of the Ministry of Tourism
and Air Transport to manage some project activities and to coordinate with Senegal Coastal and
Tourism Zones Development Agency and the Senegalese Tourism Promotion Agency was
overestimated. The Agency for the Promotion of Investment and Major Works lacked staff for
procurement and financial management. Corrective actions were eventually taken during project
implementation, but significant delays with project activities affected the achievement of the project
development objectives.




                                                                                                   Page 21 of 22
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Senegal Tourism & Enterprise Devt (P146469)



Supporting enterprise creation is feasible but requires more than financial assistance to
start-up entrepreneurs, including careful assessment of entrepreneurs, provision of flexible
advisory services, and continuous monitoring of enterprises. In this project, the Business Plan
Competition awarded equity grants to 146 winners of the first competition, 69 percent of which
survived two years after receiving their grant awards. The project experience showed that new
entrepreneurs need to be evaluated carefully prior to selection, provided professional advisory
services, and monitored closely during their operating lives. They also need flexible business
development services and enterprise support systems that recognize their status as start-ups and
the complex risks in enterprise creation. The Bank should design simplified procedures, while
recognizing that a sizable number of new enterprises will not survive. The competition should speed
up the process of paying out the grant awards (equity seed funds) to improve the likelihood of
enterprise success. A focus on technical assistance (project resources were reallocated to technical
assistance at restructuring) was vital.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR document was concise and the account of the implementation of the project activities was candid. The
efficacy assessment was outcome-oriented and based on the degree of achievement of the results
targets. However, some of the conclusions were based on tentative data. Moreover, the ICR did not conduct a
split evaluation despite that the results framework underwent major changes at restructuring (although the
project development objectives were not revised). The ICR presented ample evidence to support its
assessment of the project's efficiency, the Bank’s performance at design and implementation, and the project's
M&E design and implementation.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                Page 22 of 22
