     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NISP (P132308)



                                                                                Report Number: ICRR0023396

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P132308                                   NISP

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Pakistan                                  Health, Nutrition & Population


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-57860,TF-A2189,TF-B3039               31-Dec-2021                                        121,945,355.03

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 21-Apr-2016                               30-Jun-2022

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                          129,600,000.00                                   87,700,000.00

 Revised Commitment                           137,700,000.00                                   73,916,660.51

 Actual                                       122,986,742.05                                   73,916,660.51




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Salim J. Habayeb           Judyth L. Twigg              Eduardo Fernandez              IEGHC (Unit 2)
                                                         Maldonado




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The objective of the project was to increase the equitable coverage of services for immunization against VPD,
   including poliomyelitis, for children between 0 and 23 months in Pakistan (Financing Agreement, August 31,
   2016, p. 6).

   Note: VPD stands for Vaccine Preventable Diseases.



                                                                                                 Page 1 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NISP (P132308)




b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Overview: According to the PAD (p. 6), the components aimed at incentivizing immunization results and
   addressing bottlenecks in support of the Pakistan National Expanded Program on Immunization (EPI), as
   articulated in the National Comprehensive Multi-Year Plan, 2014. The project intended to focus on
   provincial level capacity for EPI implementation while concurrently strengthening the stewardship role at the
   federal level.

   The first three project components would use a results-based approach through a set of 11 Disbursement-
   Linked Indicators (DLIs) to incentivize provincial results (DLIs were also used as intermediate results
   indicators or as outcome indicators). The fourth and fifth components were based on transactions and
   statements of expenditure, and would finance the federal EPI cell and partner agencies to provide technical
   assistance, analytical capacities, and health system strengthening elements, particularly cold chain
   capacity.

   The project included five components (PAD, pp. 6-7) summarized below. Actual costs by component were
   not provided by the ICR:

   I. Strengthening Provincial Management, Governance and Stewardship Functions (Appraisal:
   US$40.3 million; Revised Cost: US$43.3 million), including: (i) strengthening M&E to provide robust
   monitoring and evaluation mechanisms; (ii) enhancing the capacity of provincial surveillance, with the
   federal EPI cell providing technical and logistical assistance; (iii) supporting the provincial expansion and
   maintenance of the Vaccine Logistics Management Information System (vLMIS); and (iv) promoting
   oversight and coordination functions that would also contribute to the effective functioning of the National
   Interagency Coordination Committee (ICC).

   II. Improving Service Delivery Performance (Appraisal: US$19.75 million; Revised Cost: US$23.15
   million), including enhancing: (i) planning for performance through provincial development of computerized
   EPI micro plans that would be integrated with the system developed for polio; (ii) availability and
   management of skilled human resources through the deployment of a variety of qualified personnel in
   technical and managerial roles in provincial EPI cells; (iii) supervisory systems for EPI by increasing data
   availability and instituting supervisory systems to allow their effective use, including for supply chain
   management; and (iv) linkage to communities by establishing links between provincial EPI cells and private
   sector health providers and civil society organizations (CSOs) working in low coverage catchment areas,
   especially in urban slums.

   III. Demand Generation (Appraisal: US$20.75 million; Revised Cost: US$24.45 million), including the
   development of: (i) social mobilization and community awareness creation through electronic and print
   media as well as local community awareness activities, while engaging with CSOs as key partners; (ii)
   advocacy through the development of an advocacy plan by the federal EPI cell, to be implemented locally




                                                                                                      Page 2 of 19
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  NISP (P132308)



by the provinces, including for sensitizing political bodies and senior religious figures; and (iii) development
of immunization awareness as a component of the standard school curriculum.

IV. Vaccine Supply Chain (Appraisal: US$34 million; the appraisal cost was not revised), supporting
national procurement of essential equipment to strengthen the capacity and performance of national and
provincial vaccine supply chains. It was anticipated that the majority of related procurements would be
carried in the first year of implementation through a contract with UNICEF and would utilize a cold chain
platform initiated by the Vaccine Alliance (GAVI).

V: Improving Capacity for Increased Immunization Coverage (Appraisal: US$14.8 million; Revised
Cost: US$12.8 million), including: (i) capacity building activities of federal and provincial EPI cells in
financial management, procurement, environmental and social management, and M&E; (ii) research,
including for developing a pilot on a conditional cash transfer scheme that would provide incentives to
mothers and health care providers to promote access to immunization services; (iii) DLI certification by
independent third party assessment; and (iv) coordination of technical assistance provided to federal and
provincial governments by WHO, UNICEF and CSOs.

The components were not revised, but there were fund reallocations and an increased focus on urban
centers and slums that were lagging in service access and uptake of vaccines.

DLIs consisted of the following:

DLI 1: Percent of children aged 12–23 months in each project province who are fully immunized.

DLI 2: Percentage of Union Councils (UCs) in each project province for which revised computerized UC
level micro plans are in functional use at district and provincial levels.

DLI 3: Percentage of districts in each project province reporting at least 80 percent coverage of Penta3
immunization in children aged between 12–23 months, as validated by a third party.

DLI 4: Number of districts in each project province with at least 80 percent timely and complete reporting on
vLMIS.

DLI 5. Percentage of districts in each project province with their recognized surveillance sites having
functional online surveillance systems for VPD and Adverse Events Following Immunization.

DLI 6: Percentage of districts in each project province with at least 95 percent functional cold chain
equipment in place as per specifications in each tier of the health system (including at least one month
buffer stock capacity at the district level).

DLI 7: Percent of detailed UC supervisory plans implemented by district supervisors and made available to
supervising officers in each project province.

DLI 8: Percent of children under two years of age with vaccination cards available in each project province.

DLI 9: Budget allocations for immunization are continuous, adequate and can be easily tracked within the
provincial financial management information systems.



                                                                                                    Page 3 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NISP (P132308)



   Two DLIs were added in November 2020 at the time of the additional grant financing of US$ 8.1 million
   provided by GAVI (ICR, p. 76):

   DLI 10: In each province, a simple average of the percent of children in each targeted city aged 12-23
   months who are fully immunized.

   DLI 11: In each province, within two months from the agreement date, the departments of health
   continuously maintain appropriately qualified specialized staff in each of the following immunization program
   positions: epidemiologist, monitoring and evaluation officer, surveillance officer, and financial management
   officer.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   The project constituted an incremental financing to the larger EPI program, estimated at US$1.58 billion
   equivalent that included US$326 million from the Federal Government and US$1.26 billion from the four
   Provincial Governments of Punjab, Sindh, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa (KP), and Balochistan.

   At appraisal, the original project cost was estimated at US$129.6 million, consisting of an IDA Credit of
   US$50 million and a Multi-Donor Trust Fund (MDTF) Grant of US$79.6 million, administered by the World
   Bank. MDTF partners were GAVI and USAID. The Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation committed to financing
   up to US$25 million for a partial buy-down of the IDA Credit at the end of the project (PAD, p. 8 and ICR, p.
   11). In November 2020, a supplemental grant of US$8.1 million was provided by GAVI (ICR, p. 76) to
   support an added focus on children in urban slums, at which time two DLI were also added (see Section 2d,
   above). On December 15, 2021, a level-2 restructuring extended the closing date by six months (from
   December 31, 2021 to June 30, 2022) to allow completion of activities, largely in view of service delivery
   disruptions that were caused by the COVID-19 pandemic. The actual cost after project closing was US$123
   million.

   Key dates included approval on April 21, 2016; effectiveness on November 23, 2016; Mid-Term Review on
   February 3, 2020; additional GAVI financing in November 2020; six-month extension of the closing date on
   December 15, 2021; and actual project closing on June 30, 2022.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
At appraisal, the country’s performance in maternal and child health was poor and children's immunization
coverage was recognized as a major challenge (PAD, p. 1). Estimates of the proportion of children who
were fully immunized varied between 43 and 62 percent. The rate provided by the 2014 Comprehensive
Multiyear Plan for Immunization was 53 percent. Low immunization levels have been attributed to a wide
variety of factors (ICR, p. 14). On the supply side, there were weaknesses at various levels of the EPI
delivery system, including lack of planning, supervision, and monitoring, weaknesses in logistics, limited
numbers of vaccination points, staff shortages, lack of motivation, and lack of strong leadership. On the

                                                                                                   Page 4 of 19
                       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                       NISP (P132308)



demand side, research findings suggested that parents did not get children vaccinated because of a lack of
awareness, misconceptions fed by negative propaganda, and difficulties in accessing vaccination services
and sites. Armed conflict, natural disasters, and internal displacement of large populations sowed distrust
and made it more difficult to reach children. In the case of polio, violence against vaccinators and local
government bans also contributed to limiting immunization coverage.

The development objective was fully aligned with the objectives of Pakistan’s EPI program that affirmed the
commitment of the government to provide safe, effective, and cost-effective vaccination against VPDs; to
set national standards and guidelines for immunization aligned with global goals; and to encourage the
generation of local evidence for vaccination against VPDs. The government recognized the urgency of
increasing immunization coverage and launched several initiatives, including the 2014–2018 National
Comprehensive Multi-Year Plan for Pakistan National EPI. Execution of the Multi-Year Plan was relevant
not only for Pakistan, but also in the context of polio eradication as a global public good (ICR, p. 12).

The DLIs used by the project were very relevant, as they were directly linked to program performance and
core elements of health system strengthening that would facilitate the PDO achievement.

The ICR highlighted the continued alignment of the project objective with the World Bank Group’s Country
Partnership Strategy (CPS) for the period FY2015-19 that was extended pending the preparation of a new
Country Partnership Framework (ICR, p. 11). The CPS recognized service delivery in health and education
as key areas of World Bank Group engagement to achieve the twin goals of poverty reduction and shared
prosperity in Pakistan. The project objective responded directly to two out of the four results areas of the
CPS: Results Area 3: Inclusion that focused on inclusive growth and inequality reduction for marginalized
and vulnerable population groups; and Results Area 4: Service Delivery that took into account the devolved
system of governance in the country. Project contributions would support these endeavors, including by
expanding service coverage for child immunization; setting ambitious targets for areas that were not
producing the desired changes in the past; improving public financial management; and increasing
resources for health services. Under the latter, the project approach was in line with CPS messages for
increasing provincial expenditures on education and health, including child immunization, by 20 percent.
The CPS emphasized leveraging additional funds outside World Bank resources as a strategy for
transformational change. In this context, the project sought to mobilize co-financing from development
partners.

The project objective reflected the World Bank approach to promote universal health coverage that would
provide quality and affordable health care to everyone while reducing financial risks associated with ill
health. Based on the CPS, the ICR also referred to the new investment framework “Global Health 2035” of
the Lancet Commission (as a follow-up to the 1993 World Development Report) to achieve health gains.
The Lancet Commission re-confirmed that investing in health has a huge payoff, including in fully valuing
child mortality reductions.


Rating Relevance TBL




Rating
High


4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)


                                                                                                  Page 5 of 19
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  NISP (P132308)



EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               Increase the equitable coverage of services for immunization against VPD, including poliomyelitis, for children
               between 0 and 23 months in Pakistan

               Rationale
               The theory of change was based on the premise that the fundamental barrier to improving immunization
               coverage was not primarily financial, but rather related to low performance and limited capacities of the EPI
               program. Therefore, the project intended to incentivize improvement of provincial performance in some of its
               key aspects, deploy technical assistance that would address specific health system bottlenecks, including
               capacity for coordination, and promote effective management and reporting aspects to enhance
               accountability (ICR, p. 12).

               The theory of change held that:

               - strengthening management, governance, and stewardship functions by providing support to M&E
               mechanisms, functions, and standard operating procedures for M&E systems, introducing enhanced
               surveillance, expanding vLMIS, defining the recommended staffing and capacity requirements for
               strengthening national and provincial EPI units, and promoting oversight and stewardship functions through
               review meetings, enhanced interprovincial coordination, monitoring, and reporting would plausibly result in
               strengthened health information systems for planning and management of service delivery and vaccine
               logistics, establishment of a sound and functional vaccine safety monitoring and early warning system,
               increased presence of appropriately trained vaccinators, and sustained budgeting and availability of adequate
               domestic financing for immunization;

               - improving service delivery performance by enhancing planning and conversion of current plans to
               computerized micro plans, creation of an online database and joint micro plans for immunization, improving
               the quality of micro-planning, training and hiring skilled human resources, increasing the effectiveness of
               supervisory systems for EPI by ensuring regular reporting, increasing electronic tracking of vaccinators and
               supervisors, and developing supervisory plans in all provincial UCs would plausibly result in continuity,
               enhanced immunization penetration and demand for immunization services, strengthened and empowered
               EPI, increased presence of appropriately trained vaccinators at the service delivery level, institutionalized
               utilization of computerized UC-level micro plans for planning and management, and increased numbers of
               fully immunized children in each province;

               - generating demand through social mobilization, launching behavior change campaigns, advocacy to raise
               awareness via social mobilization messaging, advertisement and radio broadcasts about the importance of
               immunization, introducing Immunization to secondary-level school curricula, enhancing community links
               through CSO engagement, and sensitization of political bodies and senior religious figures about the merits of
               immunization would plausibly result in provinces having stronger links and trust with communities through
               sustained relationships with CSOs, increased awareness about immunization, and increased demand for
               immunization services;




                                                                                                                 Page 6 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   NISP (P132308)



- strengthening the vaccine supply chain at the national and provincial levels through the provision of cold
chain equipment with adequate maintenance of cold chain vehicles would plausibly result in expanded and
functional cold chain capacity; and

- improving capacity for increased immunization coverage by strengthening the capacities of federal and
provincial EPI cells, provision of mid-level management training, contracting an independent third party to
verify DLIs, establishment of pooled procurement for vaccines, coordination with co-financing partners on a
performance framework and training of relevant EPI staff, and piloting a conditional cash transfer scheme
would plausibly result in the institutionalization of pooled and efficient procurement of vaccines in Pakistan,
and enhanced leadership and accountability at the decentralized level.

All of the above outputs and intermediate results would collectively and plausibly contribute to increased
equitable coverage of services for immunization against VPD for children between 0 and 23 months in
Pakistan.

As equitable coverage was the central project consideration per PDO statement, the theory of change could
have further clarified the granularity aspects for monitoring inequities under project activities, such as in
surveillance, administrative, and EPI management data.

The broad design assumptions were that (a) resources would support vaccine deployment; and that (b)
implementation of activities would create demand and increase the uptake of vaccines (ICR, p. 7).

Since the success of immunization programs, including equity aspects, depends on high coverage of the
target population, intended outcomes would be measured by province-specific immunization coverage and by
the reduction in coverage disparities by wealth status.

Neither ICR nor this ICR Review address the PDO element on poliomyelitis separately, as polio is an integral
part of Routine Immunization services.



Outputs and intermediate results

The project coordinated government and development partners support within a results-based structure with
emphasis on strengthening provincial capacity and performance (PAD, p. 6) by:

     i. providing a single financing platform to coordinate sources of support for Routine Immunization;
    ii. using standard government budgetary and accounting mechanisms to deliver the majority of funds
       directly to the Federal Ministry of Finance and Provincial Departments of Finance;
   iii. employing a performance-based financing structure to incentivize outcomes; and
   iv. channeling catalytic technical assistance and funding to address specific health system bottlenecks,
       and to strengthen management and reporting systems to enhance accountability.

In all provinces, the departments of health maintained appropriately qualified specialized staff (epidemiologist;
M&E, surveillance, and financial management officer positions). The project contracted CSOs to provide
immunization services in low-coverage catchment areas.



                                                                                                   Page 7 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   NISP (P132308)



The percentage of children under two years of age with a vaccination card available increased in Balochistan
from 8 percent to 35.2 percent, in KP from 39.7 percent to 71.7 percent, in Punjab from 40.7 percent to 85.5
percent, and in Sindh from 25.9 percent to 70.4 percent.

The 80 percent target for the combined number of Executive District Officers and Executive District Officers
for Health who attended mid-level management training courses in each province was fully achieved or
exceeded. In Sindh the achievement was 43 percent, short of the target of 80 percent.

The percentage of UCs in each province for which revised computerized UC-level micro plans were in
functional use at district and provincial levels exceeded the targets (ranging from 80 to 90 percent) in all
provinces, achieving 100 percent in KP, Punjab, and Sindh, and 93 percent in Balochistan.

The 100 percent target for UCs in each province with at least two skilled staff capable of providing
immunization was achieved at 100 percent in KP, Punjab and Sindh, and at 81 percent in Balochistan.

The 100 percent target for detailed UC supervisory plans implemented by district supervisors and made
available to supervising officers in each province was achieved at 100 percent in KP, Punjab, and Sindh; and
at 89 percent in Balochistan.

The 96 percent target for districts in each province having functional cold chain equipment in place (as per
specifications to exceed 95 percent in each tier of health system) was achieved at 100 percent in all
provinces.

The percentage of districts in each province with recognized surveillance sites having functional online
surveillance for Vaccine Preventable Diseases & Adverse Events Following Immunization was 100 percent in
all provinces, exceeding the common target of 80 percent.

The percentage of secure districts in each province with functional electronic tracking of vaccinators and
supervisors exceeded the targets in all provinces, reaching 100 percent in KP, Punjab, and Sindh; and 55
percent in Balochistan.

The percentage of districts in each province with at least 80 percent in terms of timeliness and completeness
of reporting on vLMIS was achieved at 100 percent in all districts.

The project intensified its activities focusing on low children coverage in urban slums and supported two new
related DLIs in 2020 (see Section 2d).



Outcomes

Notable progress was made in increasing equitable coverage for immunization in all provinces, but with wide
variability in reducing disparities (see Table 1 below) measured in terms of wealth status. Two provinces
attained their targets and two others did not, and had variable progress. In Punjab, disparities in immunization
were reduced from 41 percent to 1 percent, significantly exceeding the target of 28 percent. In Balochistan,
disparities were reduced from 35 percent to 23 percent, essentially meeting the target of 20 percent. In KP,
disparities were reduced from 43 percent to 38 percent, short of the target of 15 percent. In Sindh, disparities



                                                                                                    Page 8 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   NISP (P132308)



were reduced from 30 percent to 24 percent, short of the target of 15 percent. Nevertheless, in the latter two
provinces, perceptible progress was made in a complex area of equity.

Table 1: Reduction of inequity in immunization coverage by wealth status (measured by Penta3 coverage in
each province between the lowest and highest wealth quintile):

                                                                Actual
                                                                achievement in
                    Baseline December                                           % of target
Province                                    Original target     June 2022
                    2014                                                       achievement

Balochistan         35%                     20%                 23%               80%
KP                  43%                     15%                 38%               18%
Punjab              41%                     28%                 1%                Exceeded
Sindh               30%                     15%                 24%               40%



In terms of overall immunization coverage, all provinces documented considerable improvements in full
immunization coverage, also with variability among provinces. Punjab significantly exceeded its coverage
target, increasing from 66 percent to 88.5 percent, exceeding the target of 77 percent. Sindh had significant
progress from 29 percent to 68 percent, but remained moderately short of its target of 80 percent. In
Balochistan, immunization coverage more than doubled from 16 percent in 2014 to 37.9 percent in 2022, but
was short of the target of 65 percent. KP showed some progress, increasing from 53 percent to 60.5 percent,
falling short of its target of 80 percent. Penta3 coverage and drop-out rates also showed mixed results while
Punjab exceeded its targets. The Task Team reported on May 31, 2023 that there were shortcomings in
tracking and vaccinating highly mobile populations and displaced families, especially in KP.

At the aggregate national level, the increase in fully immunized children was significant. The ICR (p. 17)
reported that, based on data collected during the final year of project implementation (2021-2022), the actual
national coverage achieved, in terms of the proportion of children who were fully immunized, was 76.4
percent, as compared with the baseline of 53 percent (2014 Comprehensive Multiyear Plan for Immunization).
By design, the project did not set a national coverage target given the variability in coverage and uptake of
services among provinces and because its strategy was to focus attention on promoting provincial ownership
and accountability in terms of equitable coverage and program strengthening.

Gender disaggregated data by province were not provided by the ICR; however, the latter reported that there
was no perceptible variation by gender under the project, with 76.6 percent of female children and 76.2
percent of male children having been fully vaccinated. The ICR noted that both male and female children had
equal access and were administered vaccines, and that there was no evidence suggesting preferential
vaccination of male or female children (ICR, p. 19).

Outcomes were supported by significant achievements in intermediate results, as noted above, and by
important health system strengthening, positively impacting the immunization program. Pivotal gains were
made in operational, institutional, and financing aspects. These included the consolidation under one
umbrella of scattered financing for Routine Immunization; establishment of a pooled procurement mechanism
for Routine Immunization to ensure timely availability of vaccines; adoption of staffing standards; vaccine


                                                                                                  Page 9 of 19
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                NISP (P132308)



                            safety monitoring; well-functioning cold chain; development of annual immunization accounts; establishment
                            of EPI-specific Drawing and Disbursing Officer (DDO) codes for tracking EPI fund flows and management;
                            improved budget predictability and utilization (budget releases in FY2021 were 100 percent of the allocated
                            amounts); and, importantly, the regularization of EPI funding under the recurrent budget, thus raising the
                            prospect of domestic financial sustainability of immunization.

                            The above transfer of the EPI budget from the development budget to the recurrent budget at both federal
                            and provincial levels was of significance, as it would contribute to the availability of domestic financing for
                            immunization. This budget regularization was spearheaded by the Government of Pakistan and incentivized
                            by DLI 9 (see Section 2d). It was also facilitated by a prior policy action under a separate development policy
                            financing arrangement between the World Bank and the Government of Pakistan (ICR, p. 26). In addition,
                            and since the start of the project, there was a gradual increase in the domestic share of EPI financing. The
                            aggregate impact of the project contributed to an increase in the provincial share of total EPI expenditures
                            from 49.7 percent in FY2011 to 89.2 percent in FY2018 (ICR, p. 26).

                            Under the “Borrower, Co-financier, and other Partner/ Stakeholder Comments” (ICR, Annex 3, pp. 62-65), the
                            Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation noted that financial incentives succeeded in promoting the engagement of
                            provincial leadership in the finance and health sectors, and that the project was very effective at policy and
                            finance changes, but that the extent of fully addressing program performance issues remained an open
                            question.

                            Based on all of the above findings, the achievement of the stated objective is rated substantial, but marginally
                            so, as there was modest achievement of two intended outcomes used in the assessment of overall efficacy.




                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The objective to increase the equitable coverage of services for immunization against VPDs for children
                            between 0 and 23 months in Pakistan was almost fully achieved, indicative of a substantial rating for overall
                            efficacy. The substantial rating was at a marginal level as noted above.




                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial


                                                                                                                             Page 10 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      NISP (P132308)




 5. Efficiency
In the global context, child immunization is known to be among the most cost-effective public health
interventions (World Development Report, 1993). Its benefits in enhancing human capital contribute to improving
the welfare of the society, increasing labor productivity, and ultimately to reducing poverty.

At appraisal, the PAD’s economic analysis was based on scenarios of the burden of disease from VPD. An
analysis titled “Global Burden of Diseases, Injuries, and Risk Factors Study 1990-2010," published in 2013 by
the Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation, an independent global health research center founded by the Bill
& Melinda Gates Foundation at the University of Washington, included results for Pakistan and assumed three
scenarios with different Disability Adjusted Life Years (DALYs): (i) low scenario of 39,156 DALYS per 100,000
population; (ii) mean scenario of 56,984 DALYs per 100,000 population; and (iii) high scenario of 85,229 DALYs
per 100,000 population (PAD, p. 14).

According to the high scenario, the project would be expected to save about 1.16 million DALYs over the five
years of the project. Using a 3 percent discount rate, the minimum discounted economic value was estimated at
US$1,719 million. The total present value of benefits would be higher, as benefits would continue beyond the
five-year implementation period. The total DALYs saved until 2030 were estimated at 3.34 million DALYs that
would contribute US$5,491 million in present value terms. According to the mean scenario, the estimated
DALYs averted were 0.4 million over the next five years and about 1.7 million by the end of 2030. The
corresponding economic gains were estimated at US$590 million and US$2,816 million. Under the low scenario,
the project was expected to save 0.27 million DALYs over the life of the project and 1.17 million DALYs by the
end of 2030. The corresponding monetary gains were estimated at US$405 million and US$1,935 million,
respectively. In all scenarios, the PAD concluded that benefits greatly exceeded costs. Therefore, the economic
analysis concluded that the project was economically justified.

The ICR’s economic analysis built on appraisal findings and noted that the most recent data available from the
Global Burden of Disease Study (https://vizhub.healthdata.org/gbd-results/) indicated that the loss of DALYs in
Pakistan due to eight common vaccine-preventable illnesses decreased by 33 percent between 2010 and 2019.
This in turn decreased the estimated annual economic benefit of project interventions. Nevertheless, the
estimated benefits continued to greatly exceed estimated costs, and the reduced burden of disease partly
reflected the prevention impact to which the project contributed.

The ICR estimated the cost of fully immunizing a child in Pakistan. At appraisal, the cost was estimated at
US$64, based on provincial data for 2011–2012. The economic analysis at appraisal assumed that the average
weighted cost per fully immunized child would increase to US$129 in 2024/25. However, based on data
collected during the final year of project implementation (2021-2022), the average weighted cost per fully
immunized child was estimated at US$42. This lower cost at the ICR stage reflected efficiencies gained during
the life of the project, including improvements in overall immunization operations, cold chain capacity and
logistics, and pooled procurement of vaccines.

At the same time, some other implementation aspects moderately reduced overall efficiency, and these included
factors beyond the control of the project. The ICR (p. 23) reported that the cost of vaccines increased globally,
thus increasing fiscal pressure. There was a delay in conducting Third-Party Verification Immunization Coverage
Surveys. The implementation of the Environmental and Social Management Plan remained a challenge in the
initial years of the project (ICR, p. 25). Capacity constraints in procurement staff (non-EPI personnel) were
observed (ICR, p. 27). There were frequent transfers and changes in EPI leadership, both at the federal and
provincial levels, affecting the continuity of dialogue and follow up (ICR, p. 64). Security challenges adversely

                                                                                                   Page 11 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      NISP (P132308)



affected implementation in some areas. Given the political sensitivity and security risks surrounding
immunization and polio eradication in Pakistan, the project encountered limitations in accessing some tribal
areas (ICR, p. 24). The COVID-19 pandemic caused understandable disruptions in immunization delivery in
2020, and the subsequent national response to the pandemic used the EPI platform for COVID-19 vaccination
rollout and deployment, resulting in the temporary diversion of human resources and attention away from EPI.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     0
 Appraisal                                                  0
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     0
 ICR Estimate                                               0
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of the development objective was rated high in view of full alignment with country and World Bank
strategies, and because childhood immunization remains among the “best buys” in global health. Efficacy is
rated substantial as the development objective was almost fully achieved, but marginally so. Efficiency is rated
substantial in view of the high cost-effectiveness of childhood immunizations, but with some negative
implementation aspects that moderately reduced efficiency. The aggregation of these findings is indicative of a
moderately satisfactory outcome rating.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The gains made in operational, institutional, and financing aspects as described in Section 4 are likely to help
EPI maintain its achievements and to continue making progress beyond the project’s lifetime (ICR, p. 62).
The ICR (p. 28) highlighted the fact that the project strengthened the immunization program to the point at
which the provincial governments were willing to finance related expenditures under their regular recurrent
budget allocations. This ended more than 30 years of development-mode status of this core public health
priority. The resilience of Pakistan’s immunization program was also demonstrated in the context of arising
challenges in security-compromised areas and during the unprecedented challenges of the COVID-19

                                                                                                    Page 12 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NISP (P132308)



pandemic. Although Pakistan’s investment in public health is low by international standards, the fundamental
importance of immunization to child health—and to the building of human capital—is recognized at all levels
of government and remains strongly supported by the international community. The above considerations led
the ICR to conclude that the risk to development outcomes is low. This ICR Review concurs with the ICR’s
overall risk assessment without dismissing the likelihood that higher risks to the outcomes already achieved
may continue to oscillate as a result of security threats in localized areas.

Going forward, further immunization equity may be realized through more demand generation and deeper
granularity in monitoring and managing inequities in EPI operations. Importantly, in the long run,
immunization equity would continue to depend on the challenging endeavors to address broader socio-
economic determinants affecting immunization access and demand.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The overall design and financing instrument were well suited to support clearly defined provincial
  immunization programs. The choice to direct the majority of project financing to provincial governments
  under a results-based mechanism recognized their primary role and prevented bottlenecks that were
  previously encountered in other development projects that used input-based financing at the central level.
  This approach was complemented by technical assistance and support for system strengthening. Co-
  financing arrangements effectively accommodated other donors and coordinated their financial and
  technical assistance.

  Preparation was informed by analytical work undertaken by the World Bank and summarized in a 2012
  HNP Discussion Paper “The Expanded Program on Immunization in Pakistan: Recommendations for
  Improving Performance." This study indicated that underachievement of the program in the past was due
  to a combination of factors thematically linked under management, performance, and accountability. The
  analysis also underlined the importance of demand-side aspects, notably barriers to health-seeking
  behavior (PAD, p. 9). Implementation arrangements were informed by the ICR of the Pakistan HIV/AIDS
  Prevention Project, which identified difficulties in implementing a nation-wide umbrella project. Hence, the
  project design emphasized provincial ownership and accountability, whereby each province would have
  province-specific targets and would be independently monitored and incentivized along with a direct flow
  of funds.

  Institutional and implementation arrangements were the same as those of the government’s EPI program
  (PAD, p. 10). Under the federal system, responsibility for financing and delivery of health services was
  devolved to the four provinces. Provincial program activities were to be implemented by the four
  provincial EPI cells, supported by the federal EPI cell within the Ministry of National Health Services,
  Regulation and Coordination (MONHSRC). The main five implementing entities would coordinate their
  activities with respective health and finance departments, and the Accountant General Office.

  The overall quality of the PAD was high. Fiduciary assessment at appraisal was comprehensive, and the
  project had a robust implementation support/supervision plan. Appraisal was based on recent
  government policies and processes in immunization, notably the Comprehensive Multi-Year Plan,
  provincial financing plans, polio eradication strategies, and the decision of the Executive Committee of

                                                                                                   Page 13 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NISP (P132308)



  the National Economic Council on pooled vaccine financing (ICR, p. 28). Substantial risks were
  adequately identified with corresponding mitigation measures, including for governance and fiduciary
  aspects, stakeholder risks, and implementation capacities.

  While preparation was satisfactory overall, there were some shortcomings that had minor consequences.
  The ICR (p. 25) reported that there was an initial lack of understanding of the Environmental and Social
  Management Plan (ESMP) by the government, and that this issue subsequently contributed to challenges
  in its early implementation while also noting that related performance and compliance was satisfactory at
  project closing. There were misunderstandings at the level of implementing agencies on the flow of funds
  under the DLI mechanism that was to be discharged via the Departments of Finance and not through
  World Bank disbursements to a Designated Account (ICR, p. 22). Nevertheless, financial management
  was assessed as satisfactory. The ICR reported that, during preparation, there were multiple institutional
  changes in implementation responsibilities at the federal level and turnover of government officials that
  slowed the pace of preparation. The latter issues were not attributable to the Bank Task Team. Also, they
  may have affected the speed of preparation but not its ultimate quality.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The ICR (p. 28) reported that sharing one vision among partners and instituting a joint monitoring and
 supervision framework greatly reduced fragmentation in international assistance to Pakistan’s
 immunization program. Supervision reportedly focused closely on concrete progress with regular tracking
 of indicators in the joint monitoring framework. Policy dialogue of the Task Team with provincial
 governments was enhanced by the DLI financing mechanism and the close engagement of the
 departments of finance and health. The ICR (p. 22) reported that the World Bank Team had close
 coordination with development partners (USAID, GAVI, and Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation), and with UN
 agencies, namely UNICEF and WHO. Collaboration with UNICEF and GAVI in vaccine procurement and
 utilizing the cold chain platform launched by GAVI ensured a smooth flow of vaccines, averting shortages
 and implementation delays (ICR, p. 23). In addition to intensive supervision and implementation support
 efforts, the Task Team was also responsible for executing analytical and policy activities. In this context,
 the ICR was of the view that staff time allocations may have been insufficient. If substantiated, this remark
 may reflect an issue that would be attributable to broader institutional considerations within the World Bank,
 and not to Task Team performance.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory




                                                                                                   Page 14 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NISP (P132308)



9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The development objective was clearly stated and reflected by the selected PDO indicators. The results
 chain was clear and systematic, although it would have been strengthened by further explaining how
 inequities would be monitored. Data would be collected and analyzed by the provinces, supported by
 technical assistance and sound methodologies used globally. Immunization outcomes and intermediate
 results would be tracked using an annual coverage evaluation survey that provided the basis of third-party
 verification. Federal and provincial EPI cells would prepare an Annual DLI Results Report to be reviewed
 by the National ICC and then to inform the steering committee of MDTF during the World Bank’s biannual
 supervision missions. The results of DLI achievements would trigger disbursements. PDO indicators were
 province-specific by design, as explained in Section 4. Third-party verification analyses would include,
 among other criteria, gender, maternal years of education, economic status, and urban/rural residence
 (ICR, p. 24).



b. M&E Implementation
  M&E implementation proceeded adequately with some challenges. Given the political sensitivity and
  security risks surrounding immunization and polio eradication in Pakistan, the project encountered access
  limitations in some tribal areas, thus delaying or hindering activities, including M&E, in those areas (ICR,
  p. 24). Since verification of PDO indicators and corresponding DLIs relied on a national household
  survey, the first round had to be delayed as another national survey had already been contracted by a
  partner agency (ICR, p. 23). In conjunction with the additional financing grant provided by GAVI in
  November 2020, the project added three intermediate indicators (two of which were DLIs; see Section
  2d). This was prompted by EPI data showing that a proportion of children were not receiving adequate
  immunization services in urban slums. The ICR (p. 27) stated that gender-disaggregated data were
  tracked in all PDO indicators, although such data was not reported by province in the results framework.



c. M&E Utilization
  M&E findings were used for regular project monitoring, informed decision-making, and triggering
  disbursements. The reports prepared by the federal and provincial EPI cells informed the national ICC
  and the steering committee of MDTF. Findings were widely shared, and co-financing partners used the
  project indicators and reporting framework for their own grant monitoring and for other separate
  investments. This common utilization increased efficiency in M&E. The ICR Team was informed about
  continued innovative use of global positioning and monitoring systems using vaccinators' cell phones to
  track health worker performance and to contribute to informing corrective actions. M&E helped to reveal
  lagging progress in urban areas, prompting added attention to such areas (ICR, p. 24).




  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

                                                                                                   Page 15 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NISP (P132308)




10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project triggered Safeguard Policy OP/BP 4.01-- Environmental Assessment and was classified as
   Category B. The risks were mainly related to the generation of health care waste associated with
   vaccinations, such as sharps, syringes, gauzes, and unused vaccines. An ESMP was prepared and
   disclosed, and the project emphasized the need to adhere to updated EPI guidelines.

   The implementation of the ESMP was initially challenging, and there was no dedicated specialist in the first
   two years of implementation. Subsequently, the government hired dedicated ESMP coordinators (one at the
   federal level and one in each of the four provinces), thus facilitating improvements in compliance. The
   project ensured the use of auto disposable syringes in all vaccination centers and the availability of safety
   boxes. The cold chain was managed effectively in vaccination centers, assisted by a robust vLMIS. Various
   actions were taken to improve the handling of health waste at EPI centers, including: (a) the use of color-
   coded waste bins; (b) adoption of standard operating procedures for safe handling of waste disposal; (c)
   upgrading of pits to avoid open burning; (d) transport of waste to available nearby incineration facilities; (e)
   compliance monitoring through frequent site visits by ESMP coordinators along with adequate
   documentation and reporting; and (f) training at provincial, district, and UC levels. The ICR (p. 26) reported
   that, with regular follow-up from the World Bank Task Team, the government took strenuous efforts to
   improve medical waste management and developed, in 2020, National Guidelines for Infection and
   Prevention.

   According to the Operations Portal, the overall safeguards rating was moderately satisfactory during most of
   the project period, and the final rating was upgraded to satisfactory.

   MoNHSRC established a help line for a grievance redress mechanism (GRM) that was accessible across
   the country. Sign boards and complaint registers were maintained at most EPI centers, where a GRM
   committee and a focal person were nominated. A record of all complaints was maintained by the EPI
   program. In addition to the helpline, EPI received complaints through a nationwide GRM initiative (Pakistan
   Citizen’s Portal) that was launched by the Federal Government, and the Portal covered all services.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Despite a high fiduciary risk rating at appraisal, the project was mostly fiduciary compliant, and its fiduciary
   performance was satisfactory overall. The ICR reported that financial management was further improved
   and strengthened throughout the implementation period. Compliance in terms of interim financial
   statements and audits was satisfactory. EPI audits were carried out by the Auditor General of Pakistan,
   and the ICR did not report any qualifications. The ICR noted that the flow of funds was adequate, with
   some delays in fund flows from the provincial departments of finance to the provincial program in
   Balochistan and KP. Internal control was assessed as moderately satisfactory. UNICEF Financial
   Utilization Reports were satisfactory. The final financial management performance was assessed as
   satisfactory, and the ICR reported that, at the end of the project, EPI was fully embedded in the country



                                                                                                      Page 16 of 19
        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
        NISP (P132308)



   systems, and that EPI expenditure could be tracked through the National Financial Accounting and
   Budgeting System (ICR, p. 78).

   Some challenges were encountered. District Health Officers had capacity limitations that necessitated
   further training to improve budget preparation. While EPI-specific DDO codes were fully operational in
   Sindh, KP, and Balochistan, there was a lag in Punjab, where the codes were used in 21 out of 36 District
   Health Authorities (ICR, p. 27). In Balochistan, the operational budget was not sufficient to meet district
   operational needs in some instances due to insufficient anticipation of service delivery needs. Constraints
   in staffing capacity for procurement were identified during the implementation period, and the fact that
   procurement officers were not on EPI’s regular payroll was a contributing factor.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   As a positive unintended impact, the ICR (p. 22) reported that project implementation arrangements and
   procurement mechanisms greatly facilitated Pakistan’s rapid emergency response to the COVID-19
   pandemic, and that the first procurement of personal protective equipment in the region was deployed
   through the project, facilitated by legal arrangements with UN partners.



d. Other
   --



11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                           ICR                   IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
                                  Moderately
Outcome                                                Moderately Satisfactory
                                  Satisfactory
Bank Performance                  Satisfactory         Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                    Substantial          Substantial

Quality of ICR                    ---                  Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR (pp. 28-29 and pp. 67-68) provided several lessons and recommendations, including the
following lessons re-stated by IEG Review:

         Partnerships and coordination among development partners can provide effective support to
          the immunization agenda within one project mechanism. Under the project, this resulted in
          more than five years of joint investment decision-making, supervision, policy dialogue, and
          effective coordination. In addition, using the buy-down mechanism of the Bill and Melinda

                                                                                                    Page 17 of 19
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       NISP (P132308)



         Gates Foundation helped the country in alleviating incremental debt obligations during a
         period of turbulent economic circumstances.

        The strategic focus on strengthening the immunization program at subnational levels is
         responsive to province-specific development challenges and allows the central government
         and development partners to promote a continued engagement with provinces that showed
         lagging performance, and to jointly identify options for advancing universal health coverage,
         including immunization.

        The availability of timely, reliable, and verified data on immunization coverage helps in
         identifying weaknesses in immunization programs and in guiding corrective actions. Under
         the project, M&E findings were instrumental in identifying under-performance in urban
         centers and slums, resulting in intensified efforts and oversight.

        The institutionalization of a national pooled procurement mechanism for vaccines, based on
         provincial demands, can ensure a continuous and uninterrupted supply of competitively
         priced vaccines.

        Fostering community-led approaches, links, and mutual trust can facilitate the expansion of
         immunization service delivery and demand generation. The project facilitated community
         engagement mainly through Civil Society Organizations working in low-coverage catchment
         areas. The project also sensitized political bodies and religious leadership to help in
         advancing immunization efforts.




13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provided an adequate account of project performance. It was results-oriented. The theory of change
was clear and systematic in illustrating the pathway toward intended outcomes. The ICR’s narrative was candid
and aligned to the development objective. The ICR’s analysis was thorough, well organized, and supported by
adequate evidence. Both the narrative and the evidence supported the ICR’s overall conclusions. In addition to
intended outcomes, the ICR reported on other pivotal gains in health system strengthening, including in its
financing. Lessons were derived from project experience. The ICR was reasonably concise, with moderate
inconsistencies and repetitiveness.




                                                                                                     Page 18 of 19
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  NISP (P132308)



a. Quality of ICR Rating
   Substantial




                                                                    Page 19 of 19
