     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Employment Opportunities for Vuln. Youth (P157036)



                                                                                Report Number: ICRR0023074

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P157036                                    Employment Opportunities for Vuln. Youth

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Togo                                       Social Protection & Jobs


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)              Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-D1730                                  31-Dec-2020                                        15,529,364.06

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 21-Mar-2017                                31-Dec-2021

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                    Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            15,000,000.00                                             0.00

 Revised Commitment                             15,000,000.00                                             0.00

 Actual                                         15,529,364.06                                             0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator        Group
 Judith Hahn Gaubatz         Salim J. Habayeb             Eduardo Fernandez             IEGHC (Unit 2)
                                                          Maldonado




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Financing Agreement (page 5) and the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, page 14), the
   project objective was as follows:

           To provide access to income generating opportunities to targeted poor and vulnerable youth in
           the Recipient's territory.



                                                                                                 Page 1 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Employment Opportunities for Vuln. Youth (P157036)




   Note: The wording for one of the key project indicators was revised at the time of project restructuring;
   however, it was a clarification of the targeting method, not a change to the original intent or scope of the
   indicator. Therefore a split evaluation is not applicable.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   1. Community Service and Training (Appraisal: US$ 8.5 million; Actual: US$ 8.25 million): The aim of the
   component was to give poor and vulnerable youth, who have generally never held a structured work
   opportunity, the chance to develop good work habits and gain civic values through working on community
   public works projects. The community works would be selected and managed by Village Development
   Committees. The project would finance stipends to beneficiary youth, and limited funds to cover inputs,
   training and administrative costs. Beneficiaries would be provided with a bank account, in which a specified
   portion of their earnings would be retained to provide part of the seed capital for launching an income
   generating activity. On-the-job training included technical skills and knowledge, as well as life skills training
   and micro-entrepreneurial training.

   2. Support for Income-Generating Activities (Appraisal: US$ 2.5 million; Actual: US$ 2.62 million): The aim
   of the component was to provide those beneficiaries who complete the above phase of the program with a
   matching grant to top-up the savings generated during the community service, as well as mentoring to
   establish or scale up income generating activities.

   3. Capacity building (Appraisal: US$ 1.0 million; Actual: US$ 0.99 million): The aim of this component was
   to help the government design and strengthen key operational tools for implementing youth employment
   programs, including geographic targeting, community-based targeting and proxy-means testing,
   management information and payment systems, program evaluation, and a grievance redress
   mechanism. The component also aimed to help communities implement the public works projects and
   promote accountability, including training in the Grassroots Management Training approach,

   4. Project management (Appraisal: US$ 3.0 million; Actual: US$ 2.91 million); The aim of this component
   was to support activities related to project management and coordination.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project cost

         The project cost at appraisal was US$ 15.0 million, and the actual amount disbursed was US$ 15.5
          million.


                                                                                                       Page 2 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Employment Opportunities for Vuln. Youth (P157036)



         In 2020, funds were reallocated from Component 4 to Component 3, due to the increase in the
            number of beneficiary communities from 140 to 200. In 2021, funds were reallocated from Project
            Preparation Funds (PPF) to Category 1 funds to cover exchange rate losses, to ensure that there
            would be enough resources to sustain the project operation after the one-year project extension, and
            to purchase personal protective equipment and handwashing devices at all project sites due to
            COVID.

   Financing

         The project was financed by an IDA grant of US$15.0 million, which disbursed in its entirety.

   Borrower contribution

         There was no planned Borrower contribution.

   Dates

         March 21, 2017: Project approval.
         November 29, 2017: The legal covenants were revised to reflect the delay in recruiting the
            safeguards specialists (original date was November 2017; revised date was three months later).
           November 30, 2017: Project effectiveness.
           October 4, 2019: Mid-Term Review.
           March 17, 2020: The project was restructured to revise the wording of one key project indicator (to
            reflect the actual targeting method used) and to extend the closing date from December 2020 to
            December 2021 (due to additional time needed to complete the mentoring activities).
           December 31, 2021: Project closing.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Togo is a small country in Africa with a population of about 7.3 million, ranked 162 out of 188 countries in
the Human Development Index (2015). The poverty headcount rate was 55.1 percent in 2015. The country
has a high proportion of youth - 75 percent below the age of 35 and 60 percent below the age of 25. 54
percent of the working age population is 35 years old or younger. While the overall unemployment rate is
low at 2.4 percent, the real underlying issue is underemployment, which is at 35 percent. Poorer and
vulnerable youth tend to not meet the formal definition of unemployed as they often perform ad hoc work to
earn a survival livelihood at very low levels of productivity. For underemployed youth, their lower level of
earnings and productivity has a longer-lived impact on the economy, compared to older individuals.

In response to these issues, the government adopted several strategic documents that aim to improve
youth employment indicators, in order to contribute to the overall socioeconomic development of the
country. The various strategies aim to improve youth entrepreneurship, strengthen labor market-adapted

                                                                                                    Page 3 of 15
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Employment Opportunities for Vuln. Youth (P157036)



               vocational skills, and improve education quality and access to finance, alongside labor market
               interventions to increase the supply of jobs. The project objectives are well-aligned with these strategic
               directions, with a particular focus on poor and vulnerable youth.

               The Bank's Country Partnership Framework for FY17- FY20, which was under preparation at the time of
               project appraisal and then subsequently extended to FY22, included private sector performance and job
               creation as a Focus Area, with improved business and employment opportunities as an objective and
               "improved employment options for Togolese youth" as an indicator. In order to improve productivity and
               competitiveness, the Bank framework aimed to address key gaps in skills and employment opportunities.




               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To provide access to income generating opportunities to targeted poor and vulnerable youth in Togo.

                             Rationale
                             The theory of change was clear. The planned activities to hire poor and vulnerable youth to participate in
                             community public works projects, provide them with on-the-job training and life skills/ entrepreneurship
                             training, and provide seed capital and mentoring to launch income generating activities were likely to lead to
                             the outcome to increase access to income generating activities. The targeting mechanisms - geographic
                             targeting, community identification of potential beneficiaries, and confirmation of beneficiaries through proxy-
                             means test - were straightforward to ensure that poor and vulnerable youth were beneficiaries.

                             This project supported an extension of the government's national volunteer initiative, which aimed to provide
                             opportunities for youth to gain work experience and skills, through community service projects. The
                             government program was initially designed for university graduates, with this project expanding the program
                             to reach youth with little or no education, specifically those with a disability or those who did not finish primary
                             school. The program consisted of two phases: (1) participation in a community service project which provided
                             a platform for on-the-job training in technical skills, life skills training, and micro-entrepreneurship training; and
                             (2) financial and mentoring support for launching and operating an income generating activity. Only those
                             participants who completed the first phase received the financial grants in the second phase.

                             Outputs

                             Using a community-driven approach, public works projects were selected and managed by Village
                             Development Committees, with financing for stipends for youth, on-the-job training, and administrative costs

                                                                                                                                    Page 4 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Employment Opportunities for Vuln. Youth (P157036)



(maximum of 40% of total sub-project cost). Depending on the predominant economic activity in the village,
projects would either be agricultural (on land allocated by the community) or other (i.e. road maintenance,
rehabilitation of public buildings, drainage, environmental rehabilitation).

      Community public works projects implemented in 200 villages (target: 140) in the 150 poorest
         cantons. Realized assets included 116 rehabilitated or created rural roads, 40 water reservoirs to
         support vegetable gardening and livestock activities, 20 reforestation works and community
         plantations, 6 quarries, 15 agriculture sub-projects, and sanitation sub-projects. As noted in the ICR
         (page 15), anecdotal evidence indicated a strong sense of ownership of realized public works by
         community members, and their commitment to work on maintenance after the end of the project. In
         addition, community capacity building provided an important entry point for women to participate in
         sub-projects (note: to ensure the participation of at least 50% women beneficiaries, village
         development committees prioritized sub-projects suitable to and appealing for women in the village).
        Stipends paid to youth beneficiaries for their community service (Note: the total amount paid in
         stipends was 67% of total subproject costs, achieving the target of 60%). Beneficiaries were also
         provided with bank accounts, with a specified portion of their earnings retained in the account to
         provide part of the seed capital for launching an income-generating activity in the second phase.
        Life-skills and entrepreneurial training provided to beneficiaries. The training was based on the
         existing FODA model, including discussions on entrepreneurial behaviors, generation of ideas,
         rudimentary market assessment, evaluation of inputs and equipment required, and basic financial
         literacy, analysis and business plan.
        Training provided to Village Development Committees on identifying beneficiaries.
        Matching grants and mentoring provided to second phase beneficiaries (top-up to savings in bank
         account) to provide start-up capital for income generating activities. These activities included trading
         activities and small businesses (46%), food processing (20%) and livestock raising (17%).
        Capacity building support to government to design and implement youth employment programs
         including targeting mechanisms, management information system, payment system, program
         evaluation, and a grievance mechanism.
        Capacity building support to villages, using the grassroots management training approach, including
         information, communication, organizing, poverty and needs assessment, planning and procurement,
         and infrastructure maintenance. The ICR (page 22) noted that difficulties were reported in properly
         implementing FODA training in certain regions, due to the lack of qualified trainers. Given the target
         group of the project, mostly made up of youth who were not literate or did not complete primary
         school, the FODA training was to be delivered in the local language, a requirement which proved to be
         a challenge in certain regions. Also, due to COVID-19 and associated shutdowns, an
         abbreviated FODA module was created and delivered in the remaining 44 villages.

However, there were challenges at the start of the project period that delayed the launch of activities: delays
in the study of existing employment opportunities and the large share of youth in the villages did not have
identity documents which were necessary to open bank accounts. These challenges meant that the new
agricultural season had already started without the beneficiaries being able to take full advantage of income-
generating activities right away.

Outcomes




                                                                                                   Page 5 of 15
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Employment Opportunities for Vuln. Youth (P157036)




                                  14,415 beneficiaries in the 150 poorest cantons participated in the community sub-projects, achieving
                                     the target of 14,000. Of these, 60% were female (target: 50%). 95% were living with a disability or
                                     had not finished primary school, surpassing the target of 90%.
                                    1,120,219 person-days were worked in community service projects, achieving the target of 1,120,000.
                                    14,120 beneficiaries received training on business development (target: 12,500). Of these, 99%
                                     prepared a business plan with the support of a coach.
                                    11,495 beneficiaries (including 124 people with disabilities) were able to meet the savings requirement
                                     and received start up grants and 5-6 months of coaching to help launch or expand their income
                                     generating activities (target: 10,000). As reported in the ICR (page 14), beneficiaries reported
                                     that access to mentorship helped them overcome common challenges faced when setting up or
                                     scaling up their business, such as identifying available opportunities or marketing strategies that could
                                     be relevant in the local context. Also, the ICR mission noted the continuation of the income
                                     generating activities even after the six months of coaching, which have become their main source of
                                     income to provide for daily expenses such as food, education of children, and health services.
                                    10,805 beneficiaries were employed or self-employed six months after receiving the start-up grant (of
                                     these, 430 beneficiaries were approved for the grant but chose not to initiate an income-generating
                                     activity due to the opportunity for salaried employment elsewhere).
                                    52% of stipend payments were made within one week of due dates, falling short of the target of
                                     80%. The ICR (page 13) noted that this shortcoming was due to delays in payments to villages
                                     during the first phase of implementation.
                                    97% of beneficiaries felt that the community sub-projects reflected their needs, surpassing the target
                                     of 80%.
                                    83% of community sub-projects were of satisfactory technical quality, achieving the target of 80%.

                            In addition, anecdotal evidence gathered through the ICR mission (reported in the ICR, page 18) suggested
                            that gender dynamics have positively changed in households and villages. Women’s participation in the
                            program led to enhanced self-confidence and increased respect within the household (as they are now
                            perceived as breadwinners and less dependent on their husbands), and increased self-confidence due
                            to participation in village meetings to discuss sub-project activities.




                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Achievement of the objective to increase access to income generating opportunities for poor and vulnerable
                            youth is rated Substantial due to evidence of participation in community sub-projects, followed by launching of
                            income generative activities, including meeting of targets in the number of participants.


                                                                                                                                Page 6 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Employment Opportunities for Vuln. Youth (P157036)




  Overall Efficacy Rating
  Substantial



 5. Efficiency
At appraisal, the PAD did not provide a cost benefit analysis due to limited availability of data. Instead, the PAD
provided the economic rationale for the project, including increasing productivity and earnings for youth, and
economic (and social) benefits from the public works sub-projects. The appraisal also provided a comparison of
wage earnings for poor and vulnerable youth who would most likely find work in an economic activity with very
low productivity versus those with higher productivity (due to improved skills and access to capital).

At completion (ICR, Annex 4), a cost-benefit analysis was conducted that estimated the social rates of return
and also the efficiencies gained in pairing the two phases of the project. Benefits of the first phase (community
service projects) included income generated from stipends and for the second phase, increased wages from the
income-generating activities (subtracting the foregone income which represent opportunity costs). Costs were
actual projects for phase one and two activities. The estimated social rate of return ranged from 53% to 88% for
the first phase and 97% to 150% for the second phase. The analysis also noted that the cost-efficiency of the
sub-projects (US$3.50 spent to generate US$1.00 of income benefits) was on par with other labor intensive
public works projects implemented elsewhere, citing an earlier study which found that on average it takes
US$3.30 to US$5.72 to generate US$1.00 of income benefits.

Implementation efficiencies were likely realized by pairing the two phases of the project, by incentivizing
beneficiaries to only spend what is needed from their stipend payments and having the community service
projects act as a targeting mechanism for beneficiaries who then participated in the second phase. The increase
in efficiency from pairing the two types of interventions in this project’s design was shown by estimating the
returns to each component had they been implemented separately and comparing to the returns of the project
as it was implemented. Having beneficiaries use their savings as seed capital and providing the
entrepreneurship support/training during the subprojects yielded an increase of 30 to 40 percent greater return
as compared to separate implementation. Further implementation efficiency was gained by sharing
administrative functions with the ongoing Safety Nets and Basic Services Project (P157038) - both projects were
designed, launched, and implemented parallel with a view of using the same implementing agency (ANADEB)
from the start. Lastly, the actual targeting mechanisms were simplified as the original design intended to use a
proxy means test followed by community validation, however, in actuality, once geographical targeting of
poorest villages was carried out, additional poverty targeting to identify beneficiaries was not needed, because
self-selection through registration was deemed to be appropriate in a context of widespread poverty.

However, there were several challenges that affected project implementation: delays in key procurement
activities (including the study to identify employment opportunities), complaints about the grassroots
management training specialists that had to be resolved before continuing with implementation, delays in
conducting safeguards screening for all of the subprojects due to limited staff, and delays in signing of the
contract for delivery of training. There were also some inefficiencies when the planned sequencing of
subprojects around the harvest and lean seasons was not actualized in all cases due to the above
implementation delays, and lack of identity documents for a large number of beneficiaries also created obstacles



                                                                                                      Page 7 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Employment Opportunities for Vuln. Youth (P157036)



to and delays in enrollment. However, these challenges were resolved by project closing such that outputs were
delivered as planned.




Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?              Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     0
 Appraisal                                                  0
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     0
 ICR Estimate                                               0
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of objectives is rated High due to strong alignment with country conditions, government strategy, and
Bank strategy. Achievement of the objective to increase access to income generating opportunities for poor and
vulnerable youth is rated Substantial due to evidence of participation in activities that led to launching of income
generating activities. Efficiency is rated Substantial due to favorable cost comparisons and implementation
efficiencies realized by the project.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Institutional capacity has been strengthened through the project and is likely to be sustained, both at the
central level and at the local level. The main implementing agency (ANADEB) has become the
lead institution for all youth employment programs in the country. 200 local communities received grassroots
management training. Poor and vulnerable youth have been given access to financial institutions and
instilled with a culture of savings. However, the sustainability of community public works assets remains
unclear, with the ICR (page 31) noting that the budgeting of the necessary resources for these purposes has
yet to be approved.



                                                                                                      Page 8 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Employment Opportunities for Vuln. Youth (P157036)




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project design built on the government's experience with existing youth employment programs and
  on the Bank's experience with labor-intensive public works programs, including the lessons learned
  that integrating multiple interventions (technical and soft skills) for youth employment programs is more
  effective than technical skills alone. The project design featured a sequencing of activities to ensure
  beneficiaries’ continuous engagement and avoid dropouts, The project also took into consideration local
  context such as timing of subprojects due to harvest and lean seasons and predominant economic
  activity. Institutional arrangements were designed jointly with the Safety Nets and Basic Services project
  (P157038). Despite the above, there were some minor shortcomings in project design (lack of
  identification documents, migration of youth to urban areas and other countries, and burdensome
  administrative and transportation costs for decentralized financial system) which led to initial
  implementation delays.

  Risk was assessed as Moderate, with mitigation measures drawing from existing
  institutional arrangements and experience. The results framework was clear and straightforward, albeit
  with some minor shortcomings in two intermediate results indicators (community service sub-projects with
  satisfactory technical quality and beneficiaries who are employed or self-employed six months after
  receiving the start up grant) which led to a downgrade in the M&E rating in the final ISR from satisfactory
  to moderately satisfactory.

  Taking into account the whole context of operational, sectoral, and country aspects, quality at entry is
  rated Satisfactory due to minor shortcomings that had a limited impact on the ultimate achievement of
  intended outcomes.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The Bank team was highly proactive, with key staff based in-country and remaining on the task team from
 preparation to closing. The Bank team addressed numerous implementation challenges: delays in the
 procurement of a firm to conduct the study on existing employment opportunities and the firm that would
 deliver the training modules, difficulties in properly implementing the job skills training in certain regions
 due to lack of qualified trainers in local language, the large number of illiterate beneficiaries, and the lack of
 proper identification documents. These challenges led to delays in launching subprojects (thus the new
 agricultural season had already started without beneficiaries having been able to benefit from support for
 the creation and expansion of their income generating activities in the second phase) and delays in stipend
 payments which caused an initial lack of trust by beneficiaries. However, the project team was proactive in
 addressing these challenges, for example by establishing literacy centers, increasing the initial advance
 amount on the designated account to allow the pace of stipend payments to pick up, agreeing to cover

                                                                                                        Page 9 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Employment Opportunities for Vuln. Youth (P157036)



 account opening and travel costs for savings accounts, and setting up judiciary auditions to start the formal
 process for obtaining identity cards.

 In addition, a health state of emergency was declared in March 2020 due to the COVID-19 pandemic,
 which led to the temporary halt of project activities. However, the project team took measures to
 enable project activities to resume in the summer of 2020, such as the provision of personal protection
 equipment to beneficiaries and project staff, additional financial support to beneficiaries whose income
 generating activity in progress or whose business plan had been validated before the COVID-19 lockdown,
 a modification of the FODA training modules in the remaining 44 villages where the training had not been
 yet implemented.

 M&E activities were largely carried out as planned, with the establishment of the management information
 system as a key activity. Initial fiduciary challenges were addressed and no major shortcomings were
 noted.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Highly Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The results framework was clear and straightforward, with indicators measuring both key outputs and
 intended outcomes such as quality of subprojects and sustainability of income-generating opportunities.
 However, as noted above, two intermediate results indicators (community service sub-projects with
 satisfactory technical quality and beneficiaries who are employed or self-employed six months after
 receiving the start up grant) were deemed questionable by the final supervision team. Also, capacity
 building for government to design and implement youth employment programs did not have an indicator.
 Monitoring arrangements were simple and feasible, including developing a management information
 system as part of the project design. Targets were realistic given the newness of the operation and the
 implementing agency.

 Planned evaluative activities included technical and process evaluations at mid-term and an impact
 evaluation.



b. M&E Implementation
  The management information system was put in place at project launch, which tracked data on
  beneficiaries (gender, age, employment status) and enabled regular project monitoring, including
  participation of beneficiaries in the multiple activities, payments made, and results such as income
  generated by businesses. The ICR (page 25) noted that the structure of the system, which would draw

                                                                                                   Page 10 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Employment Opportunities for Vuln. Youth (P157036)



  from the regional systems to inform the central one, posed at times some challenges in terms of data
  consistency between the different regions as well as timeliness of updates.

  At the time of project restructuring, one of the key project indicators was revised to reflect the actual
  targeting method used, which was done by identifying the poorest cantons followed by a random
  selection of beneficiaries, and not by a proxy means test.

  The planned impact evaluation was dropped given that the methodology for targeting beneficiaries was
  changed from proxy-means testing to random selection and self- targeting (hence, a control group could
  not be established). Instead, a final evaluation was conducted on a sample of 20% of the 200 beneficiary
  villages, randomly selected, with 560 beneficiaries surveyed through a mobile application. The evaluation
  also included individual/focus group meetings with community development committees, intermediary
  NGOs, M&E firms/NGOs and coaches.



c. M&E Utilization
  The ICR (pages 25-26) reported that implementation progress was regularly tracked, with actions
  agreed upon at each supervision mission to improve the lagging indicators and/or their measurement.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as a Category "B" project due to small-scale public works. The project developed
   an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF), adapted from a prior labor
   project (P127200), which provided guidance on the screening process for the sub-projects. Some delay was
   reported in carrying out the environmental and social screening, due to the limited number of environmental
   and social safeguards staff. This was resolved with the recruitment of junior environmental and social
   consultants in all five regions, along with additional consultants to support the two safeguards specialists on
   project staff.

   OP 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement was triggered. Given that the exact location and type of sub-project
   that would be selected by the beneficiary communities were not known at the start of implementation phase,
   the project prepared and disclosed a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF). The RPF included templates
   for sub-project screening to identify any adverse social impacts and guided the preparation of subsequent
   Resettlement Action Plans as and when necessary. Many of the sub-projects required land
   acquisition through voluntary land donations, which were documented.

   OP/BP 4.11 on Physical Cultural Resources was triggered because physical cultural resources may be
   found during civil works activities, thus leading to a "chance find procedure".




                                                                                                      Page 11 of 15
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Employment Opportunities for Vuln. Youth (P157036)



  OP/BP 4.09 on Pest Management was triggered; the ESMP had a dedicated section on pest management.

  The project conducted two environmental and social audits to assess the level of compliance with the
  provisions of the environmental and social safeguards frameworks. Both audits concluded that environment
  and social safeguards requirements were complied with in a satisfactory manner. The closing environmental
  and social audit however, pointed to a few weaknesses including delays in the recruitment of junior
  environmental and social safeguards consultants in each region, some weaknesses in the implementation
  of measures recommended by the screening of sub-projects, the absence of compensatory reforestation of
  certain sub-project sites, and insufficient maintenance of a few sub-project sites. The final overall
  safeguards rating is reported in the Operations Portal as Satisfactory.

  As reported in the ICR (page 28), there were two severe incidents which were reported by ANADEB and
  documented through memos to Bank management. Both were classified as severe as they involved
  fatalities resulting from road accidents. While the first one was closed (with investigations concluding that it
  was not project related), the second incident is still ongoing as a judicial case was opened by the involved
  insurance companies. According to the ICR, the incident was not caused by any deficiency in the project
  design or implementation. The police report prepared following the accident could not establish that the
  incident was caused by a project vehicle; however, the case was sent to the local court for further
  investigation and decision, and the matter was still open at the time of preparation of the ICR. Following this
  case, and to prevent as much as possible future similar situations, the task team recommended to ANADEB
  to revise its procedure manuals to ensure proper guidelines are included regarding project vehicles use,
  including speed limitations, defensive driving, etc.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial management: The project team was adequately staffed with an experienced financial
  management person and accountants located in each of the five regional offices. As the fiduciary risk had
  been assessed as Substantial, mitigation measures were identified to strengthen internal controls. The
  ICR (page 28) reported that financial records were continuously and regularly updated, internal audit
  functions were performed regularly, and the accounting software had all the required functionalities. Two
  minor weaknesses were identified during the final mission (request for withdrawal of funds in advance on
  the designated account was refused by the Department of Public Debt and Financing due to limited
  availability, therefore the Bank suggested decreasing the requested amount; incorrect advice given to
  ANADEB regarding opening an escrow account to secure the amount of the final audit fees) but
  subsequently resolved. The overall financial management performance was rated as Satisfactory during
  the final mission. The project team confirmed that there were no qualifications to any project audits.

  Procurement: There were procurement issues which led to initial project implementation delays: the
  procurement of a firm to conduct the study on existing employment opportunities in project areas was
  delayed, with approval taking five months instead of two months; due to two complaints about the
  recruitment of project staff, the recruitment for key positions in the project was delayed by a few
  months. After the hiring of a full-time procurement officer, the pace of implementation picked up. The July
  2021 procurement review identified some deviations, though none involving legal remedies or
  misprocurement (delays in the deadlines for the award of effective contracts and the signing of

                                                                                                    Page 12 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Employment Opportunities for Vuln. Youth (P157036)



   contracts; missing information and documentation, causing limited understanding of the contract execution
   phase, including how late payment penalties should be managed; extension of contract performance
   deadlines without a relevant reason leading to the non-application of late payment penalties to the
   successful tenderer). These minor shortcomings were resolved and at closing, the procurement
   performance was rated Satisfactory.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   As reported in the ICR (page 20), project activities triggered a positive dynamic within some communities
   by strengthening social cohesion. Anecdotal evidence suggested that participation in sub-projects as well
   as training sessions created regular interactions among beneficiaries, who now feel less isolated and
   perceive a sense of solidarity within the community. This was particularly observed among female
   beneficiaries, who traditionally had less opportunities for interactions outside their household. In addition,
   the joint work of two villages on one single project had the positive effect of creating interactions and links
   between the two participating communities. These observations were confirmed in the final evaluation, as
   surveyed village/village development committee chiefs claimed that the overall project implementation
   approach triggered: (i) strengthened community union; (ii) enhanced social cohesion in the village; (iii)
   strengthened community solidarity; (iv) a reorganization in the management of the village with regard to the
   organization of meetings and the management of conflicts; and (v) a reduction in the rural exodus.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                      IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
                                                                                 This ICR Review rated efficacy
                                                                                 as Substantial in view of
Outcome                          Highly Satisfactory   Satisfactory              moderate shortcomings that
                                                                                 were reported, such as in
                                                                                 stipend payments and training
Bank Performance                 Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                   Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                   ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

Lessons drawn from the ICR (pages 32-33) and adapted by IEG:

      Youth employment programs that integrate multiple interventions can have an increased
         impact compared to single-focus interventions. In the case of this project, interventions

                                                                                                     Page 13 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Employment Opportunities for Vuln. Youth (P157036)



          addressed both supply side (skills development for youth) and demand side (focus on self-
          employment opportunities, as well as soft skills (promoting a culture of savings) and technical
          needs (local market assessment) were more responsive to the range of constraints to
          increased youth employment.
         Identifying synergies with existing operations and partners can generate efficiencies in
          project implementation. In the case of this project, the twinning of projects (with the parallel
          safety nets project) enabled sharing of some project specialist staff and administrative
          support staff, and partnering with GIZ enabled use of their existing business skills training
          curriculum.

Also,

         The tightly-linked sequencing of key project interventions can also generate efficiencies in
          project implementation and monitoring. In the case of this project, the savings requirement
          from the first phase of the project triggered the matching grants and hence provided the seed
          capital for the second phase.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  Yes
  ASSESSMENT_TABLE
  Please Explain
  To verify whether income generating opportunities and public works projects have been sustained beyond the
  project period and to learn lessons to apply to future youth employment programs.



14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR was results-oriented, reasonably concise, internally consistent, and consistent with guidelines. The
quality of the evidence was satisfactory, with detailed data on the participation of beneficiaries in the various
interventions supported by the project. However, there was less information on the longer-term impact on
livelihoods for the beneficiaries. The detailed description of project implementation experience that was
particularly informative for operations of this kind. Lessons were well-drawn from project experience.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
        Substantial




                                                                                                         Page 14 of 15
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
Employment Opportunities for Vuln. Youth (P157036)




                                                                                  Page 15 of 15
