     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Comoros Emergency DPO (P174260)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0023378

1. Operation Information



 Operation ID                               Operation Name
 P174260                                    Comoros Emergency DPO

 Country                                    Practice Area (Lead)
 Comoros                                    Macroeconomics, Trade and Investment



 Non-Programmatic DPF

 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                  Total Financing (USD)
 IDA-D7480                                  31-Dec-2021                                          10,374,481.39

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 10-Dec-2020                                31-Dec-2021

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                              Co-financing (USD)

 Original Commitment                              10,000,000.00                                             0.00

 Revised Commitment                               10,000,000.00                                             0.00

 Actual                                           10,374,481.39                                             0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Alma Pekmezovic             Jennifer L. Keller           Gabriela Chamartin Escobar     IEGEC




2. Program Objectives and Pillars/Policy Areas
DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives

The objectives of the operation were to i) protect the poor and vulnerable by supporting the Government’s
immediate COVID-19 response program and, ii) support reforms that will help economic recovery and
enhance resilience in the future.



                                                                                                  Page 1 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Comoros Emergency DPO (P174260)



b. Pillars/Policy Areas
The DPF was structured around two main pillars: (1) protecting poor and vulnerable households and
enhancing the resilience of firms; and (2) strengthening policies and institutions for rebuilding better. The
pillars correspond with the two objectives of the operation.

Objective 1 (protect the poor and vulnerable by supporting the Government’s immediate COVID-19
response program emic) consisted of the following prior actions (PAs):

      PA1: To help households cover their essential food and medical needs during the COVID-19
       pandemic, the Minister of Finance reduced the total customs duties and taxes (30 percent to 10
       percent reduction) on selected food and medical products till December 31, 2020 that were not already
       subject to preferential or reduced tax.
      PA2: To enhance the capacity to implement COVID-19 responses and to increase responsiveness
       and efficiency of future social safety net programs including inter alia in response to climate-related
       disasters, the Recipient has established a national social registry.
      PA3: To ensure liquidity for firms and protect productive assets, the Minister of Finance s approved a
       tax deferral of three (3) months ending September 30, 2020 for large firms and 9 months ending
       December 31, 2020 for MSMEs (micro, small and medium-sized enterprises).

 Objective 2 (support reforms that will help economic recovery and enhance resilience in the future)
consisted of the following PAs:

      PA4: To accelerate Société Nationale des Postes et des Services Financiers' (SNPSF’s) restructuring
       process, the Recipient has initiated a restructuring process beginning with the separation of its postal
       and banking activities.
      PA5: To facilitate the development of an electronic payment system and establish a legal framework
       for DFS, the Recipient has promulgated a law on payment service No 20-005 dated June 23, 2020.
      PA6: To enhance debt transparency, the recipient’s Minister of finance has mandated the publication
       on the Central Bank’s website of a semi-annual statistical bulletin on debt, including domestic and
       external debt and publicly guaranteed debt.
      PA7: To facilitate and increase efficiency in custom’s clearance of imported food and medical supplies,
       which will benefit poor households during the COVID19 pandemic, the Recipient through its Customs’
       General Director has created a fast-track lane for perishable goods, sensitive goods, and dangerous
       goods and allowed joint inspections between the customs and the INRAP (the phytosanitary
       authority).


c. Comments on Program Cost, Financing and Dates

The operation consisted of an SDR 7.2 million (US$10 million equivalent) International Development Association
(IDA) grant and was approved on December 10, 2020. The granted amount of SDR 7.2 million was approved
and resulted in a slightly higher disbursed sum in US dollars than initially projected due to a favorable exchange
rate movement (US$/SDR). The disbursed amount totaled to US$10,374,481.


3. Relevance of Design

                                                                                                       Page 2 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Comoros Emergency DPO (P174260)




a. Relevance of Objectives

In 2020, Comoros experienced the outbreak of COVID-19 after Cyclone Kenneth. By October, there were 517
confirmed cases and 7 deaths. The Government acted quickly to contain the virus through mobility restrictions
and awareness campaigns. However, the economic repercussions of the pandemic were significant. Comoros'
GDP growth was projected to be 4.4% before COVID-19 due to the reconstruction efforts after Cyclone
Kenneth, but the pandemic caused the forecast to fall to -1.4 in 2020. Comoros was heavily impacted by
disturbances in international trade, labor supply, consumption, and remittances, with poorer households
particularly affected. The disruptions in international trade and freight costs caused a decline in demand for
Comorian exports and a decrease in imports. For instance, container freight costs between Comoros and
China increased from US$765 in 2020 to US$11,000 in 2021Q3 per container. The disruption resulted in brief
episodes of shortage for specific food products and inflationary pressures. Mobility restrictions resulted in
reduced labor supply and domestic consumption. The anticipated drop in remittances from countries severely
impacted by the pandemic, such as France, was expected to widen Comoros’ account deficit to an estimated
5.9% of GDP in 2020. Additionally, the decrease in fiscal revenues and increased need for public spending
were expected to put further strain on the already strained fiscal balance, resulting in an anticipated
deterioration of 3.2% of GDP in 2020.

The PDOs were integrated into the wider strategy of the WBG and addressed crucial concerns
highlighted in the CPF (Country Partnership Framework) FY20-FY24 and the SCD (Systematic Country
Diagnostic) 2019. The SCD recognized three ways to elevate Comoros from its state of low growth and
moderate poverty: (i) overcoming the investment gap; (ii) enhancing human capital; and (iii) safeguarding
natural resources. Subsequently, the CPF selectively supported the Government's strategy based on the
priorities identified in the SCD, which included: (a) the development of human capital; (b) supporting disaster
recovery and resilience; (c) improving the business environment and governance; and (d) enhancing
connectivity. Although DPO Objective 1 related primarily to facilitating an emergency response to the COVID-
19 pandemic, it nonetheless targeted CPF priority (b) through permanent improvements to the responsiveness
and efficiency of social assistance. Objective 2 aligned to CPF priorities (b), (c) and (d) through actions related
to enhancing a digital payment system (including for emergency transfers) and through improved efficiency of
trade facilitation and credit (through reform of a state-owned bank).

The Comoros Emergency DPF was well aligned with the national development strategy. The strategy
outlined in the PCE (Plan for Emerging Comoros, Plan Comores Emergent) was organized around three axes:
(i) necessary conditions for a sound macroeconomic framework, resilience to climate change and disasters,
and a renewed framework for policy dialogue, which included solid macroeconomic fundamentals and
resilience to climate change and disasters; (ii) essential catalysts, such as human capital development,
structural reforms for a competitive environment, and participation in the digital revolution; and (iii) strategic
pillars, including financial development and modernized agriculture for food security. In addition to the pillar
under Objective 1 (which was designed to provide immediate social assistance to vulnerable households and
firms during the pandemic), the operation’s second pillar sought to support a more sustainable economic
recovery by reforms across Government priorities (i), (ii) and (iii). The prior actions under objective 2 included
reforms to support macroeconomic stability and resilience through reforms aimed at enhancing financial sector
stability and debt sustainability (with financial reforms also contributing to greater digitalization and financial
development). Objective 2’s trade facilitation reforms contributed to the Government priority (ii) of reforms for a
more competitive environment




                                                                                                     Page 3 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Comoros Emergency DPO (P174260)



b. Relevance of Prior Actions

Rationale

Prior Action 1 (PA1) was designed to prevent an increase in prices of essential imported goods during the
COVID-19 pandemic and provide financial relief to households by reducing customs taxes and duties.
At the time of PA1 implementation, Comoros imported almost 70% of its food requirements, which posed a
significant risk for food security in case of international food price shocks. (PD, p. 23). Additionally, nearly all
health-related products were imported. (PD, p. 23). Both food and medical products typically accounted for a
large share of household spending, especially among low-income households. Therefore, lowering the cost of
imports was expected to help poor households cover basic needs and alleviate household budget pressures.

Prior to the PA, only rice (the top imported commodity by value) and wheat flour were subject to a reduced tax.
PA1 aimed to protect households from COVID-19 by reducing food and health-product costs by temporarily
reducing customs duties and taxes due in 2020. The goal of the PA was to help households cover their
essential food and medical needs during the COVID-19 pandemic.

The reduction in customs duties and taxes was to be applied in a graduated manner, with a reduction of 30%
from April to July, 20% from August to September, 15% from October to November, and 10% in December. The
temporary reduction in customs duties and taxes applied to all food products, except alcohol, mineral water,
and selected medical supplies that were not already subject to a preferential or reduced tax. The measure was
expected to contain the rise in prices of imported food and medical goods, mitigating the impact of the
pandemic on household spending.

By protecting households' purchasing power, the PA contributed directly to the first objective of the DPF, and
was expected to disproportionately benefit low-income households, whose share of income devoted to basic
goods was higher. (PA1=S)

Prior Action 2 (PA2), through Presidential Decree 20-090, established a national social registry (Registre
Social Unique, RSU) to coordinate and scale up Comoros’ social assistance programs focused on vulnerable
households. Prior to this, different assistance schemes were independently managed by governmental and
non-governmental organizations, resulting in a fragmented social safety net with both leakage to the nonpoor
and significant gaps in coverage. Comoros’ social protection system covered less than 5 percent of the
population (PD, p. 234). Policy Notes by the World Bank (2014 and 2016) and analysis by the National Social
Protection Policy (2016) confirmed that a lack of coordination in social assistance programs was a significant
deterrent to social protection (PD, p. 29).

Through the establishment of the RSU, the PA aimed to modernize the country's social safety net, increase the
coverage of vulnerable households, improve the efficacy and efficiency of social spending, and enhance the
public sector's responsiveness to shocks like natural disasters and health emergencies. It sought to achieve two
main goals: (i) to avoid overlapping social assistance coverage across geographic areas and thus improve its
effectiveness, and (ii) to enhance the targeting of social programs and reduce errors related to inclusion and
exclusion of eligible households by collecting socio-economic data on households and using a scoring system
to verify eligibility for social programs. The registry was designed to complement the previously established
cash transfer program in response to COVID-19, in line with the first PDO, and also strengthen the economy's
resilience and recovery, in accordance with the second PDO. The relevance of PA2 can be considered
moderately satisfactory, as it signifies a step forward in modernizing Comoros' social safety net and addressing


                                                                                                       Page 4 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Comoros Emergency DPO (P174260)



coordination issues in social assistance programs. Nonetheless, there is room for improvement to achieve the
desired goals of increased coverage, and better targeting of social programs. (PA2=MS).

Prior Action 3 (PA3) aimed to support firms and preserve their production capacity and employment during the
economic downturn caused by the COVID-19 pandemic.

To achieve this, the MOF implemented a corporate tax deferral for large firms and deferred payment options for
micro, small, and medium-sized firms (MSMEs) through Arrêtés 20-007 and Arrêtés 20-024. The measure
mainly covered the single professional tax (TPU) paid by MSMEs, which themselves accounted for a significant
share of workers from low-income households. A 2017 Poverty Assessment had found that MSMEs were
important employers to low-income households, with about 22 percent of low-income households having the
head of the household working in an MSME. The World Bank's Business Pulse Survey conducted in 2020
found that 80 percent of firms experienced a decline in sales, with a median decline of 45 percent.

According to a survey conducted in April 2020 by the Comorian Movement of Enterprises (MODEC), 70 percent
of companies in Comoros reported that they were financially impacted by the COVID-19 crisis. Of those
affected, 50 percent had to place some of their employees on temporary layoff. Given this situation, it was
crucial to enhance the short-term liquidity of firms to allow them to continue operations and preserve jobs.

By providing support to firms (particularly MSMEs), the Government sought to reduce cash flow pressures of
firms during the pandemic, allowing them to preserve employment. However, while the PA was targeted to both
large firms and MSMEs, the measure was only available to firms in the formal sector already paying taxes. The
World Bank Prospects Group estimates that more than 40% of output in Comoros comes from informal
(unregistered) firms, and about 75% of employment occurs in firms outside the formal sector (see Informal
economy database). Given the high level of informality in Comoros, a significant number of MSMEs would not
benefit from the tax deferral program, limiting the expected impact of the measure (PA3=MS).

Prior Action 4 (PA4) aimed to address the financial vulnerability posed by the state-owned postal bank,
SNPSF (Société Nationale des Postes et des Services Financiers), by separating it into two independent
entities (a postal firm and a bank) through Presidential Decree 20-120. The SNPSF had been loss-making and
insolvent for many years due to its dual role of providing postal services alongside banking activities. (PD, p.
13). In October 2022, the SNPSF Board estimated that the final cost of recapitalization was KMF 9.6 billion.
This amount included the total losses and the necessary capital to comply with the banking law.

Since December 2018, the technical assistance provided by the WB and the IMF had been advising that the
separation of SNPSF's postal and banking activities was a precondition for any restructuring option of the failing
institution. A WB technical report delivered in March 2019 demonstrated that the majority of SNPSF’s
accumulated losses were because of the postal activities, which compromised the viability of the banking
activity and jeopardize financial stability in Comoros. (PD, p. 30).

Consequently, separation would remove the systemic financial risk posed by SNPSF (which held 15 percent of
total deposits and whose Non-Performing Loan [NPL] ratio had reached 57 percent in 2020), improve credit
allocation and the resilience of the financial system, and address the sizable fiscal risks posed to the state
through contingent liabilities. This measure was a critical step to ensuring the viability of the financial system. At
the same time, additional steps would need to be taken to realize the improvement in the bank’s financial
viability, including: raising capital, establishing a governance system, obtaining a license from the Central Bank
of Comoros (BCC), and creating a bad asset management company to deal with NPLs. The PA represented a
credible and meaningful first step toward the objective of improved economic resilience (PA4=S).


                                                                                                       Page 5 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Comoros Emergency DPO (P174260)



Prior Action 5 (PA5) aimed to facilitate the growth of digital financial services (DFS) by supporting the creation
of a legal structure for electronic payments. The digitization of financial transactions had the potential to surpass
traditional banking by providing low-cost and accessible mobile money and credit services while significantly
reducing transaction costs in a country where physical payment methods were still the norm. This could not
only contribute significantly to an inclusive economic recovery, as per the second PDO, but also protect
vulnerable households and companies from current and future shocks linked to the first PDO, as the state could
react faster and more transparently in implementing emergency transfers. While the Payment Services Law 20-
005 was critical in establishing the general structure for implementing electronic payment services, which were
already in progress with some market players, much of the regulatory framework was yet to be developed after
the law's enactment.

PA5 sought to address significant gaps in DFS. Despite the granting of three e-money licenses, including
mobile money, DFSs, including mobile banking and mobile payments, had not yet taken off in Comoros. Cash
remained the dominant mode of financial exchange in all sectors of society and the economy, while government
payments, such as transfers to citizens, payments to teachers and medical staff, were made through checks,
cash, and wire transfers. To facilitate the development of DFS and enable faster and more efficient payments,
including Government response payments, it was necessary to have the requisite foundational legal framework
for electronic payment systems. The installation of an Automated Transfer Plus (ATS+) in late 2020 and
national retail payment switch under a World Bank-financed project, as well as the planned take-off of e-money
platforms, provided an opportunity to accelerate the development of DFS. This was essential in the context of
the COVID-19 shock as well as in climate-related disasters, where promoting contactless digital payments was
important. Therefore, the development of a regulatory framework was critical to ensuring the growth of DFS in
Comoros and achieving the goals of PA5. (PA5=S).
Prior Action 6 (PA6) was aimed at enhancing the public sector's contribution to the economic recovery by
promoting debt transparency. The ICR seeks to link greater debt transparency to economic recovery via
reduced costs of borrowing from commercial banks which could potentially lower borrowing costs for the
government, freeing up resources for more productive expenditures that support economic recovery.

As of November 2019, SOE debt was estimated to be 21 percent of GDP, with most of it guaranteed by the
State (PD, p. 28). However, the actual amount of SOE debt remained unclear due to the presence of cross-
debts that were not always officially recognized between the State and different SOEs. This lack of clarity made
it challenging to forecast SOE revenues, dividends, and taxes owed to the government, creating uncertainty
regarding the extent of contingent liabilities (PD, p. 28). (According to the 2022 Comoros PER, between 2018
and 2020, SOEs paid KMF 83.4 billion in taxes and KMF 7.7 billion in dividends.)

Prior to the implementation of PA6, the last full debt statistics report was published in 2014. According to the
most recent Debt Management Performance Assessment (DeMPA) conducted in 2016, Comoros received a
“D” rating in the debt reporting dimension, indicating significant shortcomings in debt reporting practices. The
assessment noted the absence of a debt statistical bulletin. Debt transparency was considered necessary to
strengthen overall debt management in the country. According to a recent World Bank reform plan on debt
management for Comoros, the lack of debt transparency was one of the key elements of debt management that
needed to be improved, especially transparency of domestic debt. On the Open Budget Index 2018, Comoros'
score for budget oversight by the legislature and the supreme audit institution Chamber of Account was only
33/100 (PD, p. 28). Improving debt transparency was also in line with the requirements of the DSSI (Debt
Service Suspension Initiative). (Comoros participated in DSSI, and the requirements to participate were
standard. The DSSI was not a DPO prior action, however). The publication of a semi-annual statistical bulletin




                                                                                                      Page 6 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Comoros Emergency DPO (P174260)



 on public and publicly guaranteed (PPG) debt on the Central Bank website was one of the specific actions
 outlined in PPA2 of the SDFP for the fiscal year 2021.

 Comoros risk of debt distress was “moderate” at the time of the operation (IMF, Union of the Comoros, 2019
 Article IV Consultation, published June 2020). The objective of PA6 was to publish comprehensive public debt
 bulletins to provide a clear understanding of the country’s debt risks and fiscal space. A lack of transparency in
 debt reporting, especially for SOEs, was considered to have made it difficult for creditors to assess risk
 accurately. The opaqueness of debt accounting had the potential to raise risks to creditors, potentially curbing
 investments and raising lending costs.

 However, the degree of public debt transparency prior to implementation of this PA had not been established
 making it difficult to assess the incremental change in debt transparency associated with the publication of a
 semi-annual statistical bulletin on debt, including domestic and external debt and publicly guaranteed
 debt. There was evidence that lending to SOEs contained a significant risk premium (e.g., a non-concessional
 loan taken out for hospital construction had a variable interest rate exceeding 2.5 percent. A similar situation
 arose in a recent loan negotiation). However, it is not clear to which extent the terms were influenced by a lack
 of information on the creditworthiness of the relevant SOE or government.

 However, many of the above drawn links between the terms of borrowing and the adequacy of information to
 creditors are hypothetical and not clearly established for Comoros. Moreover, the deterioration in debt distress
 had been driven in Comoros by a non-concessional loan signed in FY21 and challenging macroeconomic
 conditions (Debt Sustainability Analysis (DSA), September 2021, and not by shortcomings in debt
 transparency. Therefore, while improved debt transparency may have some positive value on its own, the
 importance of it link to economic recovery in Comoros is questionable. (PA6=MU).

 Prior Action 7 (PA7) aimed to enhance trade facilitation and reduce transaction costs associated with the
 import of food and medical products. Comoros was highly dependent on imports (which make up almost 30
 percent of its GDP), but faced infrastructure bottlenecks and its customs and inspection agencies were less
 efficient than those in comparable countries (as demonstrated by its low ranking on the 2018 Logistics
 Performance Index [LPI]). Comoros took twice as long for inspections by agencies other than customs
 compared to the average time in East African countries, and it ranked low compared with other countries in the
 region with regard to the LPI and the Doing Business Trading Across Borders indicator.

 To address these issues, the Government introduced a fast-track lane for customs clearing (IM91) in March
 2020, which allowed imports of selected products to be cleared within a day, and joint inspections by the
 customs and phytosanitary authorities. The customs and the INRAP (the phytosanitary authority) were allowed
 to conduct joint inspections for these products. These measures were implemented through the Minister of
 Finance and Budget's Arrêté No 20-007 dated March 30, 2020 and Arrêté No 20-024 dated August 10, 2020,
 as well as Customs' General Director Note No 20-044 dated March 6, 2020 and Customs' General Director
 Note No 20-058 dated April 2, 2020. These actions were not limited to the COVID-19 period and were expected
 to remain in place after the pandemic and potentially be extended to other products. Overall, this trade
 facilitation measure could alleviate administrative obstacles and improve the accessibility of essential products
 during the COVID-19 pandemic, ultimately contributing to the economic recovery and both PDOs. (PA7=S).



Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

                                                                                                     Page 7 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Comoros Emergency DPO (P174260)




4. Relevance of Results Indicators

Rationale

Objective 1 (to protect the poor and vulnerable by supporting the Government’s immediate COVID-19
response program) had 3 RIs, with RI1 associated with PA1, RI2 associated with PA2, and
RI3 associated with PA3 respectively.

Objective 2 (to support reforms that will help economic recovery and enhance resilience in the future) had
4 RIs, with RI4 associated with PA4, RI5 associated with PA6, and RI6 and RI7, associated with PA6 and
PA7 respectively.

Table 1: Results Indicators and actual achievements

                                                                   Actual %
               Associated      RI    Baseline Target (2 Actual         of   RI Achievem
    RI Name
                   PA      Relevance (2019)      020)      (2020) targeted ent rating
                                                                   change
 Objective 1: to protect the poor and vulnerable by supporting the Government’s
 immediate COVID-19 response program
 RI1: Index
 based on the
 retail price
 of selected
 imported
 food and
                  PA1         MS       100.0     102.0       99.0    97.1%      High
 medical
 products
 (simple
 average,
 April –
 December).
 RI2: Number
                                                             0.00
 of vulnerable
                                                          (31-Dec-
 households
                                                          2019 31-
 benefiting
                                                         Dec-2020
 from
                                                          31-Dec-
 cash transfer
                                                            2020)
 support in       PA2          S        0.0    15,000.00            143.7%      High
 response to
                                                           Current
 COVID-19
                                                           status:
 and
                                                           21,556
 registered in
                                                         (February
 the social
                                                         18, 2022)
 registry.


                                                                                                 Page 8 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                       Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Comoros Emergency DPO (P174260)



RI3: Number
of vulnerable
households
benefiting
from
cash transfer
support in        PA3        S        0.0        75.0     87.3    116.4%     High
response to
COVID-19
and
registered in
the social
registry.
Objective 2: to support reforms that will help economic recovery and enhance
resilience in the future
RI4: New
banking
entity
(resulting
from the
separation of
the
SNPSF)                                                                    Modest (with
complies          PA4        S        No         Yes       No       n/a    additional
with Article 3                                                             evidence)
of BCC
regulation on
the
constant
minimum
capital
requirement
RI5: Number
of digital
transactions      PA5        S        0.0       300.0    797.0    265.7%     High
accounts per
1,000 adults
RI6: Score at
the “Data
Accessibility”
of the World                                                              Modest (with
Bank Debt         PA6       MU        Red       Green     Red       n/a    additional
Reporting                                                                  evidence)
Heat Map
for IDA
Countries.



                                                                                           Page 9 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Comoros Emergency DPO (P174260)



RI7: Average
number of
days to
remove
authorized
merchandise
(selected
                  PA7          MU          6.0        2.0        1.8       90.0%      Substantial
food
and medical
products)
from
customs at
the port of
Moroni.

Results Indicator #1 (R1) was constructed as an index of the retail price of all food products (excluding
alcohol and mineral water) and selected medical supplies that would be impacted by PA1. The purpose of
RI1 was to measure the extent to which prices for these products were affected by the PA (and indirectly
the impact on households' purchasing power, the objective). RI1 had several limitations. One of the main
limitations was the potential incomplete “pass-through” from customs duties and taxes to retail prices. This
issue was acknowledged in the PD (footnote #45), noting that the benefits of the measure might be
reduced due to higher intermediates' margins and a possible rise of imported goods. Additionally, the RI
might capture other issues unrelated to the PA, including changes in market concentration along import
and retail chains and changes in transport costs from the port to the location where prices were
measured. Oher factors, such as food commodity price fluctuations and disruptions in global supply
chains, would have also impacted the results indicator.

. (RI1=MS)

Results Indicator #2 (RI2) sought to measure the impact of PA2, which established a social registry
(aimed at enhancing the capacity to implement COVID-19 responses and increasing the efficiency of
future social safety net programs, including responses to climate-related disasters). RI 2 measured the
number of vulnerable households benefiting from cash transfer support in response to COVID-19 and
registered in the social registry.

As the RI was measured by the number of households benefiting from cash transfers who were
additionally registered in the (newly created) social registry, the RI was relevant for capturing the impact of
the PA toward the objective. (RI2=S)

Results Indicator #3 (RI3) measured the percentage of registered firms and self-employed (in the formal
sector) benefiting from tax deferrals, as part of PA3, which sought to ensure liquidity for firms and protect
productive assets amid the economic fallout of the COVID-19 pandemic. RI3 was measurable and well-
defined, and was appropriate for capturing the impact of PA3. (RI3=S).

Results Indicator #4 (RI4) measured the compliance of the new banking entity (resulting from the
separation of SNPSF) with Article 3 of the BCC regulation on the constant minimum capital requirement.




                                                                                                     Page 10 of 18
                   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                   Comoros Emergency DPO (P174260)



               Complying with the minimum capital requirement reflected one step toward the targeted outcome. he
               indicator was clearly defined and the data for monitoring readily available. (RI4=S).

               Results Indicator #5 (RI5) sought to capture progress towards the development of electronic payment
               services in Comoros under PA5, which involved promulgating a law on payment service to facilitate the
               development of an electronic payment system and establishing a legal framework for DFS. RI5
               specifically measured the number of digital transaction accounts per 1,000 adults. The indicator was
               appropriate for measuring the impact of the PA, clearly defined, and easy to measure. The number of
               digital transaction accounts per 1,000 adults could be accurately calculated and tracked over time.
               (RI5=S).

               Results Indicator #6 (RI6) measured Comoros' score for the "Data Accessibility" component of the World
               Bank Debt Reporting Heat Map for IDA Countries. This results indicator was linked to PA6, under which
               the Minister of Finance mandated the publication of a semi-annual statistical bulletin on debt (including
               domestic and external debt and publicly guaranteed debt) on the Central Bank's website. The relevance of
               RI6 for measuring debt transparency was high, and the indicator was clearly defined and readily available,
               which made it measurable. The target set for RI6 was appropriate for the low institutional capacity setting,
               balancing ambition and feasibility. However, its link to the objective of economic recovery and enhanced
               resilience is questionable (RI6=MU).

               Results Indicator #7 (RI7) measured the average number of days it took to remove authorized
               merchandise, including selected food and medical products, from customs at the port of Moroni. The
               creation of a fast-track lane for perishable goods, sensitive goods, and dangerous goods, along with joint
               inspections between customs and the INRAP, aimed to facilitate and increase efficiency in customs
               clearance of imported food and medical supplies. The indicator directly measured the increased
               facilitation of importing the products concerned by PA7, contributing to trade facilitation. However, the
               indicator did not specify the exact products to be considered. The indicator was measured by a list of
               products and the days needed to remove their imports from the port, with the data provided by the
               customs administration. However, it was not clear in that data what products were covered (and whether
               those corresponded to the PA’s impact). Further, there were challenges in estimating the average number
               of days to remove merchandise as the authorities do not explicitly record the removal date, and the date
               of payment was assumed to be the removal date (RI7=MU).



   Rating

   Moderately Satisfactory

   5. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
EFFICACY_TBL




                OBJECTIVE 1
                Objective
                To protect poor and vulnerable households, and enhance the resilience of firms.

                Rationale


                                                                                                                 Page 11 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Comoros Emergency DPO (P174260)



Objective 1 was supported by PAs 1-3, with the measurement of results through RI1-RI3.

The targeted change for RI1 (which sought to measure how the prices of essential goods were contained
over COVID-19) was surpassed. To define the RI1, a detailed list of products that benefited from PA1 was
collected and mapped to product-level price indices that compose the consumer price index. The ICR
reported the change in the 9-month moving average price index of the products benefited by PA1. The index
declined from 100 for the April-December 2019 period to 99.9 for the April-December 2020 period, exceeding
the target of 100 and reversing the previous upward trajectory in prices. The evidence suggests PA1
contributed substantially to the goal of preserving vulnerable households' access to them during the early
stages of the COVID-19 pandemic.

RI2 measured the number of vulnerable households benefiting from cash transfer support in response to
COVID-19 and registered in the social registry. The RI was achieved with delay. The COVID-19 cash
transfers were made based on a proxy means test model developed to identify vulnerable households in
urban areas, which means that the national social registry, then restricted to rural households, was not used
for these transfers. As a result, none of the households enrolled in the national registry in December 2020
were also receiving the COVID-19 cash transfers, and the result indicator was not achieved then. The result
indicator was achieved and surpassed in October 2021, when 21,556 urban and vulnerable households that
had received the COVID-19 cash transfers were added to the national registry.

 RI3 measured the percentage of firms and self-employed benefiting from tax deferrals. The target for RI3
was achieved and exceeded. Approximately 87.3% of formal firms and self-employed workers benefited from
the tax deferral in 2020. To ensure widespread awareness of the tax deferral, the Comoros authorities
contacted firms individually and through employer associations, which was confirmed in consultations with
private sector representatives.

Overall, achievement of objective 1 is rated Satisfactory, with high achievement of RI1, RI2 and RI3.



Rating

Satisfactory

OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To support reforms that will help economic recovery and enhance resilience in the future.

Rationale
Objective 2 was supported by PAs 4-7, with the measurement of results through RI4-RI7.

The target for RI4, compliance by the new banking entity with Article 3 of the BCC regulation on the minimum
capital requirement, has not yet been achieved. A Presidential Decree triggered SNPSF’s separation into
banking and postal institutions, and an independent private firm conducted an audit of the SNPSF's assets
and liabilities. The minimum required capital to comply with the BCC regulation's Article 3 was secured in a
special account at the BCC. However, the new bank has not yet been established (and thus the RI was not



                                                                                                Page 12 of 18
                         Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                         Comoros Emergency DPO (P174260)



                      achieved). Political instability and difficulties in mobilizing capital for the new bank have delayed the
                      restructuring process. With the additional evidence, the achievement of this RI is judged to be modest.

                       RI5 measured the number of digital transaction accounts per 1,000 adults. The target was exceeded in
                      Comoros. Before the approval of the general legislative framework as part of PA5 (Law on Payment Service
                      20-005 was enacted on June 23, 2020), there was a lack of institutional framework for digital wallets, and
                      electronic payment options were restricted. However, since 2020, the number of digital transaction accounts
                      surged, with incentives offered by firms to consumers and distributors, and opportunities for paying bills
                      through digital wallets increased. According to the BCC, the number of digital transaction accounts per 1,000
                      adults rose from the low hundreds at end-2019 to 797 in December 2021. Private providers of DFS have
                      reported that this number has continued to increase at a fast pace in 2022.

                      RI6 measured Comoros' score at the "Data Accessibility" of the World Bank Debt Reporting Heat Map for IDA
                      Countries. The target was not achieved in 2021, but some progress was made in 2020. Semi-annual
                      statistical bulletins on debt were published three times between 2019 and 2020, which included total debt
                      breakdowns into domestic and external debt and publicly guaranteed debt. However, the internal debt stock
                      accounted for in these previous reports was limited, and an ongoing debt audit is expected to render more
                      accurate data. Comoros' score on the data accessibility component of the World Bank Debt Reporting Heat
                      Map was still "Red" in 2021. With the additional evidence, the RI achievement is judged to be modest.

                      RI7 measured the average number of days to remove authorized merchandise, specifically selected food, and
                      medical products, from customs at the port of Moroni. RI7 was linked with PA7. The target associated with
                      RI7 was successfully achieved, with the average number of days decreasing from 6 in 2019 to 1.8 in 2021.
                      The fast-track line for perishable, sensitive, and dangerous goods have been active since its enactment, and
                      joint inspections by customs and phytosanitary authorities for selected goods continue to be applied.

                      Objective 2 is rated as Moderately Satisfactory, with substantial or high achievement of RI5 and RI7, and
                      modest achievement of RI4 and RI6.



                      Rating

                      Moderately Satisfactory


OVERALL EFF TBL OLD




Overall Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
Rationale

Efficacy is rated as Moderately Satisfactory, with substantial or high achievement of RIs 1, 2, 3, 5 and 7.
Achievements under RIs 4 and 6 were modest, however.



Overall Efficacy Rating
Moderately Satisfactory


                                                                                                                        Page 13 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Comoros Emergency DPO (P174260)




6. Outcome

Rationale

With PA relevance assessed to be Moderately Satisfactory and efficacy judged to be Moderately Satisfactory,
the Outcome rating is Moderately Satisfactory.


a. Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

7. Risk to Development Outcome

Under pillar 1, the RSU has the potential to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of the social safety net
in Comoros. However, to avoid reversal of the achieved outcomes, greater ownership, and utilization of the
RSU are crucial. As stated, the registry currently only includes information from World Bank-supported
programs like COVID-19 cash transfers and transfers following Cyclone Kenneth. To fully leverage the
RSU’s potential, a legal framework is being developed to integrate other social programs into the system.
Additionally, investing in human resources to manage and improve the RSU is essential for its future
transformation into a modern social safety net.

Concerning the second pillar, there are mixed risks to the sustainability of the operation's contribution to
development outcomes. Trade facilitation measures introduced through PA 7 have been successfully
incorporated into the client's operations and present low risks of reversal. However, the restructuring of the
SNPSF, supported by the IMF and AFD, is still ongoing. Similarly, the institutional and infrastructure
development of the DFS is still progressing and continuing the reform momentum can enhance its
contribution to financial inclusion and economic recovery.


8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Bank Performance – Design

Rationale


The design of the DPF operation was based on analytical underpinnings, mainly from World Bank reports.
All reform areas were connected to the findings of the latest SCD (Systematic Country Diagnostic) report.
Additionally, prior actions related to reducing international trade barriers leveraged a customs report and
an agriculture sector review. The introduction of a national social registry was supported by existing policy
notes on the social protection system in Comoros, Advisory Services and Analytics on means testing
models in the country, and a Poverty Assessment. The design of prior actions related to the financial
sector was informed by technical assistance programs provided by the World Bank and the IMF on the


                                                                                                     Page 14 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Comoros Emergency DPO (P174260)



SNPSF (National Payment System Oversight Committee), as well as by World Bank technical reports on
the SNPSF and the payments system regulatory framework.

The DPF benefited from being closely connected to ongoing operations, integrating lessons learned,
facilitating monitoring and evaluation arrangements, and mitigating risks. With the health crisis requiring a
fast disbursement of funds, the DPF leveraged other operations' lessons learned and active dialogue with
the Comoros Government to decrease risks associated with institutional capacity for implementation and
M&E of reforms and enhance their sustainability. Coordination with other developing partners during the
program design was adequate, with important efforts collaboratively made with the IMF and AfDB in
providing necessary budget support for Comoros to address the emergency of COVID-19. Fragility
concerns were also considered and mostly incorporated into the operation, with some prior actions not fully
internalizing these drivers into setting targets, but this did not jeopardize their suitability. For instance, the
operational design did not fully take into account the limited capacity of the state to implement complex
social assistance programs, particularly with regards to the time needed to execute and achieve the
desired results. This was also the case in the restructuring of the SNPSF. However, the COVID-19 cash
transfers and the rollout of the RSU were strongly connected to the drivers of fragility associated with
poverty and lack of state capacity and helped to build resilience and Comoros institutions to support the
most vulnerable households.

Overall, bank performance is rated Moderately Satisfactory.



Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

b. Bank Performance – Implementation

Rationale

The supervisory, technical assistance, and monitoring measures for the adequacy of the recipients' monitoring
and evaluation (M&E) system were generally effective in the implementation of the DPF. These measures also
had co-benefits for monitoring and assistance in other ongoing World Bank operations. For instance, the rollout
of the social registry and COVID-19 cash transfers benefited from the implementation of the Comoros Social
Safety Net project, and close interaction with the authorities. Additionally, production of bi-annual debt bulletins
and the development of DFS and the restructuring of SNPSF also benefited from the supervision co-benefits
and technical assistance.


However, some of the monitoring of the implementation of prior actions and the borrower's M&E efforts could
have been improved. For instance, although the borrower's M&E of customs measures has been robust and
digitalized, the domestic effects of the reduction on customs taxes and duties were not monitored during
program implementation. Similarly, the development of electronic payment systems has benefited from
technical assistance and capacity building efforts, but RI5 was not being monitored during the time of the ICR.
The World Bank experienced a loss of information and monitoring efforts due to staff rotations (ICR, p.26).



                                                                                                        Page 15 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Comoros Emergency DPO (P174260)




Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

c. Overall Bank Performance

Rationale

Overall, bank performance is assessed as Moderately Satisfactory, due to issues concerning RI selection and
target setting.


Overall Bank Performance Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

9. Other Impacts

a. Social and Poverty

The operation had a positive impact on poverty reduction by mitigating the negative effects of the COVID-19
pandemic on household spending and income through trade-related prior actions and cash transfers. Lower
customs taxes and duties, faster customs clearance, and cash transfers contributed to securing timely access to
food and medical products at moderate costs, with a strong pro-poor focus. The national social registry also set
the stage for better protecting livelihoods against future shocks. Other prior actions, such as the deferral of
corporate taxes, financial sector reforms, and debt transparency, may indirectly contribute to poverty reduction
by improving financial stability and inclusion, accelerating economic growth, and improving public services.
However, the distributional impact of these measures could not be assessed due to data limitation.



b. Environmental

None identified.



c. Gender

The operation did not specifically target women or include gender focused PDO indicators.



d. Other


                                                                                                 Page 16 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Comoros Emergency DPO (P174260)



None identified.




10. Quality of ICR

Rationale

Overall, the ICR is deemed substantial in quality. The ICR offers a thorough analysis of the country's situation
during project appraisal and the impact of COVID-19 on economic conditions. It presents the operation's main
objectives in a coherent manner and provides relevant evidence to evaluate the attainment of these objectives.
The ICR report is sufficiently detailed and well-organized.



a. Rating

Substantial

11. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                Disagreement/Comments
                                Moderately
Outcome                                               Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
                                                                                Staff rotations and
Bank Performance                Satisfactory          Moderately Satisfactory   communication frictions between
                                                                                different units
Relevance of Results
                                ---                   Moderately Satisfactory
Indicators
Quality of ICR                  ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The IEG concurs with the main lessons in the ICR report with some revisions.

      Leveraging ongoing sector-specific World Bank operations and Government initiatives can be
       mutually beneficial and inform program design, especially in Comoros’ fragile context. This DPO
       designed PAs that were realistic but also impactful by complementing with other World Bank operations
       and Government initiatives. This approach was particularly important in a context of low state capacity
       during the COVID-19 pandemic and after a tropical cyclone, where fast disbursement was needed, and
       implementation challenges abounded.
      Post-approval monitoring in a low-capacity setting is crucial for the success of stand-alone
       DPOs, and having precisely defined Government counterparts facilitate this dialogue. Closer and
       more frequent follow-ups with the authorities could be decisive in guaranteeing the operation's success


                                                                                                   Page 17 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Comoros Emergency DPO (P174260)



       and the sustainability of outcomes. In this operation, the Ministry of Finance was supposed to monitor
       reforms and report progress biannually to the International Development Association, but no report was
       produced. Designating a specific government counterpart to manage the whole operation and coordinate
       all the government sectors concerned by the operation could have increased the fluidity of the dialogue
       with the World Bank team and helped monitor the achievement of development objectives..
      Institutionalizing operation-specific knowledge sharing within the World Bank is important to
       secure the continuation of M&E efforts and client's assistance after the operation's approval.
       Staff rotations and turnover and communication frictions between different units can lead to a loss of
       information and faltering monitoring efforts during the operation. Ensuring that information continues to
       flow across generations within a unit and across units can translate into better operational results.


13. Project Performance Assessment Report (PPAR) Recommended?

No




                                                                                                 Page 18 of 18
