     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Govtech and Citizen Engagement (P155121)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0023322

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P155121                                   Govtech and Citizen Engagement

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Burkina Faso                              Governance


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-57640                                 31-Dec-2021                                          30,829,395.31

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 18-Feb-2016                               30-Jun-2022

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            30,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                             30,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Actual                                         31,014,796.72                                              0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Jorge Garcia-Garcia        Konstantin Atanesyan         Jennifer L. Keller              IEGEC (Unit 1)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The objective of the project is to enhance domestic revenue mobilization and improve the use of public
   resources by strengthening accountability mechanisms, revenue collection systems, and public expenditure
   management (Financing Agreement, p. 5; PAD, p. ix, par. 19).

   The objective remained unchanged during the two project restructurings. For this review, the objectives of the
   operation are defined as follows


                                                                                                  Page 1 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Govtech and Citizen Engagement (P155121)



   PDO1: Enhance domestic revenue mobilization; and

   PDO2: Improve the use of public resources.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Component 1. Strengthening Citizen Engagement and Accountability

   The component sought to enhance transparency and accountability in the public sector and to strengthen
   the capacity of civil society to monitor public sector performance and service delivery (original cost, US$8
   million; actual cost US$6.8 million). The goal was to be achieved through: (a) enhancing access to and the
   use of public information; (b) strengthening citizens’ monitoring of the delivery of public services and giving
   feedback on them; and (c) implementing the measures set out in the fraud and anticorruption law. The
   subcomponents were:

   1.1: Enhancing Public Sector Transparency (original cost: US$2 million; actual cost: US$1.3 million). The
   activities to be financed were (a) enhancing proactive disclosure of information; and (b) stimulating the use
   of disclosed information. The proactive disclosure activity sought to upgrade and standardize information
   disclosure practices at the Ministry of Economy and Finance (MEF), Ministry of Education and Literacy
   (MENA) and the Ministry of Health (MoH) which, among other things, included the production and
   dissemination of citizen/user-friendly budgets. Using disclosed information supported building capacity for
   independent budget monitoring and analysis by civil society and increasing the quantity and quality of
   media coverage on the mobilization and use of public resources through capacity building for journalists on
   budgetary processes.

   1.2: Developing Accountability Mechanisms in Service Delivery (original cost: US$2.5 million; actual cost:
   US$2.8 million). The activities to be financed were to (a) promote accountability at the sector level; (b)
   develop a third-party monitoring and feedback mechanism at the service provider level; (c) provide technical
   assistance (TA) to set up an ICT platform for tracking feedback from communities; and (d). build civil society
   capacity for independent monitoring and advocacy. The first group supported five sub-activities including
   developing and adopting by project midterm a sector wide citizen engagement strategy in the Ministries of
   Health and of Education. The second group supported piloting a third-party accountability mechanism at the
   point of service involving users, service providers, and civil society. The third group supported establishing
   an ICT platform in the health and education sectors to strengthening community engagement in monitoring
   public services.

   The fourth group supported capacity building for civil society, through targeted technical assistance to play a
   more proactive role in service delivery monitoring and advocacy.

   1.3: Consolidating Mechanisms and Capacity to Fight Fraud and Corruption (original cost: US$3.5 million;
   actual cost: US$ 2.7 million). The activities to be financed were to (a) strengthen institutional capacity to

                                                                                                      Page 2 of 18
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  Govtech and Citizen Engagement (P155121)



implement anticorruption laws; and (b) improve adjudication of corruption cases. The first group supported,
among others, establishing an asset declaration system at the High Authority for State Oversight (Autorité
supérieure de contrôle de l’Etat –ASCE) and an anticorruption unit at ASCE. The second group supported
operationalizing the anticorruption criminal branches of the first instance courts of Bobo-Dioulasso and
Ouagadougou and financing independent monitoring of corruption cases by the National Network Against
Corruption (Réseau national de lute contre la corruption –REN-LAC).

Component 2. Improving domestic revenue mobilization and public expenditure management

The component's objective was to increase domestic revenue collection and enhance the performance of
public spending and the delivery of efficient public services (original cost: US$14 million; actual cost: US$
18.6 million). The goal was to be achieved through: (a) broadening the tax base and simplifying customs
clearances and tax procedures; (b) enhancing management information systems for budget and revenue;
(c) strengthening the management capacity for public procurement; (d) managing cash, debt and treasury;
and (e) strengthening the predictability and control of budget execution. The subcomponents were:

2.1: Broadening of the Tax Base and Simplification of Customs Clearances and Tax Procedures (original
cost: US$3 million; actual cost: US$ 5.4 million). The activities to be financed were (a) enhancing the
reliability of the tax base; and (b) streamlining customs clearance procedures and tax non-compliance
investigations. Activities under (a) included: conducting a general census of taxpayers to geographically
identify and register all taxpayers; auditing and overhauling tax identification files and establishing a tax
identification number; examining the possibility of reorganizing VAT billing; conducting a census of the
regulated professions and a study on the impact of the single and global taxation on income. Activities
under (b) included: development, consultations, and drafting of a General Tax Code (Code général des
impôts –CGI), its application regulations and administrative doctrine; acquiring quality and quantity control
instruments for hydrocarbons to equip the customs administration with adequate control tools to perform
counter-expertise of the presented declarations and secure revenue of petroleum products; and developing
and rolling out a communication plan to develop civic spirit around tax issues.

2.2: Enhancing Revenue and Budget Management Information Systems (original cost: US$7 million; actual
cost: US$9.1 million). The activities to be financed were (a) modernizing the revenue administration IT
systems; and (b) upgrading and adapting the existing budget management information systems. The first
group consisted, among other things, of upgrading network, security and hardware infrastructure to support
the rollout of ICT systems to remote customs and tax offices; enhancing interconnection between ICT
systems and core public finance management information systems, including ASYCUDA World and other
PFM IT systems; and developing and activating additional functionality modules for customs and tax ICT
systems.

2.3: Strengthening Public Procurement Management and Capacity (original cost: US$1.5 million; actual
cost: US$2.6 million). The activities to be financed were (a) technical assistance (TA) to the contracting
authorities; (b) development of electronic systems to enable electronic transactions between contracting
authorities, and the regulatory and procurement control bodies, and to improve the database for statistics
and archiving purposes; and (c) professionalizing the procurement function. The first group consisted of
developing and disseminating techniques and procedures for use of new procurement tools in particular
contracts; and piloting a feedback mechanism to support improved monitoring of key infrastructure projects.
The third group financed a consultant to support the Public Procurement Regulatory Body (Autorité de
régulation de la commande publique –ARCOP) to conduct a procurement capacity and training needs



                                                                                                 Page 3 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Govtech and Citizen Engagement (P155121)



  assessment and to study the possibility of introducing minimum required qualifications for the procurement
  function and a certification process to ensure standard qualification.

  2.4: Cash, Debt, and Treasury Management (US$1 million; actual cost: US$0.4 million). The activities to be
  financed were, among others, (a) developing a cash management database and cash flow forecasting
  model to improve forecasts of cash requirements ; (b) improving debt management and operational risk
  management; (c) updating and disseminating of a manual of procedures for debt management; (d)
  providing technical assistance for improving liquidity management and the predictability of budget releases
  to line ministries; (e) capacity building for staff working on debt and cash management; and (f) TA and
  advisory services for implementing an Electronic Fund Transfer system.

  2.5: Strengthening Predictability and Control in Budget Execution (original cost: S$1.5 million; actual cost:
  US$1.0 million ). The activities to be financed were (a) establishing a functional directorate of public
  procurement and financial control; (b) establishing functional internal audit units across ministries,
  departments and agencies; and (c) assisting the Supreme Audit Institution (Cour des Comptes –CdC) in
  implementing a risk-based audit approach and performance audits. The first group included capacity
  building for financial controllers and diagnosing bottlenecks in the financial control process. The second
  group consisted of reassessing risk mappings of key line ministries, technical support for internal audit units
  and equipment for some of these units. The third group consisted of developing and implementing a risk-
  based audit approach, developing auditor capacity in conducting performance and special audits
  and enhancing coordination between internal and external audits.

  Component 3. Rapid Response Facility

  The component supported additional priorities defined by the new authorities as needed, depending on the
  evolution of the reform agenda for economic governance in addressing constraints in public services.
  (original cost: US$6 million; actual cost: US$ 2.4 million)

  Component 4. Project Management Support

  The component supported the establishment of a project coordination and administration unit (original cost:
  US$2 million; actual cost: US$3.9 million). The subcomponents were:

  4.1: Project Management and Central Coordination (US$1.5 million; actual US$3.3 million)

  4.2: Monitoring, Evaluation, Independent Review, and Communication (US$0.5 million; actual US$0.6
  million)



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Costs and financing. The original project cost was US$30 million equivalent. IDA financed US$30 million
  equivalent (SDR21.9 million). The actual resources allocated at closing were US$31.9 million equivalent.

  Dates. The project was approved on February 18, 2016, became effective on October 14, 2016, and closed
  on June 30, 2022, six months after the original closing date of December 31, 2021.




                                                                                                    Page 4 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Govtech and Citizen Engagement (P155121)



   Restructurings. The Bank restructured the project twice, on April 6, 2021, and December 9, 2021. All
   restructurings were approved at level 2 [i.e., by the Country Director]. The Bank changed the closing date
   during the second restructuring. The restructurings changed the results framework, components and costs,
   loan closing date and reallocated funds between reimbursement categories. The PDO remained
   unchanged.

   First restructuring (April 6, 2021). The following changes took place:

         Targets for two of the PDO indicators were revised upwards. This was done because the target had
          already been exceeded.
         Two PDO indicators drawn from the Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability Assessment
          (PEFA) were replaced (PI-14 and PI-21). The reason for replacing them was their multidimensional
          nature which did not match well with the scope of project activities.
         A PDO indicator on grievances was dropped and replaced by disaggregated results indicators.

   Second restructuring (December 9, 2021). The following changes took place:

         One PDO indicator was added, another was changed, and another was reformulated and moved to
          the list of intermediate results indicators. The new PDO indicator focused on the officials other than
          ministers and parliamentarians completing their online asset declarations. The changed PDO
          (budget allocations aligned with policy priorities) reflected the major innovations supported in the
          Public Financial Management (PFM) Act. This indicator replaced one on improved budget credibility
          and control in budget preparation and execution, whose performance depended on timely
          installation of the program (N@folo). The indicator on budget credibility was dropped from the PDO
          group and reformulated as an intermediate results indicator that would now measure the number of
          N@folo modules installed.
         The closing date was extended from December 31, 2021, to June 30, 2022.
         The cost allocation for components was changed, as follows:
                o Component 2: an additional US$1.5 million.
                o Component 3: a deduction of US$3 million.
                o Component 4. an additional US$1.5 million.

   The table below summarizes the initial and final allocations. Changes in the US dollar-euro exchange rate
   explain the difference between the total values for the final allocation shown below and for actual
   cost shown in section 1.

                                                   Original allocation (US$
   Component                                                                      Final allocation (US$ million)
                                                   million)
   1. Citizen engagement and accountability        8.0                            8.0
   2. Revenue mobilization and public
                                                   14.0                           15.5
   expenditure
   3. Rapid response facility                      6.0                            3.0
   4. Project management                           2.0                            3.5
   5. Total                                        30.0                           30.0

3. Relevance of Objectives

                                                                                                    Page 5 of 18
                       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                       Govtech and Citizen Engagement (P155121)




Rationale
Country and sector context. The World Bank's Systematic Country Diagnostic for Burkina Faso (SCD,
2017) identified 7 second tier priorities, of which two were addressed by the project: (i) good governance
and strong institutions, and (ii) ensuring fiscal efficiency (i.e., value for money) and macroeconomic stability.
Addressing these two priorities would necessarily involve creating the fiscal space required to achieve other
priorities.

Weaknesses in collecting revenue and in executing the budget constitute two significant challenges in
Burkina Faso’s public financial management. Weaknesses in collecting revenues result from a lack of
attention to which group of taxpayers can generate revenue, inefficient administrative processes, poor
collection of arrears, fraud on tax exemptions and VAT reimbursements, and a small tax base that
depended on large enterprises in the formal sector, with most of the informal sector untaxed. Such
weaknesses affected treasury management and the reliability of the budget, which in turn delayed the
payment of government bills and led to low levels of budget execution. Poor budget preparation and
execution, in turn, impaired achievement of development outcomes; for example, the PAD mentions –
without providing numbers– that part of the investment budget was not spent as intended or did not
translate into results for communities. Low skill levels and lack of modern tools (e.g., computer, specialized
software for financial management) impair the productivity and efficiency of civil servants working on
financial planning, procurement and budget execution. (For more details, see PAD, pp.1-3 and SCD, 2017,
pp. 130-132 and Annex 2)

Government strategy. The government program, summarized in its Strategy for Accelerated Growth and
Sustainable Development (SCADD), had four axes, with the issues addressed in this project falling under
the axis of improving governance. The strategy on economic governance reforms was integrated in the
Economic and Finance Sector Policy (POSEF) for 2011-2020, a program with six areas which were related
to enhancing domestic revenue mobilization and improving the use of public resources. The six areas were:
(a) reinforce the institutional and organizational capacity of the Ministry of Economy and Finance (MEF); (b)
improve the macro fiscal framework and promote performance-based budget management; (c) enhance
revenue mobilization and management; (d) strengthen budgetary planning and efficiency of public
expenditure; (e) improve the efficiency of public accounts and financial systems; (f) institute an effective
control system, audit of public finance, and mechanisms to fight corruption and fraud; and (g) develop close
collaboration with the West African Economic and Monetary Union (WAEMU) and the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS).

Bank strategy. The World Bank Group’s (WBG) Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for FY13-FY16
consisted of three pillars that sought to: accelerate inclusive and sustained growth (Pillar 1), enhance
governance to deliver social services more efficiently (Pillar 2) and reduce social, economic and
environmental vulnerabilities (Pillar 3). The project was congruent with the CPS because it supported
enhanced domestic revenue mobilization (in objective 1 of Pillar 1) and improve the use of public resources
by strengthening accountability and resource management (objective 8,Pillar 2), expanding access to
quality education for the poor (objective 9, Pillar 2) and increase access to quality health services and water
and sanitation facilities for the poor (objectives 10 and 11, Pillar 2).


Rating Relevance TBL




Rating

                                                                                                      Page 6 of 18
                   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                   Govtech and Citizen Engagement (P155121)



               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                OBJECTIVE 1
                Objective
                Enhance domestic revenue mobilization

                Rationale
                Theory of change

                The PAD did not present a theory of change and did not map outcome indicators to project objectives. The
                first and second restructuring papers remedied the shortcoming by presenting a theory of change, revising it
                and redefining indicators to reflect better the project’s results. For objective 1, the papers identify as
                challenges the low collection of fiscal revenues, cumbersome customs clearance procedures, and
                shortcomings in the processes used to execute the budget. To address these problems the project supported
                (a) development of an online asset and tax declaration platform (e-SINTAX– Système intégré de taxation -
                Taxes Administration Information Technology System); (b) development of an automated system for customs
                data (ASYCUDA); (c) operationalization of an integrated public financial management system (N@Folo); and
                (d) upgrading of the unique tax identifier (IFU). The outputs were expected to improve the reliability of the tax
                base, simplify the tax declaration and the payments online, and prepare annual performance reports for 33
                ministries. The expected outcomes were an increase the share of tax revenue collected through e-SINTAX
                and an alignment of budget allocations in all ministries with policy priorities and Public Financial Management
                Act (Second restructuring paper, Report No. RES45189, page 9 -revised theory of change).

                The results indicators associated with the actions did not have a clear connection with enhancing revenue
                mobilization (i.e., increase revenue).The first result was to have 55 percent of the tax revenues collected
                through e-SINTAX. The indicator measures the share of revenues processed through e–SINTAX, but does
                not measure if revenue increased, an explicit objective of component 2, which was defined as “to increase
                fiscal space and domestic revenue collection (emphasis added) and enhance the performance of public
                spending and the delivery of efficient public services” (PAD, paragraph 32).

                Outputs-Intermediate results indicators (ICR, pages 10-12)

                The outputs derive from the activities conducted under component 2, improving domestic revenue
                mobilization and public expenditure management. The table below shows the three intermediate results
                indicators, the baseline and target values, the values achieved at closing, and IEG’s achievement rating. The
                achievements in two results are high and one is substantial. Indicator 3 is a binary (yes/no) output indicator
                and does not measure any outcome of improved decision-making processes in the management of taxation.
                It is also qualitative in nature making its achievement highly subjective. Its value as a results indicator is
                questionable.

                                                                                            Actual
                Intermediate Results Indicators               Baseline       Target                        IEG rating

                                                                                                                   Page 7 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Govtech and Citizen Engagement (P155121)




                                                                             6-30-2022
1. Reduction of UBDs [i.e., Fast track
clearance units] resulting from the
                                              0               55             100            High
digitalization of customs clearance
(Percentage)
2. Share of large enterprises tax payment
                                              24              75             96             High
through e-SINTAX (Percentage)
3. Improved decision-making process in
taxation management (Information
                                              No              Yes            Yes            Substantial
management system for taxation
management operational)

Outcomes (ICR, pages 10-12)

The outcome indicator was defined as increased revenue mobilization, which is measured by share of tax
revenues collected through e-SINTAX. The assessment of performance of the indicators is as follows:

                                                                             Actual
Final PDO Indicators and IRIs                 Baseline        Target                        IEG rating
                                                                             6-30-2022
Increased revenue mobilization (share of tax
revenue collected through e-SINTAX)          36               55             62             High
(Percentage)

Share of tax revenue collected through e-SINTAX. By project closing, some 62 percent of total tax revenue
was collected through Burkina Faso’s tax administration technology system. Although the target was
achieved, the indicator does not measure whether tax revenue increased.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Improve the use of public resources

Rationale
Theory of change

The theory of change for PDO2 can be summarized as follows. The second restructuring paper identified as
challenges the limited outcomes of public services in the education and health sectors, weak government
accountability in the delivery of public services, weak citizens trust in public institutions because of lack of
transparency, weak social accountability, and weak monitoring and oversight capacity of citizens and civil
society. To address these problems the project supported (a) publishing online the citizens’ budget; (b)
developing a platform where public official interests and assets are declared; (c) implementing a redress

                                                                                                    Page 8 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Govtech and Citizen Engagement (P155121)



mechanism to address service delivery issues; and (d) building capacity for civil society organizations (CSO)
to monitor and oversight public sector performance. The expected outputs and outcomes are shown below.

Outputs-Intermediate results indicators (ICR, pages 10-12)

Eleven outputs were expected, among others annual citizens’ budget online; the interests and asset
declaration platform operational; 120 schools and health centers providing feedback through community
score cards, and 3000 staffs in civil society organizations trained on public financial management and social
accountability. The table below separates indicators for enhancing public expenditure management and those
for strengthening accountability mechanisms. The ratings show that the project achieved or exceeded all the
11 target values; the achievement rating is high for nine indicators and substantial for two. It should be noted
that N@folo (indicator 2) has more modules than the two modules reported here. The N@folo system was
officially launched on July 1, 2022, one day after the project closed, and was not used during the project’s
lifetime.

                                                                                     Actual 6-
  Intermediate Results Indicators                         Baseline      Target                    IEG rating
                                                                                     30-2022
  Public expenditure management indicator
  1. Citizens’ budget published by end of the first
                                                            0           4            5            High
  quarter of the budget year (Number)
  2. Improved budget credibility and control in budget
  preparation and execution (Number of N@folo
                                                            0           2            2            High
  modules - preparation, and execution - corrected and
  ready for testing) (Number)
  Accountability mechanism indicators
  3. The number of communities adopting Community
                                                            0           120          120          High
  Score Card (Number)
  4. Identified officials (ministers and parliamentarians)
                                                            0           97           99.3         High
  who have declared their assets (Percentage)
  5. Grievances addressed by the ministry of Education
                                                            0           75           87           High
  (Percentage)
  6. Grievances addressed by the ministry of Health
                                                            0           40           94.4         High
  (Percentage)
  7. Identified officials of phase 1 (high officials expect
  the ministers and parliamentarians) who have              0           83           100          High
  declared their assets online (Percentage)
  8. Reduced alleged corruption cases pending
  adjudication (percentage of pending case judgments 25                 40           54           High
  issued) (Percentage)
  9. Improved public procurement capacity (number of
                                                            0           245          311          High
  certified public procurement specialists) (Number)
  10. Number of Government and CSOs staff trained in
  new accountability tools, citizens engagement and         0           3,500        3,769        High
  public financial management (Number)




                                                                                                   Page 9 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Govtech and Citizen Engagement (P155121)




  11. Number of women trained in new accountability
  tools, citizens engagement mechanisms and PFM            0            600            652        High
  (Number)

Outcomes (ICR, pages 10, 13-15)

The expected outcomes were to: (a) increase citizens access to annual budget; and to have: (b) public
officials declare their assets in the interest and asset declaration platform; (c) citizens satisfied with service
delivery in target schools and health centers; (d) citizens grievances addressed by client service units
contributing to improved service delivery; and (e) civil society empowered to perform its role of monitoring and
oversight the public sector.

                                                                                  Actual 30-06-
  Outcome indicators                               Baseline       Target                        IEG rating
                                                                                  2022
  Public expenditure management indicator
  Improved strategic budget allocation: Budget
  allocations aligned with policy priorities and
                                                    0             100             100            High
  PFM Act (Line ministries preparing program
  budgets - Percentage)
  Accountability mechanism indicators
  Citizen satisfaction with quality of education
                                                    49 +          61 +            72 +           High
  service delivery in target schools (Percentage)
  Citizen satisfaction with quality of health
  service delivery in target health centers         52 +          64 +            75 +           High
  (Percentage)
  Identified officials who made their online assets
                                                    11            30              33             High
  declaration (Percentage)
  + Number rounded to closest integer

Public expenditure. With support from the project the government has been preparing program budgets
aligned with sectoral strategies since 2017. At project closing, all line ministries were preparing their budgets
based on their sectoral strategies. Transitioning to program budgeting has brought some flexibility to
expenditures, permitting adjustments and reallocations. The program budgeting tool informs on the sector’s
programmatic and financial performance, which helps inform decisions about future allocations. However, the
indicator cannot measure if public resource use improved and, hence, if the objective was achieved.

Accountability. The two first indicators measure whether citizens are satisfied with the education and health
services received from the government. Both results show that about three-fourths of the citizens interviewed
are satisfied, a substantial improvement over the 49 percent baseline value. The numbers also reveal that
one quarter of citizens are not yet satisfied with the education and health services from the government; this
number, relatively large, indicates that there is space for improvement. The third indicator is an output, which
informs about the potential to improve accountability. The result shows that about 750 of the 2,260 identified
government officials who could report their assets online did it; also, 286 out of 288 ministers and
parliamentarians (not counted in the indicator) declared their assets. Declaring assets is a good tool to
improve transparency and accountability but does not ensure that the person that declares his or her assets
will be held accountable and whether public resources are used better.


                                                                                                   Page 10 of 18
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Govtech and Citizen Engagement (P155121)




                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Efficacy in achieving each objective was Substantial. Therefore, overall efficacy is Substantial.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   The PAD did not have an economic analysis of the project’s net benefits, but the ICR used three methods to
   estimate the project’s benefits.Method I measures the financial return of the project, defined as the net present
   alues (NPV) of tax revenues minus the foreign exchange costs of the project. The ICR measures NPV and the
   internal rate of return; methodologically, the NPV is a better way to measure project benefits. Method II
   examines if public resources are used better. Method III uses a fiscal multiplier method to measure the fiscal
   impact of the project.

   The methods used do not measure well the benefits of an investment projects as recommended in the World
   Bank Institute book Economic Analysis of Investment Operations: Analytical Tools and Practical Applications
   (2001) by Pedro Belli and co-authors or in Cost-Benefit Analysis: Concepts and Practices (2018) by Boardman,
   Greenberg, Vining and Weimer. The ICR overlooks some clear benefits (e.g., cost savings in closing border
   posts, time savings in customs clearance) and costs (e.g., local costs besides those of the PIU) that could have
   been calculated. Some benefits are not as clear cut and direct, and alternative methods could have been used,
   such as measuring the costs of delivering services in health and education before and after the project. While
   satisfaction surveys inform on whether people are happier or not with the services, they do not inform how much
   it cost to improve satisfaction, or whether the cost fell as a result of the project. The ratings for the Country
   Policy and Institutional Assessment (CPIA) cannot substitute for measuring the net benefits or the cost
   reductions in delivering services for health and education. The average budget execution rate for education or
   health only tells if the budget is being spent and by how much, but cannot measure if the cost of the services fell
   or the quality of services improved. The fiscal multiplier method (a) uses a set of assumptions derived from the
   economic literature about the size of the multiplier over time and (b) assumes that the increase in government
   expenditure can be counted as a project benefit. This method has two shortcomings: (a) there is no evidence


                                                                                                                                Page 11 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Govtech and Citizen Engagement (P155121)



that the project actually contributed to that expenditure; (b) it equates expenditure with benefit, a strong
assumption that is not supported by any evidence related to the project.

The review summarizes below the results based on Method I, the least problematic of the three methods.

Method I – Trends

The ICR compares projections of tax revenues pre-project and post-project and attributes the differences in the
projections to the project. Specifically, the ICR: (a) estimates a trend line for revenues of the period 2010-2016;
(b) uses that trendline to extrapolate revenues for the period 2016-2021 before the project (Rbp); (c) estimates a
trend line for the period 2016-2021 based on actual revenues during 2016-2021 and uses it to estimate trend
revenues for 2016-2021 –revenues after the project, Rap); (d) calculates project benefits as Rap-Rbp, that is,
trend revenues after the project minus trend revenues before the project; (e) calculates the financial net present
value of the project using a discount rate of 5 per cent. The method seems sound intuitively, but it is a shortcut
to doing the real work of seeking the true benefits of the project.

Besides the problem of attribution, the estimates presented in the ICR have the following problems. First, the
revenues are not adjusted for changes in the price level. Second, actual revenues attributed to the project
should have been the correct measure of benefits. Third, the ICR underestimates costs because they include
foreign exchange costs only, not local costs. Fourth, the projections for 2010-2016 and 2016-2021 are based on
nominal values, when real values should have been used. Fifth, the constant for the regression equation for
2016-2021 (second graph in page 46) should have been adjusted to ensure that the actual, post-project and
pre-project values for tax revenue in 2016 are all equal to 1,040.3 CFAF. After adjusting for changes in price
level and restricting the value of the constant in the regression, the estimated net present value of the project
would be US$140 million, 60 percent of the value presented in Table 2 of the ICR.

Review’s Comment

The ICR, however, measures some results that can be related to the project, and which can inform about its
achievements and shortcomings that persist. Revenue management depended on SINTAX (information
technology system for tax administration) and ASYCUDA (automated system for customs data).

Customs clearance and customs revenue. ASYCUDA helped to improve the collection of custom revenues and
speed up customs clearance. Revenues increased 14 percent in Ouagadougou, Bingo, and Bobo Dioulasso and
39 percent in other localities but, as the ICR notes, not all the increase can be attributed to the project. The
digitalization of customs clearance processes permitted to close all the fast-track customs clearance units (22),
to save costs in customs administration and to increase customs revenues as customs inspectors had less
discretion in clearing merchandise. Having ASYCUDA in place brought customs’ services closer to users and
reduced clearance time of merchandise from 24 hours to 2 hours, a substantial gain for importers and exporters
which the project did not consider as a potential benefit and, like the ICR, did not use it to assess its benefits.
Lower expenditures in customs and time savings in clearing merchandise are two clear project benefits, but
their size is unknown. Their size may be small, but the benefits are real.

Net present value and rates of return. Using the adjusted values presented under Method I-Trends, the results
suggest that efficiency may be substantial; to be certain that is the case, it would be necessary to have accurate
estimates of the project’s actual benefits and costs.

The information reviewed suggests that, overall, the project helped to generate gains in customs, with savings in
government expenses and in time for clearing merchandise and to some increase in tax revenues. The

                                                                                                       Page 12 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Govtech and Citizen Engagement (P155121)



estimated impact on tax revenues is likely to be overestimated, but its extent is difficult to assess given the
paucity of information about the project's impact. There are clear gains in customs clearance and savings in
costs in customs. Based on these identifiable gains, the efficiency of the project is modest.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      0
 Appraisal                                                   0
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      0
 ICR Estimate                                               45.00
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The relevance of the PDOs to the Government and Bank strategies is substantial. The efficacy of the two PDOs
is assessed as substantial. Efficiency is modest. The outcome is moderately satisfactory.

Improvements in technology helped improve the administration of tax revenues and customs. The share of tax
revenues collected online reached 60 percent at project closing, which possibly helped increase tax revenues;
its contribution to raising taxes was not measured, but tax administration improved because of the use of an
electronic payment methods and more adequate tax revenue accounting systems. Using ASYCUDA for
customs administration accelerated the clearance process, reducing the time to do so from 24 to 2 hours, which
represents a substantial time savings; also, having ASYCUDA in place permitted closing the 22 fast–track
customs clearance units and reducing government expenditures.

The use of public resources in health and education improved judging by the higher share of citizens who said
to be satisfied with the quality of delivery in these two government services. The share of people satisfied with
the services rose to 72 and 75 percent for education and health from baseline values close to 50 percent.
Budget allocations are better aligned with policy priorities and line ministries now use program budgeting to
prepare their budgets. The budget executed is also closer to the programmed budget in the education and
health sectors. Last, some steps to increase transparency and accountability were taken when more than 30
identified public officials declared their assets online.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory



                                                                                                      Page 13 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Govtech and Citizen Engagement (P155121)




7. Risk to Development Outcome

The risks to development outcomes are high. They arise from political, governance, financial conditions.

The frequency of military coups and unstable transfer of power suggests a volatile political climate which is
not supportive of sustained reform. Weak rule of law makes it difficult to address the population’s grievances
and have fair and just solutions to the problems. These conditions have led to lower government
effectiveness and lower regulatory quality.

The political risks impinge on the government’s financial stability, threatening future investments needed to
support and expand the gains achieved. Deteriorating security conditions, the political uncertainty and rising
food prices triggered by the Russian invasion of Ukraine have widened the fiscal deficit, which reached 10.3
percent of GDP in 2022.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  Project documents lacked an explicit theory of change. Moreover, the link between project objectives and
  intermediate results indicators was unclear, making it difficult to attribute results to the project’s actions.
  The original PDO and intermediate results indicators were replaced by new ones at the time of
  restructurings when new intermediate results indicators were added. These changes led to a better
  results framework but: (a) several PDO indicators did not measure the achievement of results (e.g.,
  declaring assets online); (b) the logical chain between activities conducted and the claimed impact of
  the project was unclear (e.g., satisfaction with services in education and activities carried out under
  component 1); and (c) the revised results framework missed some obvious results in customs that could
  have been accounted for such as budget savings from closing fast-track units and time savings in
  clearing merchandise.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 After supervising the project from Dakar for more than four years, the WB placed staff in Burkina Faso to
 supervise the project; this increased interaction with local counterparts and provided better and timelier
 assistant to the government and the implementation unit in particular. The reporting about the project’s
 status was candid and of good quality, including fiduciary and safeguard aspects.




                                                                                                      Page 14 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Govtech and Citizen Engagement (P155121)



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The project started without a theory of change (TOC) and did not map expected outcomes to the PDO. The
 two restructuring papers each had a TOC and mapped expected outcomes to the project development
 objectives. The second restructuring changed the outcome and intermediate results indicators at
 closing; the changes measured project contributions better, improving the results framework. While several
 of the revised outcome indicators can be used to measure achievement of objectives, the broad scope of
 the PDO makes it difficult to attribute the specific contribution of the project to the objectives. More specific
 and detailed results indicators could have helped overcome these problems and anchor the expectations of
 what could realistically achieved (e.g., in using ASYCUDA, besides revenue generation there was the costs
 savings in bureaucracy and the time savings in clearing merchandise).

 While the PAD’s Annex 4 discusses supervision in detail and called for “more intensive supervision and
 client support during, at least, the first 24 months of project implementation.”, there was no clear and
 specific arrangement on how to achieve this.



b. M&E Implementation
  The M&E activities received adequate project funding and the tracking of activities and results indicators
  worked well. An M&E specialist collected and reported on the data for intermediate and outcomes results
  indicators. Although the indicators changed over the project’s life, their collection was effective because
  of the work of the M&E specialist which received the support of a network of focal points among
  beneficiaries and a team of technical assistants dedicated to specific components.



c. M&E Utilization
  Data collected were used to produce required project reports (e.g., Aide Memoires, implementation
  status reports) but the ICR suggests that they were not for any other purpose or for taking decisions
  about the project such as restructuring it and revising the intermediate and the outcome indicators. The
  ICR does not report if the M&E findings were communicated to the various stakeholders, as well as their
  implications for the success of the project.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest


                                                                                                      Page 15 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Govtech and Citizen Engagement (P155121)



10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project did not trigger safeguards, because it was classified in category C, with minor and reversible
   environmental impacts and its main focus was on intellectual services.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Fiduciary compliance was rated satisfactory in all but one instance. The implementing unit followed the
   recommendations of supervision missions, which noted the following strong points:

         an experienced financial management team;
         acquisition, installation, and use of appropriate software for the project’s accounting and financial
          management;
         regular transmission of unaudited Interim Financial Reports;
         the progression of the project’s disbursement rate; and
         no ineligible expenditure identified after reviewing the project’s transactions.



c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   The project financed the development of modules and platforms that supported the public administration
   digitalization agenda. The ICR reports that they contributed to improve the resilience of the state and the
   public administration during the COVID-19 pandemic.



d. Other
   The ICR reports that there is anecdotal evidence of women benefiting from the health and education
   services. It does not present evidence, and it does not explain why is that different from the results reported
   earlier.



11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                     IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
                                Moderately
Outcome                                                Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
                                Moderately
Bank Performance                                       Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory



                                                                                                    Page 16 of 18
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Govtech and Citizen Engagement (P155121)



Quality of M&E                   Modest                Modest

Quality of ICR                   ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

IEG offers the following lessons, some derived from the ICR with modifications:

        Focusing on technology and management-induced change is likely to increase the chance of
         success of credits/projects that support acquiring and adopting information technology and
         communications.
        To assess the results correctly the project design must ensure that the results indicators are
         appropriate to measure the achievement of objectives.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The review rates the quality of the ICR as substantial. The report reviews the performance, achievements and
shortcomings of the project in a candid and comprehensive manner. In most instances, the information is
complete and adequate to validate the project’s achievements. Despite these positive points, the ICR has
shortcomings that must be pointed out:

      Its effort to assess efficiency is commendable and ambitious, overlooking more direct and measurable
       benefits such as time savings in customs and the closing of 22 fast track clearance units. The report
       tried to estimate potential project benefits using high-level models for which there was no basis for an
       investment project with clear and focused interventions and with specific results which were
       not accounted for. None of the methods were appropriate to measure benefits properly. Using them
       had a high opportunity cost: neglecting to measure properly the project’s benefits.
      The section on risk to development outcomes does not inform about the future risks that might imperil
       the results achieved. The section focuses more on what will be done in the future to enhance the
       project’s benefits but does not inform about the future threats to the results achieved so far.
      Some lessons resemble more a statement of the problems and their causes (e.g., par. 92), while others
       provide information that should have been presented in the main text when discussing the project’s
       results (pars. 96-98).



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial



                                                                                                    Page 17 of 18
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
Govtech and Citizen Engagement (P155121)




                                                                        Page 18 of 18
