     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GZ: Cash for Work (P167726)



                                                                               Report Number: ICRR0023428

1. Project Data



 Project ID                               Project Name
 P167726                                  GZ: Cash for Work

 Country                                  Practice Area(Lead)
 West Bank and Gaza                       Social Protection & Jobs


 L/C/TF Number(s)                         Closing Date (Original)              Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-A8275                                 31-Oct-2021                                        16,993,108.00

 Bank Approval Date                       Closing Date (Actual)
 10-Aug-2018                              30-Jun-2022

                                          IBRD/IDA (USD)                                    Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                          17,000,000.00                                  17,000,000.00

 Revised Commitment                           17,000,000.00                                  16,993,108.00

 Actual                                       16,993,108.00                                  16,993,108.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                 ICR Review Coordinator        Group
 Rosen Asenov               Denise A. Vaillancourt      Eduardo Fernandez             IEGHC (Unit 2)
                                                        Maldonado




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   As stated in the Trust Fund Grant Agreement (TF0A8275, dated August 14, 2018, p. 6) between the
   International Development Association (acting as Administrator of Trust Fund for Gaza and West Bank) and
   the NGO Development Center (NDC) (the “Recipient”), the Project Development Objective (PDO) was “…to
   provide target youth in Gaza with short-term income support and increased access to internet-enabled self-
   employment opportunities.” The Project Appraisal Document (PAD, p. 1) and the Project Restructuring Paper
   (p. 1) articulated the same objective. The PDO remained unchanged throughout the life of the project.


                                                                                               Page 1 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GZ: Cash for Work (P167726)




b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Component 1: Cash for Work (C4W) (Original allocation: $12.5 million; Actual expenditure: $12.5
   million)

   Component 1 aimed to provide unemployed youth aged 18-34 years with short-term employment
   opportunities and income support. Under this component, selected local NGOs - mainly specialized in
   delivering social services - received Cash for Work (C4W) sub-grants to hire youth to help these NGOs
   implement services that supported economic livelihoods (e.g. enhancements to agricultural and fishing
   activities) and social services (e.g. health, education, support to disabled and elderly and psychosocial
   support), with priority given to social services provided to vulnerable groups since these services were
   under‐provided in Gaza. Beneficiaries were hired in two batches of sub-projects during one year – each
   lasting six months - based on a competitive and transparent process and targeting criteria set by the project.
   During their 6-month employment, each beneficiary received a stipend equivalent to $380 per month. This
   amount was considered appropriate as it was below the minimum wage ($390) to discourage candidates
   who were already working or able to find a job easily, while providing a meaningful safety net. To spread the
   benefits of C4W, support was provided across Gaza and across households. Only one qualifying youth per
   beneficiary household could benefit from C4W, of which half were to be female.

   Component 2: Internet-enabled self-employment (e-work) (Original allocation: $3 million; Actual
   expenditure: $3 million)

   Component 2 aimed to increase access of target youth in Gaza to internet-enabled self-employment (e-
   work) opportunities by offering e-work sub-grants to selected service providers to help a total of 750
   unemployed youth aged 18-34 years (half of which female) become online freelancers. To this end, the
   project provided them with an e-work support package (skills training and on-the-job support). Depending
   on the market needs and the comparative advantage of the organizations, the type of e-work to be
   supported by the project included complex tasks (e.g., software development, graphic design, media
   production, content development, website design, animations, e-marketing, translation) and simpler tasks
   (e.g., labeling photos or videos, describing products, transcribing scanned documents, data gathering,
   answering calls). The expected cost of each support package was up to $4,000 per beneficiary and
   included: (1) up to two months of freelancing skills training, which could include technical skills training; (2)
   six months of on-the-job support that included provision of co-working space, equipment as needed, and
   mentorship/technical support; and (3) transportation allowance provided for e-work beneficiaries during the
   support period. Additionally, the support package was to include sensitization outreach to families on the
   importance of women’s work to influence men’s household-related decisions. The organizations and
   proposals potentially eligible to receive sub-grants for providing e-work support packages were to be
   evaluated and selected based on criteria set by the Project. The selected providers of e-work packages



                                                                                                        Page 2 of 21
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    GZ: Cash for Work (P167726)



  would then identify and select youth with adequate skills and interest to join the program - one target youth
  per beneficiary household.

  Component 3: Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation (Original allocation: $1.5 million;
  Actual expenditure: $1.5 million)

  This component was expected to help strengthen the capacity of the NGO Development Center (NDC) for
  project management (PM) and monitoring and evaluation (M&E) through financing of office equipment,
  consultants’ services, including audit, training, and incremental operating cost. Additionally, noted by the
  TTL (May 3, 2023), the implementing organizations received substantial project management skills training
  from the NDC team, which most of them needed, as they had never implemented such projects before.
  Component 3 was expected to finance the preparation of a Project Operations Manual, guidelines and
  outreach material for NGOs providing C4W services and not‐for‐profit organizations providing e‐work
  support, and to assist these organizations in the identification of target youth and the validation of eligibility
  information (PAD, p. 14). All of these were expected to ultimately improve the quality and effectiveness of
  the services that the implementing organizations would provide to vulnerable groups in Gaza.




e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Cost. The total actual cost of the project was $16,993,108, essentially 100 percent of the original estimate
  of $17 million. The actual cost of all three project components was the same as originally envisaged.

  Financing and Borrower Contribution: The project was financed by a grant from the Trust Fund for Gaza
  and the West Bank to the NGO Development Center (NDC), in the amount of $17 million, of which virtually
  all was disbursed. No contribution from the Borrower was planned or delivered.

  Dates. The project was approved on August 14, 2018 and became effective less than two weeks later, on
  August 27, 2018. However, following effectiveness, project launch and implementation were delayed. The
  Ministry of Finance and Planning requested the previously agreed on institutional and implementation
  arrangements to be complemented with an Advisory Committee (AC), aimed at facilitating linkages and
  coordination between the Palestinian Authority (PA) and the Project’s Implementing Agency (NDC),
  specifically related to the validation of the selected implementing organizations and end beneficiaries, while
  ensuring alignment with the general framework of the national plans and policies. Following lengthy
  consultations involving all concerned stakeholders, the AC was established on February 4, 2019, over five
  months after project effectiveness. A virtual mid-term review took place during the period October 26 -
  November 5, 2020. The project was restructured on July 7, 2021, around four months before the original
  closing date (October 31, 2021), at which time an amount of $15.83 million had been disbursed, or 93
  percent of the total actual disbursements ($16.99 million), and progress toward achievement of the PDO
  and implementation progress were rated Satisfactory. This Level 2 restructuring involved an eight-month
  extension of the closing date (from October 31, 2021, to June 30, 2022), necessary to offset implementation
  delays that resulted from: (a) the Covid-19 pandemic that led to the closure of all educational institutes in
  Gaza (in March, 2020), affecting the delivery of most C4W sub-projects; (b) conflict escalations in Gaza (in
  May 2021); and (c) initial delays in rolling out the AC. The change in the grant closing date allowed the
  completion of pending activities so as to ensure the achievement of the PDO and the full disbursement of


                                                                                                       Page 3 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GZ: Cash for Work (P167726)



   the Project’s outstanding balance of $1.17 million. It did not affect the PDO or Theory of Change of the
   Project.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The PDO is highly relevant to current country conditions. Gaza’s economy has been suffering for
decades due to violence and political instability. As a result of the uncertainty, ongoing conflict with Israel,
mobility restrictions imposed by the blockade, and structural deficiencies, private sector job opportunities in
Gaza have been extremely limited, making the Gazan population heavily dependent on support provided by
the public sector and international donors such as The United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), a major provider of relief and jobs in Gaza and, as such, an
important driver of growth. However, jobs and social services provision in Gaza have been negatively
impacted by budget cuts in the public sector and declining donor aid since 2014. In 2017, over half (53%) of
the Gazan population was poor while unemployment and inactivity were the highest among youth (41%)
and women (60%). In 2018, unemployment in Gaza reached 50 percent, one of the highest rates in the
world. This Project is highly relevant to current country conditions as it contributed to filling the gap in social
services provision and supporting medium-term development goals by addressing the high unemployment
among Gazan youth, emphasizing the support of young women, of which 88 percent were
unemployed. The project’s focus on young women included: (i) a concentration on C4W in social services
and e‐work, which are more likely to ensure women’s participation; and (ii) the requirement that at least 50
percent of the Project beneficiaries be women (PAD, pp. 6-9). The relevance of the project was further
strengthened by the Covid-19 pandemic and the conflict escalation in Gaza in May 2021, which
exacerbated the already existing labor market and welfare challenges in Gaza (ICR, p. 12).

The Project is also relevant to the Bank’s previous sector engagement. Since 2010, the World Bank
Group has been supporting the Palestinian Authorities’ (PA) efforts to reduce poverty and improve social
safety nets. With support from the World Bank Group and the European Union for its development and
implementation, the Cash Transfer Program (CTP) plays a critical role in addressing and preventing poverty
and vulnerability, sustaining income and fostering economic inclusion, especially among women and
marginalized groups, and serves as the main social assistance instrument to fight poverty due to its proven
effectiveness and quick scalability. The CTP serves as a well-targeted social assistance instrument, which
has enabled the PA to consolidate, harmonize and further develop social assistance that was mostly
provided through a complex web of organizations run by the PA (including at least three ministries),
non‐governmental organizations and other external agencies. The project complemented other Bank
operations supporting private sector growth and job creation in the West Bank and Gaza, including: the
Innovative Private Sector Development Project, which aims to support the creation of an outsourcing Hub in
Gaza (among other things); and the Finance for Jobs Project, which is piloting a development impact bond
to attract private investment to upgrade the skills of the workforce (PAD, pp. 8-10).

The PDO is well aligned with the current development priorities of the Government. With its aim to
address challenges faced by Gaza’s vulnerable population (youth, especially young women), through the
provision of social services and its contribution to human capital development and job creation, the Project
is well aligned with several of the Government’s priorities set out in a number of policy frameworks,
including the National Policy Agenda 2017–2022, and its accompanying National Development Plan 2021–

                                                                                                        Page 4 of 21
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      GZ: Cash for Work (P167726)



               2023, the National Employment Strategy, as well as the Social Development Strategy 2017–2022 of the
               Ministry of Social Development (MOSD). More specifically, the Palestinian National Policy Agenda for 2017-
               22 focuses on investing in human capital (“Putting Citizens First”) and private sector development as the
               key to job creation and economic growth. The Social Development Sector Strategy prioritizes employment
               in general, youth employment, entrepreneurship, improving the quality of education and its responsiveness
               to labor market needs, as well as the delivery of cash transfers and social services to the poorest and most
               vulnerable – mainly through NGOs – to reduce social vulnerabilities and improve access to economic
               opportunities. The Project is also consistent with the Palestinian Authority’s commitment to promote youth
               employment and gender inclusion as defined, respectively, in the Palestinian National Employment Strategy
               and the 2016 National Action Plan to implement the UN Security Resolution 1325 on Women, Peace and
               Security (PAD, pp. 8-9).

               Moreover, the Project is in line with the World Bank Group’s Assistance Strategy for the West Bank
               and Gaza for FY18‐21, which was in place during most of the Project’s implementation period, and
               with the subsequent Assistance Strategy FY22-25, issued one year before Project closing. The
               Project contributed to the first pillar of the Bank’s FY18-21 Strategy: ‘’Setting the conditions for increased
               private sector investments and job creation’’ helping young people to: (1) increase their employability by
               providing them with valuable work experience and (2) engage in e-work and start their own business
               through e-work training and support. The Project’s C4W support provided a temporary safety net to target
               youth and their families, helped reduce the deficit in much-needed social services, and supported
               institutions with a strong record in delivering services to poor communities. In so doing, the Project
               contributed also to the third pillar of the Bank’s FY18-21 Assistance Strategy: “Addressing the needs of the
               vulnerable and strengthening institutions for improved citizen-centered service delivery”. With respect to the
               Bank’s Assistance Strategy for the period FY22-25, in place during the last year of project implementation,
               the Project contributed to: Objective 1.3: Achieve Better Human Development Outcomes, ‘enhancing the
               capacity of the workforce with particular focus on youth and women for better job opportunities’; Objective
               1.4: Strengthen Social Protection Systems to address Multi-Dimensional Poverty: ‘reducing multi-
               dimensional poverty and safeguarding the poor and the most marginalized’; and Objective 2.1 Stimulate
               Inclusive Private Sector Development and Diversify Financial Products: ‘support resilience of micro, small
               and medium enterprises (MSMEs) and employment in the wake of the COVID-19 crisis’.

               The relevance of the PDO is rated High due to its strong alignment with country conditions, the relevant
               WBG Assistance Strategies and the Bank’s previous sector engagement, as well as the Government’s
               development priorities in place at appraisal and throughout project implementation.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                                                                                                                   Page 5 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   GZ: Cash for Work (P167726)



Provide target youth in Gaza with short-term income support.

Rationale
The ICR’s Theory of Change (ToC) (ICR p. 7) articulates four objectives, categorized as “intermediate
outcomes” for this emergency operation:

    1. Increased access to short-term employment and earnings;
    2. Increased access to social services among vulnerable groups, leading to improved health, education
       and mental health of vulnerable groups;
    3. Increased access to e-work opportunities; and
    4. Improved project management capacity (including financial management, outreach activities and the
       tracking of outcomes at the beneficiary level), culminating in NGOs’ improved capacity to provide
       services to vulnerable communities and target groups.

These four objectives are consistent with the PAD’s write-up of what the project intended to achieve by
completion and with IEG’s exchange with the TTL of May 3, 2023. The PDO Statement, on the other hand,
articulates only two of these four objectives: the first and the third.

This assessment of the project’s efficacy is organized around the two objectives formally stated in the
PDO. The assessment of the achievement of Objective 1 (to provide target youth in Gaza with short-term
income support) includes an assessment of the achievement of the second of the four outcomes in the theory
of change (increased access to social services among vulnerable groups), and the fourth (improved project
management capacity, culminating in NGO’s improved capacity to provide services to vulnerable
communities and target groups), as both are tightly linked to the achievement of the formally stated Objective
1. The project’s ToC shows that these three outcomes would be achieved through the provision of Cash for
Work (C4W) sub-grants to selected local NGOs to hire unemployed youth for temporary work, which would
expand these NGOs’ implementation of services supporting economic livelihoods and social services, with
priority given to social services for vulnerable groups. The ToC is built on the expectation that the hiring by
NGOs of target youth to provide services to vulnerable groups would increase vulnerable groups’ access to
much-needed social services, and ultimately could lead to enhanced protection of vulnerable groups,
provided that targeting and service delivery by sub-projects are well executed.

Note: The Project’s theory of change (ICR, p. 7) highlights other expected intermediate outcomes of the C4W
sub-projects, such as gained new skills; increased self-value among target youth; enhanced protection of
vulnerable groups, including target youth and their families; as well as expected medium-term and long-term
outcomes, among which improved employability of target youth; better education, health and long-term jobs
outcomes of vulnerable groups; and improved social cohesion at the community level. All these presumed
outcomes, however, are beyond the control of the operation and are not part of the PDO and thus not
included in the results framework, although some of them were reported in the ICR.

Outputs and intermediate results:

Hiring, training and payment of youth for delivery of services:

      Through implementing NGOs, the project (1) hired unemployed youth aged 18-34 years, each batch
       hired for a six-month contract, based on a competitive and transparent process and targeting criteria
       set by the project, (2) provided them with training and on-the-job experience, and (3) paid them a
       stipend equivalent to $380 per month.

                                                                                                  Page 6 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   GZ: Cash for Work (P167726)




      All 23 implementing NGOs successfully completed their employment cycles, including 14 education
       sub-projects, 4 health sub-projects, three psychosocial sub-projects, and two sub-projects for people
       with disabilities.
      100 percent of the claims and grievances were processed and resolved within 30 days,
       surpassing the target of 60 percent

Capacity building of participating NGOs:

      The local NGOs engaged in project implementation were provided with necessary human and
       financial resources to support sub-projects’ implementation and service provision.
      The NDC provided implementing local NGOs with guidance and assistance aimed to improve NGOs’
       capacity for designing and implementing projects and providing better services to vulnerable groups.
       The implementing organizations participated in regular and open discussions and exchanged good
       practices on project management (including implementing donor-funded operations, preparing quality
       proposals, fiduciary and safeguard aspects, M&E, and replicating and scaling up successful
       interventions); project design (through the conduct of needs assessments and the consideration of
       supply and demand); and achieving greater impact by joining efforts with other partners, the local
       community, and other NGOs providing similar services (ICR, p. 25).

Outcomes:

The project increased access to short-term employment and earnings, enhanced the skills and experience of
beneficiary youth, and boosted their confidence.

      A total of 5,052 youth received cash for work (C4W) from the Project, exceeding the target of
       4,400.
            o Of these, a total of 3,535 young women received C4W, exceeding the target of 2,200.
      The C4W participants’ earnings allowed them to increase their consumption (housing, nutrition,
       schooling, and clothing, among others), which also had a positive effect on the local economy.
            o A total of 30,312 people lived in households where beneficiary youth received C4W from the
               Project (exceeding the target of 26,400), among which 28,056 members were from CTP
               households or households on the waiting list for UNRWA's Job Creation Program, more than
               double the target of 13,200.
      As noted in the NDC-ICR, female participants in C4W sub-projects reported feeling a sense of
       accomplishment that has empowered them to play an active role in their families and communities and
       improved their awareness of self-worth.
      According to the NDC’s midterm report, the majority of the interviewed youth reported that the project
       helped them increase their self-actualization and outlook on life.
      Over 94 percent of the C4W direct beneficiaries were satisfied with the support provided by the
       Project, exceeding the target of 80 percent, whereas the share of satisfied female beneficiaries was
       around 96 percent and that of male beneficiaries was about 93 percent.

The project also increased access to social (health, education and mental health) services among vulnerable
groups.

      As the C4W participants worked for NGOs that were serving vulnerable populations, there was an
       added benefit to the community. A total of 407,784 vulnerable people directly benefited from services

                                                                                                Page 7 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   GZ: Cash for Work (P167726)



         provided through C4W sub-projects, far exceeding the target of 80,000, of which 10,195 disabled
         people (surpassing the target of 6,000), 263,496 children (far exceeding the target of 20,000), and
         94,177 women (far surpassing the target of 20,000).
        As reported by the TTL, qualitative data (success stories) and anecdotal evidence from field visits
         point to improved health and education services for vulnerable groups as a result of the Project.

The project’s support to implementing NGOs served to enhance their capacities to design, oversee and
provide services to vulnerable communities and target groups.

        The C4W support to NGOs enabled them not only to continue providing essential social services but
         also to improve the outreach and quality of these services. As reported in the TTL written interview
         (dated May 03, 2023), implementation of C4W by participating NGOs culminated in a strengthening of
         their capacities and enhanced their service delivery effectiveness, thanks to their: exposure to project
         implementation expertise and experience, networking opportunities, and enhanced ability to leverage
         resources and obtain further funding from other donors.
        A number of NGOs retained their employees at the end of the six-month support provided by the
         C4W. As noted in the TTL written interview, during field visits, the task team learned that between 10
         to 15 percent of the C4W participants were retained, particularly in the health sector, as the project
         coincided with the pandemic outbreak.

Note: Overachievement of the target for number of vulnerable people benefitting from services provided
through C4W sub-projects was due to an emphasis on covering large parts of the school system by sub-
projects (ICR, p. 30). Additionally, C4W projects are usually implemented as public works projects in Gaza, in
which case the number of public works projects rather than the number of their beneficiaries is reported. As
this was the first C4W project in Gaza that counted the number of individuals benefitting from C4W support,
there was uncertainty regarding how many vulnerable people would benefit from the social services and
hence the conservative target of 80,000 (ICR, p. 13). Even with this scenario of a possible underestimate of
vulnerable people benefiting from the social services provided under the C4W sub-projects, the actual
number of beneficiaries served was five times the estimate, and would be considered high, even if the original
target had been increased by a factor of two, three, or even four.



Rating
High


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Provide target youth in Gaza with increased access to internet-enabled self-employment (e-work)
opportunities.

Rationale
The theory of change held that increasing access to e-work opportunities by contracting specialized not-for-
profit entities to provide target youth with e-work support (skills training and on-the-job support) would help
the beneficiaries of e-work support to find freelancing jobs.



                                                                                                    Page 8 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   GZ: Cash for Work (P167726)



Outputs and intermediate results:

     The selected three service providers (i.e. the University College of Applied Sciences and
      Technology, Gaza Gateway, and the Islamic University) completed two cycles of training and
      coaching as planned and were able to provide a third cycle.
     A total of 1,309 youth received e-work support from the project, exceeding the target of 750, of
      which 715 females, exceeding the target of 375.
     Of the direct beneficiaries of e-work, 86.5 percent were satisfied with the support provided by
      the Project, surpassing the target of 80 percent. Broken down by gender, 87.2 percent of female
      respondents and 85.5 percent of male respondents reported, respectively, that they were
      satisfied.
     100 percent of all claims and grievances were processed and resolved within 30 days, far
      exceeding the target of 60 percent.

Outcomes

     A total of 1,040 e-work support beneficiaries became online freelancers (i.e. have carried out at
        least one paid freelancing job during the support or 6 months after that), far surpassing the target of
        375, of which 574 young women, far exceeding the target of 188.
       Companies have been formed between e-work trainees, and some of them have been able to become
        professional freelancers with clients from across the Middle East.
       On average, beneficiaries of e-work training and support received 1.6 additional freelancing contracts
        per month (each contract on average paid $300), or an additional $480 per month, equivalent to
        around $6,000 annually, well above the $4,178 average annual income in Gaza in 2017. A survey
        undertaken by NDC six months after completion of the e-work training and coaching indicated that of
        the 1,198 surveyed beneficiaries, 913 (76.2%) continued to earn income. Many e-work participants
        were able to find jobs that required a combination of their diverse educational backgrounds, old and
        newly acquired through the project skills. For example, previous educators who struggled to find a job
        were able to use their language and subject matter skills, in combination with the technical training
        received under the project, to become translators, voice-over specialists, and programming
        specialists.
       Many e-work participants used their income generated through the initial e-work training to raise funds
        for their advanced training and were also teaching these skills to others within their families and
        communities as a way to earn income.
       The e-work support has had a positive impact in that it created opportunities for young women to work
        virtually, thus enabling them to engage in meaningful work while reducing cultural barriers to their
        participation in the workforce.
       According to the NDC’s midterm report, the majority of the interviewed youth reported that the project
        helped them increase their self-actualization and outlook on life.
       As noted in the ICR (p. 20), overachievement of the e-work-related targets was a result of the project
        extension and the cost savings from shifting to online e-work training and support delivery, due to the
        Covid-19 pandemic, which enabled the completion of all planned activities and the delivery of a third
        (unplanned) round of support for e-work.




                                                                                                 Page 9 of 21
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                GZ: Cash for Work (P167726)




                            Rating
                            High


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Achievement of Objective 1 (provide target youth in Gaza with short-term employment opportunities and
                            income support) exceeded targets and culminated in the reaching of five times the vulnerable populations
                            with social services than the target. Moreover, the project enhanced the experience, capacities and
                            confidences of youth benefiting from this short-term employment, boosted their income, and strengthened
                            NGOs’ capacities and prospects for improved social service delivery. Achievement of Objective 2 (increase
                            access to internet-enabled self-employment [e-work] opportunities for target youth in Gaza) also exceeded
                            targets.

                            Attribution. According to the ICR (pp. 13-14) and the TTL - despite the lack of impact evaluation - it is
                            credible to attribute the achieved outcomes to the Project, as the project beneficiaries were unlikely to have
                            received income, valuable work experience and access to services, outside of the project, given the scarcity
                            of job opportunities and deficit in social services in Gaza. Moreover, the beneficiaries of e-work support
                            would not have been able to obtain the kind of employment, guidance, training and opportunities provided
                            under the project, which were not available elsewhere. While these arguments provide evidence of the
                            Project’s major contribution to the achieved outcomes, they are insufficient for attributing the achieved
                            outcomes entirely to the Project. Project activities were expected to complement services provided by
                            government institutions (PAD p. 9); its C4W component also supported refugees on UNRWA’s waiting list
                            who could no longer be supported (PAD, p. 16), and youth from households included in the EU / WBG-
                            supported Cash Transfer Program were given preferential access to the project’s C4W support, to provide
                            them with valuable work experience and additional safety to their families (PAD, p. 18). The ICR (p. 46) notes
                            that many e-work participants were able to find jobs that required a combination of their diverse educational
                            backgrounds, already established and newly acquired through the project, indicating that this outcome was a
                            result not only of this intervention but also of external factors. All these examples show that there have been
                            other sources of training and assistance available in Gaza that may have benefited at least some of the
                            Project participants and improved their employability, thus contributing to the project outcomes. The extent to
                            which other donors and interventions contributed to project outcomes was, however, not discussed in the
                            ICR.

                            Counterfactual. Given Gaza’s economic decline and reduced aid flows, limited job opportunities, the Covid-
                            19 pandemic and deficit in social services, among other constraints, in the absence of the Project it is unlikely
                            that the gap in social services provision would have been bridged and that the high poverty and
                            unemployment among youth and women, among other vulnerable groups, would have been reduced, as
                            noted by the task team.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating



                                                                                                                               Page 10 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      GZ: Cash for Work (P167726)



  High



 5. Efficiency
Economic Efficiency. While not including ex-ante economic analysis due to difficulties in quantifying some of
the Project benefits, the PAD (p. 21) highlighted the Project’s expected positive economic effects at the
individual and macro levels. The income expected to be generated through improved skills, temporary
employment and more steady employment resulting from participation in the Project would help beneficiaries
and their families to stabilize their purchasing power and aggregate demand and thus contribute to the local
economy. It was also expected to help decrease social exclusion, crime, and political instability. The Project’s
Internet‐enabled self‐employment (e‐work) component, in particular, was expected to have sustainable positive
effects on both beneficiaries and Gaza’s economy as the freelancing industry has promising prospects in the
Palestinian territories and freelance jobs typically offer higher‐than‐average salaries. The PAD pointed to the
availability of supply and demand factors contributing to the freelance industry’s strong potential to create jobs in
the Palestinian territories. The PAD’s identification of this potential included: a suitable workforce that is young
and educated with widespread basic computer and language skills, and the availability of necessary
infrastructure for online freelancing (accessibility to affordable Internet and broadband in certain
regions). Moreover, the freelancing industry was assessed as able to offer a wide range of job opportunities,
especially for Gaza’s youth and women, who are the most affected by unemployment and under-employment,
thanks to its ease of entry, flexibility in the skills required, time arrangements, and ability to overcome movement
and access restrictions.

An end-of-project cost-benefit analysis confirmed that the Project is likely to have generated substantial benefits
and reasonably high rates of return. The ICR’s (pp. 14-15) estimates of the Project’s social rate of return (SRR)
are robust to changes in key assumptions, as shown by the sensitivity analysis presented in the ICR’s annex 4
(pp. 37-45). Largely attributable to significantly surpassing project targets and innovative project design features,
the Project’s estimated SRR, ranges from 53 percent if counting only the immediate income benefits for the
C4W beneficiaries to 63 percent when considering the long-term benefits to C4W and corresponding sub-project
beneficiaries. Because the C4W component linked beneficiaries to services rather than higher-cost endeavors,
such as infrastructure construction projects, operating costs were low compared to conventional Labor-Intensive
Public Works (LIPW) projects, and were further reduced by the NGOs’ lower-than-planned operational costs,
which enabled an increase in beneficiary coverage. Out of the $12.5 million allocated to the C4W component, a
total of $11.7 million was disbursed to beneficiaries. As a result, even without counting the long-term benefits of
the C4W activities, the component achieved a favorable SRR of 26 percent. Additionally, even though the long-
term per-beneficiary benefits of the sub-project services to vulnerable populations are modest and expected in
the future, just the sheer number of the education and psychological sub-projects beneficiaries alone (230,000)
made the difference. The estimated high returns to the e-work component of 75 percent also contributed to the
Project’s high return, as shown by the large projected net increase in earnings per sub-project beneficiary. On
average, beneficiaries of e-work support received 1.6 additional freelancing contracts per month, whereas each
contract paid $300 on average, or an additional $480 per month. This means that the average annual income
from freelancing was around $6,000, significantly higher than the $4,178 average annual income reported in the
Palestine Inclusive Diagnostic Note, 2017.

Implementation Efficiency. Design and implementation also contributed to the efficiency of the project. The
Project design featured innovative elements aimed to generate greater positive effects on the beneficiaries and
their communities by placing beneficiaries in higher social return activities as compared to traditional LIPW
projects through (1) providing services that C4W beneficiaries supported and (2) focusing on activities that

                                                                                                       Page 11 of 21
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       GZ: Cash for Work (P167726)



matched beneficiaries’ skills and backgrounds to help them further develop and refine skills relevant to their
careers. Project implementation, including follow-up, supervision and support, was both efficient and effective,
as reported by partners, participating NGOs, and service providers. According to them, among the key factors
contributing to the project’s success were (1) the emphasis on the use of an operational manual with guidance
on management, procurement, and other relevant topics and (2) development of a database portal that enabled
implementing partners to manage the high number of applicants and select beneficiaries transparently (ICR, p.
15).

Additionally, despite the initial delays associated with the creation of the AC, its presence allowed for quicker
and more efficient implementation in the later stages of the project (ICR, p. 20). Due to Covid-19-related
restrictions, C4W activities were put on pause except the – much-needed - health C4W activities through which
the project contributed to increased emergency responsiveness during the pandemic and improved outreach
and quality of the services of health organizations by adding new team members to their staff. The delivery of e-
work support activities was not affected by the pandemic as they could be shifted online. This also lowered
operation costs, allowing for the saved funds to be used for increasing the beneficiary coverage (ICR, p. 14). At
the same time, implementation delays in some project activities (caused by delays in the project launch and
further delays caused by the pandemic and the 2021 conflict escalation) necessitated the Project’s extension by
eight months. With this extension outcome targets were fully achieved, if not surpassed. The project’s
implementation efficiency is rated Substantial as implementation delays affected the timeliness of the short-term
relief that this emergency operation was aimed to provide to the Gazans most affected by the crisis.

Notwithstanding implementation delays, by the extended project end, all pending activities were implemented,
the PDO was achieved and related targets surpassed, positive impacts beyond the PDO were reported, the
project’s outstanding balance was fully disbursed and actual component costs remained the same as the
original estimates. Moreover, the delay in the project launch was due to Government’s request to set up an
Advisory Committee to oversee and monitor implementation and results. In the end, the establishment and
functioning of this Advisory Committee, was instrumental in ensuring smooth implementation and the project’s
success. Based on these notable achievements, high economic efficiency and substantial implementation
efficiency, the project’s efficiency is rated High.


Efficiency Rating
High


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                    0
 Appraisal                                                  0
                                                                                     Not Applicable
                                                                                    0
 ICR Estimate                                               0
                                                                                     Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.


                                                                                                   Page 12 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GZ: Cash for Work (P167726)



6. Outcome

The PDO was highly relevant to (i) the situation in Gaza at the time of appraisal and completion, (ii) the
government’s development priorities, and (iii) the Bank’s Assistance Strategies for FY18-21 and FY22-25 for the
West Bank and Gaza. Efficacy is also rated as high - achievement of both formally stated objectives exceeded
expectations and positive results were reported with regard to the two additional intended objectives in the
Project’s Theory of Change (vulnerable populations’ access to social services, and strengthened capacities and
experience of hired youth and of implementing NGOs). The Project's overall efficiency was rated high based on
high economic efficiency and substantial implementation efficiency. Based on High relevance, High efficacy and
High efficiency of the project, the outcome of the project is rated Highly Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Highly Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

As indicated by the TTL, unlike the e-work support, the results of the project’s C4W component were not
expected to be sustainable as C4W activities were designed to provide a short-term response to the high
unemployment and poverty rates in Gaza. Nevertheless, after the project ended, around 10-15 percent of the
hired C4W beneficiaries retained their jobs, while the rest gained valuable work experience, which
contributed to their employability. The beneficiaries of e-work support continued to earn income after project
completion, and some of them have managed to secure long-term contracts. The survey undertaken by the
NDC six months after the e-work training and coaching completion, revealed that of the 1,198 surveyed
beneficiaries, 913 (76.2%) continued to earn income. Also, capacity building activities that were implemented
under the project helped strengthen public authorities’ and NGOs’ capacity to design, implement and
oversee services to vulnerable communities and target groups and thus have contributed to the sustainability
of project outcomes.

The likelihood that the project outcome will be maintained is further strengthened by the Government’s and
the Bank’s commitment to investing in human capital, private sector development and social protection and
promoting youth employment and gender inclusion. There are a number of related ongoing and recently
approved WBG-funded projects in Gaza that contribute to maintaining and improving the results of this
project. These include ongoing projects, such as the follow-on Gaza Emergency Support for Social Services
Project, as well as the Emergency Social Protection and Jobs COVID-19 Response Project; Supporting an
Education Reform Agenda for Improving Teaching, Assessment and Career Pathways; and recently
approved projects, such as the Health System Efficiency and Resilience Project and the Technology for
Youth and Jobs Additional Financing.

Additionally, the TTL pointed out to IEG that for this project’s contribution to SDG 8 – Decent Work and
Economic Growth, the NGO Development Center received the Arab Gulf Programme for Development’s
2022 Prince Talal International Prize for Human Development for projects implemented by national NGOs.
The award recognizes and promotes globally the project as an innovative and effective human development
intervention and in so doing increases its visibility and the likelihood for sustaining its results, while




                                                                                                   Page 13 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GZ: Cash for Work (P167726)



recognizing the NDC’s (and the Bank’s) contribution to addressing Gazans’ most pressing needs and helping
them achieve their full human development potential.

The Project contributed to youth employment and human capital formation and laid a foundation for more
resilience and the returns of the Project’s e-work activities could become greater should and when Gaza’s
freelancers become more attractive. However, the risk that the Project’s development outcome may not be
maintained remains substantial. This is mainly because of Gaza’s fragility and the high dependence of its
social protection on donor financing, which could be further reduced given the likelihood of a global recession
(ICR, p. 24).




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  At appraisal, risks and activities for their mitigation were appropriately identified; relevant technical
  expertise was brought to the design process; and project preparation benefited from a highly
  collaborative and consultative process that involved the government, the NDC, the NGO community,
  international organizations and development partners and concerned communities. As reported by the
  TTL (May 3, 2023), the project design was informed by several rounds of consultations with key
  stakeholders, including the UNRWA, Palestinian Authority (PA) line ministries, the NGO community and
  development partners. These consultations were critical in securing the buy-in of all key stakeholders,
  particularly the PA. The project design was innovative and well aligned with Gaza’s context and the
  government’s policies, priorities and strategic vision. Its design as an emergency operation was
  appropriate for providing a quick response to vulnerable Gazans’ most pressing needs, thus contributing
  to filling the gap in social services provision and increasing the earnings and earnings potential of Gaza’s
  youth, with a focus on young women, who were most affected by unemployment. The design of the
  project’s C4W component was informed by evidence from World Bank-supported C4W in other countries
  and a careful review of the various types of cash for work projects being implemented within Gaza, with a
  focus on priority areas and gaps, as well as the potential for scalability and greater impact. The design of
  the e-work component was informed by research in the field of online freelancing, micro work, and digital
  jobs and an accompanying demand-side study commissioned for Gaza.

  Implementation arrangements were kept as simple as possible and built on the experience of previously
  implemented, successful Bank-funded NGO projects. It was envisaged that project implementation
  would be based on close partnership with government counterparts and development partners aimed to
  increase the efficiency and effectiveness of resource use through better targeting, management,
  coordination and administration of the various safety net instruments. The NDC’s responsibility for
  overseeing project implementation and ensuring compliance with the Bank’s procedures and guidelines
  was well placed. C4W sub-projects were to be identified and implemented by NGOs in consultation with
  relevant communities and public institutions, ensuring local relevance. Implementation arrangements,
  fiduciary compliance, and M&E arrangements took into account institutional capacity. The project
  examined the evidence and the implementing organizations’ experience in World Bank Group projects to
  ensure their sufficient capacity and required spot audits of implementing organizations to avoid
  misappropriation and ineligible expenses. The Results Framework and component designs took into
  account gender inclusion and supporting vulnerable communities in Gaza. Additionally, collaborating with
  a partner the Bank had previously worked with that had significant experience and a good track record

                                                                                                   Page 14 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GZ: Cash for Work (P167726)



  (the NDC) considerably reduced the risks of inadequate M&E implementation and lack of fiduciary
  compliance (ICR, p. 18-23). Implementation arrangements were sound and reflected the right choices
  and strategies for: selecting experienced NGOs; capacity building; coordination and communication
  (Advisory Committee consisting of the key partners); and oversight arrangements.

  The project’s M&E was based on measurable indicators and vision to provide nuances of the project’s
  successes through extensive midterm evaluation and generate supplemental information (both
  quantitative and qualitative) through beneficiary surveys and the conduct of an external implementation
  completion report commissioned by the NDC (NDC-ICR). However, both the inconsistency between the
  PDO’s two objectives and the ToC’s four objectives, and the lack of indicators in the Results Framework
  to reflect the capacity building objectives can be seen as shortcomings in the project’s design.
  Additionally, while this was an emergency operation aimed to provide quick relief and contribute to short-
  term development goals, the preparation time for this operation turned to be insufficient. Following the
  quick approval and effectiveness of the grant, the client requested the previously agreed on institutional
  and implementation arrangements to be complemented with an Advisory Committee. The establishment
  of the AC delayed the project launch by five months, affecting the timeliness of this emergency project,
  but in the end contributed to the management, smooth implementation and success of the project. While
  expected results of capacity-building activities under Component 3 were not included in the PDO or
  among indicators in the Project’s results framework, achievements resulting from the capacity-building
  activities were reported throughout the ICR and by the TTL. Based on minor shortcomings in the project’s
  preparation the quality at entry is rated Satisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 As noted in the PAD (p. 19), given that this was an emergency operation in a volatile environment, it was
 envisaged that the Bank would provide intensive supervision and decentralized assistance to the
 implementing agencies to ensure proper monitoring and compliance with Bank procurement, financial
 management and reporting procedures, while coordinating and harmonizing project activities with all
 development partners engaged in similar interventions in Gaza. The Bank’s supervision focused on
 ensuring the project’s successful and prompt implementation through working closely with the NDC and the
 Palestinian Authority and being flexible and responsive to the client’s needs and changes in the
 environment caused by the Covid-19 pandemic and the conflict escalation in May 2021, which delayed
 project implementation. For example, the Bank was responsive and flexible regarding the client’s request
 for complementing the previously agreed on institutional and implementation arrangements with an
 Advisory Committee (AC) to institutionalize coordination between key stakeholders. Notwithstanding the
 delayed creation of the AC, its presence allowed for better communication among stakeholders (especially
 between PA and NDC), leading to quicker and more efficient implementation in the later stages of the
 project, as shown by the rapid selection of beneficiaries and NGOs and success in obtaining necessary
 clearances and stronger government buy-in of the design of the project. The Bank was flexible and able to
 respond to the restrictions imposed by the Covid-19 outbreak and ensuing lockdowns and travel
 restrictions by identifying alternative delivery modes and continuing to engage proactively with the client
 through video calls and virtual missions. All this combined with a dedicated team in the field and the Bank’s
 timely approval of the client’s request to extend the project closing date, enabled implementation of all

                                                                                                  Page 15 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GZ: Cash for Work (P167726)



 pending activities and achievement/surpassing of outcome targets (ICR, pp. 19-24). The inconsistency
 between the PDO, ToC and choice of indicators in the Results Framework might be interpreted as a
 supervision shortcoming, as this incoherence persisted throughout the project, despite the project
 restructuring, which might also suggest an insufficient focus on development objectives. However, the ICR,
 drawing on project data and surveys, does provide evidence to assess achievement of all four objectives,
 as laid out in the ToC.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The project’s theory of change (results chain) was based on in-country and international evidence with a
 clearly stated PDO. The sequence of the results chain was, however, not fully captured (e.g.: [1] improved
 health and education of vulnerable groups might be better classified as an impact instead of an
 intermediate outcome, as these improvements were expected to result from the C4W activities’
 intermediate outcome ‘’increased access to social services among vulnerable groups’’; and [2] there is a
 need for better distinction between the NGOs’ capacity strengthening activities’ intermediate outcome
 ‘’improved provision of social services for vulnerable groups’’ and impact ‘’more effective service provision
 to vulnerable groups’’). There was also a disconnect between the PDOs (articulating only two objectives)
 and the ICR’s theory of change, articulating four intended objectives, all categorized as intermediate
 outcomes and drawn from the description of project activities in the PAD (pp. 12-15) and the PAD’s (p. 20)
 sustainability section (see the Rationale discussion in Section 4). The selected indicators were generally
 SMART (specific, measurable, attributable, realistic, and targeted) and all had baselines and achievable
 targets. At the same time, the results framework lacked indicators and targets for the project’s activities
 aimed at strengthening the capacity of implementing organizations (Component 3), while the indicator for
 provision of social services to vulnerable populations should have been categorized as an outcome (as it
 emanates from the C4W activities).

 The NDC, was responsible for overall project monitoring and evaluation, including managing data
 collection, aggregation and periodic reporting on implementation progress and monitoring the Project’s key
 performance indicators. The NDC - in close collaboration with the NGOs - was responsible for: providing
 technical and implementation support to the NGOs, carrying out monitoring and evaluation activities,
 producing a report integrating the results of the monitoring and evaluation of Project activities, carrying out
 with the Bank a mid‐term review (MTR) of the Project, and preparing an Implementation Completion and
 Results Report.




                                                                                                     Page 16 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GZ: Cash for Work (P167726)



b. M&E Implementation
  Using two NDC internal electronic systems in tandem - the Project Management Information System
  (PMIS) and the Beneficiary Computerized Database (NDC Online Portal), the NDC carried out data
  collection, tracked key performance indicators, and reported on project progress. The project M&E data
  were complemented by beneficiary surveys and M&E data collected by external consultants for the
  purposes of the NDC ICR and the evaluation of the e-work component from both supply and demand
  side perspectives. The NDC online portal served both monitoring and implementation purposes, as it
  was used also for recruitment of beneficiaries. Along with monthly monitoring visits to the NGOs, the NDC
  program officers continuously monitored the NGO sub-projects and uploaded data to the PMIS that were
  drawn from standardized reports provided by the NGOs. To ensure consistent and high-quality data: (1)
  frequent visits were conducted according to checklists and documented in a standard format, (2) the NDC
  conducted training for NGOs that covered project cycle management, implementation requirements,
  reporting guidelines, and financial management (FM), and how to use the NDC Online Portal, and (3) the
  NDC ensured compliance with the Bank’s procurement, FM and reporting procedures.

  Based on the collected data, the NDC prepared periodic reports at the sub-project level and at the NDC
  level, including semi-annual reports, quarterly unaudited financial reports, and audits. Reports by the
  NGO sub-projects included implementation status, achieved outputs, financial progress, procurement
  updates, milestones, and results, including number of beneficiaries targeted and reached, and challenges
  encountered. These periodic reports were complemented by a midterm review. Additionally, the Bank
  carried out implementation support missions twice a year to monitor and report on progress, accordingly
  (ICR, pp. 20-21).



c. M&E Utilization
  The M&E activities ensured that the Project implementation was on track and in compliance with the
  Grant Agreement signed with the NDC. No significant issues were found, while minor issues were
  discussed and resolved during field visits and followed up with additional field visits or phone calls and
  emails. Project M&E data were widely shared with stakeholders, including the Palestinian Authorities,
  the Bank and development partners. As reported to IEG by the TTL, during meetings, mission
  workshops and events, the Bank shared project M&E data with all key stakeholders, including
  development partners such as UNDP, ILO, KfW, and GIZ. Additionally, the implementing partners (local
  NGOs, e-work services providers and NDC) regularly disseminated the progress against project
  outcomes through various workshops, conferences, opening or closing ceremonies. A video on the
  project (link: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7anEa8Ip7A8) was prepared and made available to the
  wider public and widely disseminated within the Bank. Both NDC and the NGOs showcased the project
  and its achievements through their interactive websites and social media platforms. Furthermore, the
  project experience and results helped inform the design of subsequent projects including the Emergency
  Social Protection and Jobs COVID-19 Project (P174078) and the Gaza Emergency Support for Social
  Services (P177897).



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial



                                                                                                  Page 17 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GZ: Cash for Work (P167726)



10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Environmental and social. The project was classified as Category C under the Bank’s Safeguard Policy.
   No environmental or social safeguard policies were triggered as no environmental impacts were anticipated
   under any of the planned project interventions. Indeed, the project’s interventions were expected to have
   positive social impacts on individuals and households. The project adjusted its implementation to align with
   the Covid-19-related public health safety guidelines by temporarily halting its implementation and providing
   personal protection equipment and support enabling adherence to public health and safety guidelines. In
   total, there were 17 grievances, 10 from the C4W component and 7 from the e-work component, all of which
   were resolved in under 30 days (ICR, p. 22).




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management (FM). At appraisal the overall fiduciary risk rating was Substantial. This risk was
   mitigated through the project's fiduciary arrangements, including the flow of funds, accounting and
   reporting, internal controls and audit, which resulted in Satisfactory FM performance throughout the
   project. The NDC approved payments following the Project Operations Manual, and the project’s budget
   was appropriately maintained and updated quarterly in line with the disbursement plan. Regular reviews of
   the project’s FM arrangements (including midterm evaluation) found that the project kept a sound FM
   system that generated timely financial information in areas of budgeting, internal control, accounting
   system, funds flow, external auditing, and financial reporting. The quarterly external audits and spot checks
   found no irregularities. During the final mission, the overall FM was rated as satisfactory. Required financial
   reporting, including the quarterly interim financial reports for Q1 2022 and Q2 2022, were submitted on
   time, with no exceptions or observations, and the final audited financial statement covering January 1,
   2022, to June 30, 2022, was submitted on October 31, 2022, and an unqualified/clean final audit opinion
   was issued.

   Procurement. The Project’s performance on procurement was rated as Satisfactory throughout
   implementation. Procurement under the Project was mostly small scale, carried out by the beneficiary
   NGOs and overseen by NDC following a simplified Procurement Plan prepared for every sub-grant. In
   June 2022, the final ex post procurement review was carried out for a sample of contracts awarded by the
   NGOs under the NDC’s oversight. The review concluded that all procurement activities were compliant
   with the Bank’s Procurement Regulations and the Sub-Procurement Plans prepared by the sub-grantees
   (NGOs) and cleared by the NDC (ICR, pp. 22-23).




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None reported.



d. Other

                                                                                                    Page 18 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GZ: Cash for Work (P167726)



   Institutional Strengthening. Positive institutional spillovers have resulted from the project’s activities
   aimed at improving the 26 implementing organizations’ abilities to operate and manage resources. As noted
   by the TTL, although there was no budget allocated specifically for capacity building of the 26 implementing
   organizations, the project provided these agencies with an opportunity to network and learn from each other
   and thus strengthen their capacities. Eventually, they used the improved and newly acquired skills under the
   project to secure additional funding from other donors; and most of these organizations were also
   shortlisted for the follow-on project Gaza Emergency Support for Social Services (P177897), which was
   approved in June 2022. Additionally, other service providers have adopted the coaching platform developed
   by the University College of Applied Sciences and Technology (one of the e-work service providers) to
   monitor project activities, contracting and expenditures (ICR, p. 17). The project also helped strengthen the
   capacity of public authorities that were engaged in the project. For example, the Social Protection and
   Employment Fund (SPEF) received hands-on capacity building through its active participation with the NDC
   in proposals’ evaluation, contract management, M&E, supervision of NGOs, procurement and FM,
   complaint handling, and tracking of beneficiaries. Additionally, the external evaluation funded under the
   project, which assessed SPEF’s governance structure, human resource policies, and mandate, helped this
   agency to identify capacity gaps and make necessary adjustments. The resulting improved capacity -
   combined with the use of a similar project design - enabled the SPEF to implement a similar C4W
   component in the West Bank Emergency Social Protection Covid-19 Response Project (P174078),
   delivered in July 2020 (ICR, p. 26).



11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Highly Satisfactory   Highly Satisfactory

Bank Performance                Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                  Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                  ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

Experience gained under this project generated important lessons on how a project can be designed
and prepared to counteract the challenges found in difficult contexts and be resilient to significant
shocks while having sustainable development impacts. The ICR (pp. 24-26) reported the following
key lessons:

      When a project is implemented in a difficult context, having a focus on regular
       communication and M&E throughout project design and implementation facilitates the
       identification of bottlenecks and actions to address them in a timely and effective way. For
       example, by having an integrated platform for M&E and communications, the project was
       able to track progress at a detailed level and smoothly transition interactions into a virtual
       space when that became necessary.


                                                                                                    Page 19 of 21
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       GZ: Cash for Work (P167726)



        Implementing efficient systems for communication and M&E can also strengthen institutional
         capacity. For example, in the case of this project, a clear communication and outreach plan
         led to the holding of frequent forums with open discussions facilitating the sharing of
         experiences on implementation bottlenecks and lessons learned, which strengthened the
         public sector’s and NGOs’ capacities for designing and managing projects.

Additional lessons reported in the executive summary of the implementation completion report
commissioned by the NDC (ICR, p. 45-46) include the following:

        Hiring C4W participants to perform social services work can have multiple benefits. Over and
         above providing a safety net and valuable experience that increases participants’
         employability, when the work performed by the C4W participants is connected to NGOs that
         serve vulnerable populations, there is a significant added benefit to the community.
        In contexts characterized by health and conflict emergencies, as well as cultural barriers to
         women’s employment, the ability to work from home creates an opportunity for participants,
         particularly women who face additional limitations on their movement, the chance to earn
         income and increase their employability through valuable work experience (ICR, pp. 45-46).



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

This ICR is well-written and provides a clear and coherent storyline. The overall quality of the evidence is
strong, relying on an M&E system that was strengthened by frequent monitoring visits to the implementing
organizations, beneficiary surveys, an extensive midterm review and the Implementation Completion Report
commissioned by the NDC, as well as external evaluation of the e-work component from both supply and
demand side perspectives. The ToC presented in the ICR outlines four intended outcomes of the project and
presents evidence to document the achievement of each of the four. It is appropriately organized around the
two formally stated PDO objectives. However, it neglected to highlight this inconsistency in its assessment of
project design. The ICR does not provide sufficient evidence to back up the attribution of achieved outcomes
entirely to the project, while not discussing the type and extent of the contribution made by other actors and
factors to the project outcomes. Also, the ICR assesses the project’s relevance against the FY18-21 WBG
Assistance Strategy. It does not assess relevance against the new Assistance Strategy for the West Bank and
Gaza for FY22-25, which was in effect a year before the project’s closing and publicly disclosed on May 2,
2021. The ICR’s robust cost-benefit analysis presents a strong economic rationale for investing in human
development and social inclusion. The proposed ratings for Relevance of Objectives, Efficacy, Efficiency and
Bank Performance are consistent with the evidence presented in the ICR. Also, the ICR is candid about
implementation delays and provides a generally adequate, critical assessment of the Project's main
achievements and shortcomings. The lessons learned are informative, relevant and evidence-based, reflecting
the Project’s specific experiences and findings. The overall quality of the ICR is rated Substantial.




                                                                                                    Page 20 of 21
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  GZ: Cash for Work (P167726)



a. Quality of ICR Rating
   Substantial




                                                                    Page 21 of 21
