     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Nat'l Urban Devt Program - NM (P143596)



                                                                                 Report Number : ICRR0023483

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Program Name
 P143596                                    Nat'l Urban Devt Program - NM

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Vietnam                                    Urban, Resilience and Land


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)             Total Program Cost (USD)
 IDA-54760                                  30-Jun-2021                                        199,299,493.79

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 05-Jun-2014                                30-Jun-2022

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           250,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                            250,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Actual                                        199,299,493.79                                              0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Cynthia Nunez-Ollero       Vibecke Dixon                 Avjeet Singh                   IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Program Context and Development Objectives

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Financing Agreement (FA, p.5) and the Program Appraisal Document (PAD, paragraph 24)
   the Program Development Objective of this Results Based National Urban Development Program in the
   Northern Mountains Region of Vietnam was "to strengthen the capacity of participating Northern Mountains
   cities to plan, implement, and sustain urban infrastructure." The program targeted seven Northern Mountains
   cities—Bac Kan, Cao Bang, Dien Bien Phu, Hoa Binh, Thai Nguyen, Tuyen Quang and ,Yen Bai.



                                                                                                  Page 1 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Nat'l Urban Devt Program - NM (P143596)



   This PforR program supported the following activities to implement the government's National Urban
   Development Program (NUDP): (i) performance-based transfers for local infrastructure in participating cities;
   (ii) capacity support to participating cities; and (iii) support to national development policy and oversight.

   This review will assess the program performance against the following objectives: to strengthen the capacity
   of participating Northern Mountains cities

         to plan urban infrastructure.
         to implement urban infrastructure.
         to sustain urban infrastructure.



b. Were the program objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during
   implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The program has the following four components under four results areas (RAs) supported by disbursement-
   linked indicators (DLIs):

   1. Institutional Strengthening at City Level (US$55.0 million at appraisal, US$35.4 million actual, as
   reported in the ICR, Annex 1B) This component was to finance activities to strengthen the capacity of the
   target cities to plan infrastructure investments. This component was to form part of the Results Area 1 of the
   program: Institutional Strengthening at City Level. Two Disbursement Linked Indicators (DLIs) were to
   support this component:

         DLI 1.1: Enhanced Annual City Plans Approved and Disclosed to the public (PDO Outcome Indicator
          1)
         DLI 1.2 Professionally staffed management unit in place in each participating City People's
          Committee.

   2. Delivery of Infrastructure Services in Participating Cities (US$155 million at appraisal, US$89.2
   million actual) This component was to finance activities that would strengthen the capacity of City People’s
   Committees (CPCs) to implement urban infrastructure sub-projects. This component was to form part of the
   Results Area 2 of the program: Delivery of Infrastructure Services in Participating Cities. One DLI was to
   support this component:

         DLI 2: Local urban Infrastructure investments delivered under the Participating City's approved
          enhanced annual city plan.

   3. Sustainable Infrastructure Investments (US$20 million at appraisal, US$7.5 million actual) This
   component was to finance the following activities: (i) develop improved mechanisms for operations and
   maintenance (O&M) of infrastructure; (ii) enhance fiscal capacity to fund O&M; and (iii) sustain ongoing


                                                                                                    Page 2 of 24
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Nat'l Urban Devt Program - NM (P143596)



  levels of investment in infrastructure and replacement. This component was to form part of the Results Area
  3 of the program Sustainable Infrastructure Investments. Two DLIs were to support this component:

        DLI 3.1 Asset management plan adopted and completed local urban infrastructure sub-projects in
         full service (PDO Outcome indicator 3)
        DLI 3.2 Increase in own resource revenue

  4. National Policy, Support and Oversight. (US$20 million at appraisal, US$10.6 million actual) This
  component was to finance activities to enhance the enabling policy environment, technical capacity, and
  oversight systems of the national government in support of cities’ urban development efforts. This
  component was to form the Results Area 4 of the program: National Policy Support and Oversight. Three
  DLIs were to support this component:

        DLI 4.1: Implementation Strategy for National Urban Development Program adopted with annual
         milestones (PDO Outcome indicator 4)
        DLI 4.2: Professionally staffed unit in place in the Ministry of Construction (MOC), preparation of
         annual capacity development plans and capacity building support provided to cities in accordance
         with such plans.
        DLI 4.3: Completed program report.



e. Comments on Program Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Program Cost: The original program cost was US$250 million. The credit disbursed US$199.3 million (from
  the Data Sheet. The World Bank task team clarified that the disbursements in ICR Annex 1B based on the
  DLI disbursements was SDR 142.8 million). Two factors led to the cancellation of the undisbursed
  amount: (i) the target for DLI 3.2 (increase in own-sources revenue) was not achieved. The allocation was
  not disbursed, and (ii) the government implemented a policy change in 2019 that prohibited Overseas
  Development Assistance (ODA) funds from financing tax and capacity development activities (ICR,
  paragraph 59). This affected the program's capacity building activities.

  Financing: The International Development Association (IDA) financed this P4R program.

  Borrower Contribution: The government committed to contribute US$50 million at appraisal. The
  government disbursed US$53.5 million. The ICR noted that an Operations Portal error reflected US$20
  million as government contribution at appraisal (ICR, Annex 3).

  Dates: The program was approved on June 5, 2014, and was made effective on October 30, 2014. The Mid
  Term Review (MTR) was conducted on May 7, 2018. The program was to close initially on June 30, 2021
  but was extended by another 12 months to close on June 30, 2022, according to a level 2 restructuring
  approved on June 30, 2021 (Restructuring Paper, Report No. RES47072). The extension allowed (i) the
  completion of 19 remaining infrastructure works approved under the Enhanced Annual City Plans (EACPs)
  and (ii) the completion of the resettlement sites in five cities.

  Split Rating: No split rating of the outcome will be undertaken. The program PDO remained unchanged
  throughout the operation. The scope of the PforR activities also remained unchanged. Restructuring



                                                                                                  Page 3 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Nat'l Urban Devt Program - NM (P143596)



   realigned resources to match changes in target values. The cancelled funds did not impact the Theory of
   Change (TOC).




3. Relevance   TBL




a. Relevance of Objectives   New




  Rationale
  Alignment with Sector Strategy: The PDOs of this PforR operation were aligned with the government's
  National Urban Development Program (NUDP), which addressed growing inequality due to the poor urban
  management of lagging regions. The NUDP set national targets for efficient, sustainable, and equitable
  urban services. The central government sought to enhance the capacity of these regions in urban
  development management by offering participating cities and provinces a comprehensive package of
  performance-based fiscal and capacity support combined with enhanced oversight. The Ministry of
  Construction (MOC) prepared a National Urban Development Strategy (NUDS) to implement the NUDP and
  outlined the regional rollout of the government’s priorities for urban development. This PforR piloted the
  rollout of the NUDS by targeting the poorer cities of the Northern Mountains Region. The program supported
  strengthening urban management systems for investment planning, works management, operational and
  financial sustainability, and public consultation. The PDOs were also relevant to the government's
  development priorities laid out in Vietnam 2035. This plan was a joint government-World Bank report that
  outlined the country’s development directions. This PforR helped the government implement three of six key
  programs to help Vietnam reach the following 2035 goals: (i) reshape urban policies and investments for
  more dynamic cities and urban centers by preparing high-quality city plans and strengthening cities’ capacity
  to plan; (ii) pursue an environmentally sustainable development path by increasing adaptation and resilience
  to changing climate patterns, by supporting climate-resilient urban infrastructure and strengthening cities’
  capacity to implement; and (iii) promote equality and inclusion among marginalized groups for a harmonious
  middle-class, by prioritizing infrastructure investments in low-income areas, adopting inclusive
  implementation processes for ethnic minorities (EMs) and women, and monitoring program results. The
  PforR PDOs were relevant to the three other recent government policies. First, Resolution No. 06-NQ/TW,
  effective January 24, 2022 on planning, construction, management, and sustainable development of urban
  areas in Vietnam till 2030. Second, Decision 438 No. 438/QD-TTg, effective March 25, 2021, on approved
  schemes for developing climate-smart cities in 2021 – 2030. Third, Decision 950 No. 950/QD-TTg, effective
  August 1, 2018, on approved schemes for developing smart, sustainable cities in Vietnam in the 2018 – 2025
  period. This last policy supported effective investment planning in response to the cities’ growth needs,
  economic impacts, and poverty reduction. Sustainable urban infrastructure would be met by enhancing
  institutional capacity and integrating climate risks into infrastructure investments.

  This PforR was to equip the cities in these lagging regions to meet the demands of a burgeoning population
  by increasing their institutional capacity to plan, implement, and sustain urban infrastructure. The government
  developed an urban classification system with six classes of cities - the first was the special cities of Ho Chi
  Minh City and Hanoi. The other five were classified by levels of economic activities, physical development,
  population, population density, and infrastructure provision. By 2020, in addition to the two special cities (Ho
  Chi Minh City and Hanoi), Vietnam had 20 class I cities, 29 class II cities, 45 class III towns, 85 class IV
  provincial towns, and 652 class V small townships. Ten of 19 cities in the Northern Mountains Region were

                                                                                                    Page 4 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Nat'l Urban Devt Program - NM (P143596)



Class IV cities with less than 100,000 residents. The region had poor connectivity within cities, between
urban centers, and surrounding peri-urban and rural areas. Many urban areas lacked basic urban and social
infrastructure such as roads, sanitation, drainage, flood protection facilities, street lighting, public green
space, and schools. The mountainous setting of the growing urban settlements raised geotechnical and land
availability challenges. Low-income settlements were often located in flood- or landslide-prone areas and
were exposed to climate disasters. The provision of serviced land in safe areas for high-density housing and
economic activities was limited. City infrastructure was built without accounting for intensifying climate
change risks.

World Bank Previous Sector and Country Experience: The PDOs remained relevant to the current World
Bank Group Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for Vietnam for FY18-22. A new CPF to cover the period
FY23-27 was under preparation at closing. The PDOs were particularly relevant to Objective 4, “Improve
planning, management, and delivery of infrastructure and land in cities,” with program financing focused
on improving the institutional capacity of the target cities of the Northern Region to plan, deliver, and sustain
infrastructure service delivery. The PDOs also supported achieving Objective 5, “Improve the welfare and
development of ethnic minorities, women, and vulnerable groups,” under Focus Area 1, “Enable inclusive
growth and private sector participation.” The program was designed to encourage the participation of these
groups in prioritizing infrastructure investments. The PDOs were also relevant to Objective 10, “Increase
climate resilience and strengthen disaster risk management,” under Focus Area 3, “Ensure environmental
sustainability and resilience.” The program financed the construction of drainage systems, embankments,
channel rehabilitation, and retaining walls to enhance communities’ resilience to the impacts of climate
change and natural disasters in low-income areas most affected by disasters, which contributed to achieving
Objective 10. The program activities also complemented the World Bank’s ongoing policy engagement in
Vietnam on decentralization and strategy for second-tier cities focused on access to climate-resilient basic
urban infrastructure services.

Country Capacity and Adequacy of PforR Instrument: The government piloted NUDP implementation in
the Northern Mountains Region to address extreme poverty and promote shared prosperity. The growing
urban settlements in the small cities of the Northern Mountains Region were to serve as economic and social
hubs of the regional economy. MOC was mandated to coordinate the program’s activities. MOC
provided capacity support to cities coordinated, appraised, and supervised cities’ urban development
activities. This PforR was the instrument of choice to pilot the rollout of the first NUDP regional sub-program
in the Northern Mountains Region. The PforR targeted the poorest region to highlight the development
disparities among cities. The program defined what the NUDP lacked - the implementation modalities for
effective planning, financing, implementation, and monitoring systems of the cities' urban strategies. This
PforR piloted a scalable regional approach to achieve the NUDP objectives using disbursement-linked
incentives under four Results Areas. The PforR was to implement the NUDP by (i) supporting urban
infrastructure investment (Results Area 2 - Delivery of Infrastructure Services and Results Area 3 -
Sustainable Infrastructure Investments), (ii) strengthening urban management by improving mechanisms for
investment planning and works management, increasing public engagement, and building capacity of local
officials (Results Area 1 - Institutional Strengthening at the City Level), and (iii) piloting a results-based
financing approach to NUDP implementation and developing an implementation framework for the
next phase. These incentives were to lead to adopting measures that would strengthen national government
oversight (Results Area 4).

Overall, the PDOs were highly relevant to the country's urban development strategy at closing. The PDOs
were also relevant and contributed to the achievement of the World Bank's objectives for the country under
the CPF. The relevance of the PDOs to the country's strategy and the World Bank's objectives is rated High.

                                                                                                    Page 5 of 24
                              Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                      Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                              Nat'l Urban Devt Program - NM (P143596)



                       The PforR program sought to address the development problem associated with the lagging capacity of the
                       poorer cities in the country's Northern region. The PDOs were appropriately pitched to the urban
                       development capacity of the pilot cities.


       Rating Relevance TBL




                       Rating
                       High


b. Relevance of DLIs                           New




DLI RELEVANCE TBL




                DLI 1
                DLI
                Enhanced Annual City Plans approved and disclosed to the public

                Rationale
                DLI 1.1 - Enhanced Annual City Plans (EACPs) approved and disclosed to the public (target: 7). This was a
                PDO outcome indicator.
                DLI 1.2 - Professionally-staffed management units in place within each Participating City People’s Committee
                (target: 7). This was an Intermediate Results Indicator (IRI).

                DLIs 1.1 and 1.2 were strategic and provided incentives for institutional change. All cities in Vietnam used to
                prepare two annual planning documents: (i) first, the annual update to the Five Year Social-Economic
                Development Plan (SEDP) with targets and budget allocation across sectors; and (ii) second, the annual
                construction investment plan specifying the infrastructure investments for the year. These plans were
                submitted for approval as data tables without justification for the budget allocated. These DLIs incentivized
                the cities to consolidate the previous two annual plans as an Enhanced Annual City Plan (EACP) and to
                ensure adequate staff capacity. The enhanced plan contained a description and rationale for the proposed
                investments, targeting sub-project service delivery to poor households, monitoring implementation progress,
                and strengthening the investment prioritization process for the next five-year SEDP. The plans were to
                include all local government expenditures, including infrastructure investments, under this program. DLI.1 was
                a PDO level outcome indicator for objective 1. and provided a measure and incentive to achieve the
                program results.

                The DLIs were adequately defined, specific, time-bound, highly relevant, and achievable based on the actions
                included in the Program Action Plan (PAP). The State Auditor of Vietnam (SAV) was designated as the
                independent third party that verified compliance with the actions to trigger the release of funds. with clear
                protocols and methodologies for internal monitoring and verification contained in the Program Operations
                Manual (POM). The amounts allocated to each city were proportional to their population size, subject to a
                basic minimum allocation to ensure that all the cities could finance at least a basic level of infrastructure
                investments. The disbursement amounts were weighted to reflect mutually reinforcing relationships, providing
                adequate incentives for the participating cities to achieve institutional performance targets and infrastructure
                delivery. Performance-based transfers were allocated to the participating cities subject to the maximum




                                                                                                                    Page 6 of 24
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Nat'l Urban Devt Program - NM (P143596)



allocations over the Program's life. These allocations provided an average annual allocation of US$5.5 million
per city, or US$47 per capita (ICR, footnote 28).

The DLIs were aligned with the PDO and well-integrated into the results framework. The DLIs were consistent
with the Theory of Change (TOC); these DLIs facilitated the achievement of the targets of the first Results
Area by strengthening planning capacity for infrastructure delivery. DLI 1.1 was a PDO level outcome
indicator. DLI 1.2 was an intermediate outcome indicator of the results framework. Actions associated with
achieving the DLIs addressed constraints to achieve the PDOs.

Overall, the relevance of these combined DLIs to the objectives is rated High. These
DLIs facilitated institutional change by combining the previous reports into one plan, with better information to
inform constituents; and, second, publishing these plans reflecting investment levels agreed with constituents
following a consultative process.



Rating
High

DLI 2
DLI
DLI 2 - Local urban infrastructure investments delivered according to each Participating City’s approved
Enhanced Annual City Plan (target: Yes)

Rationale
This DLI was allocated fixed amounts and provided cities with incentives to aim for cost-efficient allocation
of resources. The amounts allocated to each city were proportional to their population size, subject to a basic
minimum allocation to ensure that the cities could finance basic infrastructure investments. Cost savings
could finance additional urban or social infrastructure priorities. Eligible investments under DLI 2 were
prioritized using screening criteria, appropriate fiduciary governance standards, and environmental and social
safeguards embedded in its definition and verification protocols. These incentivized cities to strengthen their
procurement and public expenditure management, public consultation, land acquisition and resettlement
practices, and grievance redress mechanisms.

The DLI was broadly stated, but the PAP and the POM provided specific, measurable, achievable design
standards. However, the first-year investments were to be pre-financed because the DLI would be released
after verifying completed works. The cities had the following options - (i) advance of up to 25 percent of their
DLI 2 allocation; (ii) counterpart funds of up to 10 - 20 percent of construction costs for a total of about 35 - 45
percent of the construction costs; and (iii) contractors could borrow from commercial sources, although some
required guarantees by the cities. Funds would be disbursed after the cities completed the previous years’
works. They are independently verified by SAV using clear protocols and methodologies to meet the
infrastructure design, construction, and supervision standards. Achieving this DLI's target would improve the
infrastructure's quality (see Section 4 Efficacy below).

Completed subproject investments, a grievance redress mechanism, and trained staff in place to support DLI
2. All infrastructure investments were to be selected according to an eligible investment menu. The
investments were to be aligned with each city’s approved plan. Projects were to be screened and
prioritized with residents' participation as agreed in the POM. The cities had guidelines for a complaints

                                                                                                       Page 7 of 24
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Nat'l Urban Devt Program - NM (P143596)



redress mechanism and capacity support for procurement, contract management, quality control, and social
and environmental risk management. DLI 2 served as an intermediate outcome indicator of the results
framework and provided the measure and incentive to achieve the program outcomes. These DLIs facilitated
achieving the second Results Area targets by delivering the infrastructure services as designed.

Overall, this DLI was aligned with the PDO. Incentives in this DLI contributed to the program's performance
and results. The relevance of this DLI to the PDO is rated Substantial because of the adequacy of resources
for the pre-financing mechanism (see Section 4 Efficacy below).



Rating
Substantial

DLI 3
DLI
Asset Management Plan adopted and local urban infrastructure sub-projects in full service after completion

Rationale
     DLI 3.1 - Asset management plan adopted and local urban infrastructure sub-projects in full service
         after completion (target: Yes). This was a PDO outcome indicator.
        DLI 3.2 – Increase in own-sources revenue. The original target for this DLI was at least a 12 percent
         increase the previous year but was not reflected in the Operations Portal at appraisal (ICR,
         footnote.17). The ICR reported a target of 7 instead.

These DLIs were designed to support the maintenance needs of the completed infrastructure
investments to ensure their sustainability after closing. The amounts allocated to each city were proportional
to their population size, subject to a basic minimum allocation to ensure that all the cities could finance at
least a basic level of infrastructure investments. The DLIs were specific, measurable, achievable, and
consistent with the incentives to achieve outcomes. SAV served as the independent third party that verified
results using protocols and methodologies in the POM. The DLIs were aligned with the PDO and the results
framework. DLI 3.1 was an outcome indicator under Results Area 3, Sustainable Infrastructure Investments.
DLI 3.2 was an intermediate outcome indicator with a 12 percent annual increase target set at appraisal when
the inflation rates were 18.7 - 4.1 percent (2011 - 2014). In addition, that target complemented the prevailing
government’s policy direction of retaining revenues from corporate income taxes on medium and large
enterprises in cities’ budgets. Both contributed to providing incentives to achieve program outcomes. The DLI
3.2 of at least a 12 percent increase in own source revenue was not captured at appraisal in the Operations
Portal. The ICR reported this as a target of 7 or all target cities reporting an increase in their own source
revenue. This target did not correspond to the definition of the DLI.

Overall, these DLIs were aligned with the PDO, one being an outcome indicator. Incentives in this DLI
contributed to the program's performance and results. Relevance of this DLI to the PDO is rated Substantial.



Rating
Substantial


                                                                                                   Page 8 of 24
                            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                            Nat'l Urban Devt Program - NM (P143596)




            DLI 4
            DLI
            Implementation Strategy for National Urban Development Program adopted with annual milestones

            Rationale
                 DLI 4.1 - Implementation Strategy for National Urban Development Program adopted with annual
                               milestones (target: Yes. The PAD noted that this indicator was to be measured by a “Yes/No,” but the
                               end target in the results framework was “NUDP implementation in phase 2 cities commenced,” not just
                               that there is one). The ICR reported on the Yes/No measure. This was a PDO outcome indicator.
                              DLI 4.2 - Professionally-staffed unit in place in MOC, preparation of Annual Capacity Development
                               Plans, and capacity building support provided to cities in accordance with such plans (target: 100
                               percent)
                              DLI 4.3 - Completed Program Report (target: Yes) This Program report was to be prepared by MOC
                               and consolidated the CPCs’ financial statements for Program-related expenditures, incentivized
                               central government’s close monitoring of the Program’s activities, results, expenditures, and
                               performance-based disbursements.

            These DLIs were designed to enhance the capacity of the national level urban development agencies to
            achieve the program outcomes. The DLIs were a mix of intermediate and outcome-level results. These DLIs
            were clearly defined, specific, achievable, measurable, and time-bound, with clear protocols and
            methodologies for monitoring and third-party verification following the POM. MOC prepared the target for DLI
            4.3 (Program report) and consolidated the CPCs’ financial statements for program-related expenditures. This
            target incentivized the central government to monitor program activities, results, expenditures, and
            performance-based disbursements. These DLIs were aligned with the PDOs. One DLI (4.1) was assigned as
            an outcome indicator under Results Area 4, National Policy, Support, and Oversight. This results area
            recognized the role of the central government (MOC) in improving the enabling environment for urban
            development and management at the city level by enhancing their capacity with qualified staff to coordinate,
            monitor, evaluate, and provide capacity support to cities to manage the first NUDP performance-based
            regional program.

            Overall, these DLIs were aligned with the PDO. One DLI served as an outcome indicator. Incentives in these
            DLIs contributed to program performance and results. Relevance of this DLI to the PDO is rated Substantial.



            Rating
            Substantial


OVERALL RELEVANCE DLI TBL




            OVERALL RELEVANCE RATING
            Rationale
            The PforR PDOs and DLIs remained highly relevant to and aligned with the government and World Bank
            strategic objectives for the urban sector development in Vietnam, and the PforR approach served to
            incentivize the achievement of the PDO and Program implementation efficiency.


                                                                                                                      Page 9 of 24
                   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                   Nat'l Urban Devt Program - NM (P143596)



               All eight DLIs were clearly defined and measurable. All had clear protocols and methodologies for internal
               monitoring. A third party, SAV, independently verified all DLI results, as prescribed in the POM. The DLIs
               were well structured to support the delivery of the Program’s intended outcomes with generally achievable
               targets. DLIs complemented each other. For example, DLIs measuring institutional strengthening were critical
               requirements for infrastructure delivery and sustainability as they supported an enabling policy environment;
               dedicated local management capacity was essential for effective local planning and sub-project execution;
               and national oversight was essential to strengthening results monitoring and evaluation (M&E).

               Overall, the PDOs were aligned with the country's sector strategy for the Northern Province's urban areas.



               Rating
               High



   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               To strengthen the capacity of participating Northern Mountains cities to plan urban infrastructure.

               Rationale
               Theory of Change (TOC): No TOC was prepared at appraisal, but the results framework provided the causal
               logic behind the inputs, outputs, and expected outcomes of this objective. The target seven cities lacked the
               capacity to identify investments that would increase their constituents' economic opportunities and predict
               their future needs. The cities also lacked the capacity to integrate climate risks into capital investment
               planning. A TOC was prepared for the ICR. The program was to support the achievement of the objectives of
               the NUDP by strengthening the capacities of the target cities to plan urban infrastructure. This objective was
               to be supported by activities under Results Area 1 - Institutional Strengthening at City Level. Inputs: were to
               consist of professional training of city-level management staff in infrastructure development planning
               processes and prioritization following the city’s socio-economic development strategy. Inputs were also to
               include training the professional city staff in capital investment planning, economic and financial feasibility
               analysis, master planning techniques, climate risk mitigation and adaptation, and analyzing the poverty
               reduction impact of the investments. Outputs were to include the published Enhanced Annual City Plans
               (EACPs) and professionally trained staff in city management units. Outcome was to strengthen the capacity
               of participating Northern Mountains cities to plan urban infrastructure, as evident in these published EACPs.

               The TOC included the following assumption, which, if actualized, would increase the likelihood that the
               outcomes would be achieved: (i) an independent verifying agency conducted annual performance
               assessments on time. This assumption occurred and boosted the outcome of this objective.

               The TOC was clear and convincing. The outputs provided a logical result to the project activities or inputs.
               The strengthened planning capacity led to the publishing of an Enhanced Annual City Plan ready for


                                                                                                                Page 10 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Nat'l Urban Devt Program - NM (P143596)



implementation. No logical gaps were noted in the inputs that led to outputs that led to outcomes. The
outcome was attributable to the project.

OUTPUTS: Under Results Area 1, Institutional Strengthening at City Level, the following output targets were
achieved:

      IR 1 and DLI 1.2 - All seven cities had professionally staffed management units in each participating
       City People’s Committee (CPC) as targeted. All seven cities maintained professionally staffed
       management units, including a director and two vice directors, a chief accountant, three technical
       engineers, a procurement expert, an environmental safeguards expert, a social safeguards expert, an
       M&E expert, and two administrative staff, as prescribed in the POM. MOC provided annual planning
       support and technical assistance to cities’ management unit staff to build their capacity in capital
       investment planning, feasibility analysis, asset management, and investment M&E. All seven cities
       retained the majority of their management units’ staff after Program closing given their strong
       planning, implementation, and monitoring capacities built during Program implementation.
      All output targets under his results area were achieved.

OUTCOMES: Under Results Area 1, the following outcome targets were achieved:

      DLI 1.1 - The strengthened capacity of participating Northern Mountain cities to plan urban
       infrastructure was evident in the publication of the EACPs, achieving the target. All seven
       cities developed their plans, including local government expenditures and infrastructure
       investments under this program. The plans emphasized service delivery to poor households,
       described implementation status and strengthened the investment selection and prioritization process
       underlying the next five-year SEDP. The plans consolidated the previous planning documents,
       reflecting improved investment selection and prioritization processes. The plans included the
       following:
             o A statement of anticipated revenues and expenditures of the CPC for the following financial
                year.
             o A detailed list of all infrastructure sub-projects that would be implemented in the following year,
                with a rationale for each sub-project.
             o The status of ongoing and completed infrastructure investments and budget allocations for
                their O&M allowed for closer monitoring of expenditures and progress.
             o All infrastructure sub-projects proposed for implementation in the following year were reviewed,
                screened, and prioritized using the following weighted criteria-based system:
                       positive economic impacts, including a significant impact on poverty reduction and local
                        economic development
                       access to markets and economic development opportunities for poor households in
                        peri-urban areas
                       positive environmental impacts and increased community resilience to climate change
                        and natural disasters
                       benefits to a high proportion of poor and low-income households, addressing women
                        and ethnic minority community members, and promoting gender equality
                       minimal negative social impacts on communities.




                                                                                                   Page 11 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Nat'l Urban Devt Program - NM (P143596)



Overall, the project's efficacy in achieving this objective is rated Substantial. All outcome targets were
achieved and provided evidence for improved capacity to plan infrastructure investments.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To strengthen the capacity of participating Northern Mountains cities to implement urban infrastructure.

Rationale
Theory of Change: The Program was to support the NUDP in strengthening the capacities of selected cities
in the Northern Mountains Region. to implement urban infrastructure. Inputs: were to include financing local
urban infrastructure investments according to the EACPs. Inputs were also to include the training of staff
in fiduciary (procurement) and safeguards requirements, establishing local grievance mechanisms,
resettlement, compensation practices, and guidelines to ensure the quality of designs; ensuring the
participation of ethnic minorities, women, and vulnerable groups in planning and prioritization of investment
needs; and capacity to supervise subproject implementation. Outputs were to consist of four Intermediate
Results (IRs), including people benefiting from primary/secondary and tertiary/social infrastructure
services, new and upgraded roads and bridges completed, resettlement areas completed, and low-income
areas upgraded. The outputs were also to include the staff trained. The results of these infrastructure
investments were to meet the conditions of DLI 2 under Results Area 2. All infrastructure investments were to
be selected according to an eligible investment menu, screening, and prioritization criteria in the POM and
aligned with the approved EACP. The POM included constituents' participation guidelines, a complaints
redress mechanism, and capacity support for procurement, contract management, quality control, and social
and environmental risk management.

The TOC was clear and convincing. The inputs or activities were logically linked to the outputs and the
outcomes. There were no observed logical gaps other than the assumptions that would have pointed to the
risks of implementation delays and justifying the target values or lack thereof for the infrastructure
investments to be completed. All expected outputs and outcomes were attributable to the project.

In addition to the assumption under Objective 1, the TOC included the following assumptions, which, if
actualized, would increase the likelihood that the outcomes would be achieved: (i) program funds and
government counterpart funds are transferred in a timely manner, (ii) local contractors and supervision
consultants work with sufficient capacity and meet the infrastructure quality standards, and (iv) capacity
support activities are implemented. However, since this objective was focused on implementing the
investments, assumptions surrounding the financing needs to pre-finance the investments were omitted. DLI
2 was associated with this objective. The POM required cities to pre-finance the construction of the
priority infrastructure using up to 25 percent of their DLI 2 allocation plus 10-20 percent of their counterpart
funds. Construction companies would borrow from other sources. The government adopted new policies at
implementation that limited the resources available to cities to use in pre-financing infrastructure investments.
Those new policies caused implementation delays and affected the achievement of the targets for DLI 3.2
(see below).


                                                                                                    Page 12 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Nat'l Urban Devt Program - NM (P143596)



OUTPUTS The urban infrastructure investments prioritized in the city plans were completed at closing. The
targets were identified during the planning process. A total of 128 infrastructure sub-projects (total cost of
US$284 million (VND6,597 billion), of which construction cost was US$205 million (VND4,765 billion)

The following primary/secondary infrastructure services were reported:

      IR 2 - 739,125 people benefited from primary/secondary infrastructure services, exceeding the target
       of 651,500.
      IR 5 - 128.67 km of urban roads were built, exceeding the target of 101.9 km (8.2 km were new, and
       120.47 kilometers were upgraded). In most of the 63 sub-projects, roads were upgraded in all seven
       cities by resurfacing, repairing, or providing adequate drainage, streetlighting, or pedestrian paths.
       Their locations and types of upgrading were screened and justified according to the criteria in the
       plans. The new roads were linked to existing roads or provided access to peri-urban
       areas. 10 bridges were constructed, and two bridges, seven embankment works, three channels, and
       four reservoirs were rehabilitated. All targets for these specific investments were established during
       implementation as each EACP was completed.

The following tertiary/social infrastructure services were supported:

      IR 3 - 151,481 people benefited from improved tertiary/social infrastructure services (disaggregated by
         gender), exceeding the target of 107,800. There were 62,822 female beneficiaries, exceeding
         the target of 53,275.
        IR 4 - 16 percent of the beneficiaries were Ethnic Minority beneficiaries, exceeding the target of 14
         percent. This represented the proportion of ethnic minorities, male and female, benefitting from the
         program out of the total ethnic minority population, male and female, in the seven provinces.
        IR 6 - Developed 291.3 hectares of resettlement area, exceeding the target of 236 ha. Five sub-
         projects developed resettlement areas in five cities (Bac Kan, Dien Bien Phu, Thai Nguyen, Tuyen
         Quang, and Yen Bai) with roads, drainage, and utility service lines for households relocated under the
         program or other government-financed projects (in the case of Dien Bien Phu). Two high schools, ten
         kindergartens, and three community centers were upgraded or newly built. All targets for these
         specific investments were established during implementation as each EACP was completed.
        IR 7 - Upgraded 592.9 hectares of low-income areas, exceeding the target of 333 ha. Seventeen sub-
         projects upgraded low-income areas in four cities (Cao Bang, Dien Bien Phu, Tuyen Quang, and Yen
         Bai) with various interventions, such as road resurfacing or repair, road-side drains, water supply
         pipes, or street lighting. All targets for these specific investments were established during
         implementation as each EACP was completed.
        IR 8 and DLI 3.2 (Increase in own-sources revenue). 3 of the 7 target cities achieved an increase in
         their source revenue. At appraisal, the original target was for cities to increase their own-source
         revenues by 12 percent over the previous year. This target was set because of high inflation rates
         (see Section 3 above, Relevance of DLI 3.2). Between 2015 and 2021, inflation rates declined to 0.6 -
          3.5 percent. At the same time, the government adopted new budget policies that required local
         governments to transfer collected taxes on companies with registered capital of more than VND10
         billion to provincial revenues. This limited the city's ability to increase its source revenues and led to
         the unmet original target of a 12 percent increase from the previous year. However, since this target
         remained unreported in the Operations Portal at appraisal, a target of 7 cities was reported at closing
         (see also Objective 3 below for IR 8 and DLI 3.2)


                                                                                                    Page 13 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Nat'l Urban Devt Program - NM (P143596)



OUTCOMES:

      The capacity of participating Northern Mountains cities to implement urban infrastructure was
       strengthened. The program benefited 912,508 people, exceeding the target of 759,300, with 434,340
       females exceeding the target of 374,869 females.
      The ICR report claims results at the impact level from informal interviews with selected beneficiaries,
       such as health benefits, the value of reduced incidence of accidents (vehicular or pedestrian),
       diseases or hospitalization, increase in value of traded goods, or satisfaction rates:
             o In Informal interviews, beneficiaries reported that resurfaced roads reduced travel time, dust,
               and traffic accidents. Road-side drains made roads passable. Students attended
               classes during the rainy season. New roads increased access to markets and public services.
             o The relocated households were satisfied with their well-serviced land, clean environment, and
               accessibility to markets and public services.
             o The resurfaced roads helped residents save time and physical effort when bringing their
               agricultural produce or livestock to markets. Road-side drains helped their hygiene condition by
               protecting them from flooding and resultant exposure to infiltrated pollutants of septage or
               agricultural chemicals. New streetlights helped extend productive or social activities. Upgraded
               areas increased the value of their properties. The upgraded areas offered new business
               opportunities to sell food or agricultural produce to more visitors to their neighborhoods.
             o None of these claims were triangulated with other evidence or data and can thus not be
               validated.
      City representatives interviewed at closing, and MOC officials confirmed improved overall quality
       of infrastructure because of the rigorous application by SAV of standards for infrastructure design,
       construction, and supervision before releasing DLI 2 resources.
      Cities improved the cost-effectiveness of their investments by using cost savings to finance more
       investments than initially planned. Bac Kan built another school in addition to the planned 12
       infrastructure sub-projects; Thai Nguyen upgraded another road intersection in addition to the planned
       12 infrastructure sub-projects; and Tuyen Quang upgraded two link roads in addition to the planned 16
       infrastructure sub-projects (ICR, footnote 29).

Overall, the efficacy of the project to achieve this objective is rated Substantial, with moderate shortcomings.
All output targets were achieved as evidence of improved capacity to implement the infrastructure
investments. In some cases, cities encountered implementation delays because of national government
expenditure policies that affected the cities’ ability to pre-finance investments. The moderate shortcoming
comes from a lack of indicators to signify a strengthened capacity to implement beyond the number of
beneficiaries. There was no data on how these infrastructure investments implemented by the cities improved
the lives and livelihoods of its residents other than cited anecdotes.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
To strengthen the capacity of participating Northern Mountains cities to sustain urban infrastructure.

                                                                                                  Page 14 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Nat'l Urban Devt Program - NM (P143596)




Rationale
Theory of Change: The Program was to support the NUDP in strengthening the capacities of selected cities
in the Northern Mountains Region to sustain the built urban infrastructure. This objective was to be met
under two Results Areas: (3) Sustainable Infrastructure Investments and (4) National Policy, Support, and
Oversight. The strengthened urban development capacity at the national level was an implied
outcome. Inputs were to include asset management training and enhancing cities’ own-source revenue
generation. Inputs were also to include training of the central government in urban development to provide
capacity support to cities, such as in policy formulation, procurement, contract management, internal and
external audit, monitoring and evaluation (M&E), and verification of results. Inputs also included preparing an
implementation strategy and expenditure framework for the NUDP rollout. Outputs included asset
management guidelines, plans, revenue enhancement strategies, a professionally staffed management unit in
the Ministry of Construction (MOC), and an implementation strategy for the NUDP. The completed program
report was to support DLI 4.3. As noted, a change in government policy on tax revenue systems led to a
decrease in cities’ own-sources revenue, affecting their ability to achieve one of the sustainability targets fully.
There was also a legal constraint prohibiting cities from determining the tax rates and utility service charges,
further affecting cities’ ability to allocate resources for O&M needs. Outcomes were expected to be enhanced
fiscal capacities of cities to fund, operate, and maintain their assets (improved mechanism for infrastructure
O&M) and sustained capital investments evident in adopting the asset management plans and increase
in its own-source revenues. Additionally, the enhanced capacity of the MOC to coordinate and guide
participating cities in implementing results-based programs and financial mechanisms of the NUDP was an
implied outcome. DLI 3.1 was supported by the cities adopting its asset management plans with fully
functioning infrastructure investments. DLI 3.2 was supported by an increase in own source revenues for
O&M needs. DLI 4.1 was supported by the implementation of the NUDP strategy with milestones. DLI 4.2
was supported by having professional staff at MOC and training delivered to city officials according to
the Annual Capacity Development Plans.

The TOC was clear and convincing. The activities and inputs provided the causal logic that led to outputs and
outcomes. There was a gap in the lack of mitigating measures to address risks of possible national policies
that may run counter to the intent of the inputs under this TOC. There were also no indicators to strengthen
the causal link between inputs, outputs, and outcomes of national level MOC capacity improvements in urban
development that would enhance city-level urban management. The expected outputs and outcomes were
attributable to the project.

The assumption under the first objective also applied to this TOC. However, since this objective focused on
the sustainability of the completed investments, the TOC could have added an assumption regarding
complementary national government policies that supported cities' efforts to raise their resources for O&M.
See Outputs below.

OUTPUTS: The following expected outputs were under Results Area 3:

      IRI 8 or DLI 3.2 - 3 of the target 7 cities increased their source revenues for O&M. In the PAD, the
       seven cities were to target a minimum 12 percent year-on-year increase in own-sources revenue,
       excluding revenues from land transactions and rentals. This target was unmet because the
       government adopted a new tax revenue policy requiring cities to transfer taxes collected
       from companies with registered capital of more than VND10 billion to provinces. Cities could also not
       determine the tax rates and utility service charges for local infrastructure services. The State Auditor
       of Vietnam reported varying results for increasing own-source revenues: in 2015, all cities except Yen

                                                                                                    Page 15 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Nat'l Urban Devt Program - NM (P143596)



       Bai reached a minimum 12 percent increase in own-sources revenue compared to the previous year;
       in 2016, only two cities (Hoa Binh and Tuyen Quang) met the target; in 2017, only Thai Nguyen met
       the target; in 2018, four cities (Bac Kan, Cao Bang, Thai Nguyen, and Tuyen Quang) achieved the
       target; in 2019, when COVID-19 broke out, none of the seven cities achieved the target; and in 2020,
       three cities (Bac Kan, Cao Bang, and Hoa Binh) achieved the target.
      IR 9 and DLI 4.2 - 100 percent of professionally trained staff were in place at MOC, including a
       director, two vice directors, a finance management and internal auditor, an institutional development
       and capacity building expert, two technical engineers, a procurement expert, an environmental
       safeguards expert, a social safeguards expert, an M&E expert, and two administrative staff, as
       prescribed in the POM, achieving the target. MOC provided capacity support to cities to complete their
       Annual Capacity Development Plans, achieving the target.
      IR 10 and DLI 4.3 - MOC completed annual Program reports, summarizing key implementation
       aspects, results, and status of PAP actions, as targeted.
      All cities adopted asset management plans as targeted. These plans featured the quantity of identified
       assets per asset class (roads, bridges, drainage, embankments, retaining walls, water supply system,
       streetlights, buildings, etc.), their use-life, age, condition, estimated annual maintenance cost,
       responsibilities, and procedures for planning and conducting maintenance tasks; and the operation of
       completed sub-projects as designed.

OUTCOMES:

      DLI 3.1 - The strengthened capacity of participating Northern Mountains cities to sustain urban
       infrastructure was evident in the adoption of their respective Asset Management Plans and fully
       functioning local urban infrastructure sub-projects benefiting 912,508 people exceeding the target
       of 759,300, with 434,340 females exceeding the target of 374,869 female beneficiaries. The PAD
       noted a Yes/No unit of measure target and an end target of “a minimum of 80 percent of local urban
       infrastructure sub-projects completed free from physical damage and fully function as designed.
      DLI 4.1 - At the national level, the outcome of a strengthened national institutional capacity for urban
       development was evident in adopting the Phase 2 NUDP Implementation Strategy for cities in the
       Mekong Delta Region in 2019 with annual milestones. The implementation of this strategy
       commenced in 2020.

Overall, the efficacy of the project to achieve this objective is rated as Substantial with moderate
shortcomings. While the target for the adoption of Asset Management Plans and fully functioning local urban
infrastructure sub-projects was achieved (and exceeded in terms of the beneficiaries), the outcome regarding
own source revenue generation to sustain O&M of completed assets was partially achieved.



Rating
Substantial




OVERALL EFFICACY
Rationale

                                                                                                  Page 16 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Nat'l Urban Devt Program - NM (P143596)



 Overall efficacy is rated Substantial. The efficacy of the project to achieve the first and second objective
 is rated Substantial, while the third objective is rated Modest because of partial achievement of the target
 regarding own source revenue generation to fund the O&M needs of the completed assets. Seven of the eight
 DLIs were substantially achieved.



 Rating
 Substantial


5. Outcome

The overall outcome is rated Satisfactory. The relevance of the program objectives and associated DLIs were
aligned with the government priorities and the World Bank's strategic objectives for developing the urban sector
in Vietnam. Relevance of objectives is rated High. The overall efficacy of the program to achieve all its
objectives is rated Substantial with minor shortcomings. The overall outcome is rated Satisfactory.


    Outcome Rating
    Satisfactory


6. Risk to Development Outcome

The following pose risks to development outcomes (ICR, paragraph 82)

      Technical Risk: In this program, the central government piloted the use of the EACPs by the
       participating cities. These plans combined two previously prepared annual reports. These EACPs
       provided the justification and prioritization of the city's investments with provisions for monitoring by
       residents since the information is made public through websites. Keeping this information updated is
       a moderate risk. CPCs could implement a program for periodic rollout of updates.
      Financial Risk In this program, all seven cities allocated O&M budgets for the completed
       infrastructure according to their Asset Management Plan and to meet the requirements of DLI 2. All
       cities have committed to continuing to allocate O&M budgets and staff in the future. However, urban
       infrastructure is not a revenue-generating service, and rate-setting for the services is not determined
       by local authorities and is not likely to change soon. MOC and the cities would need to be creative in
       raising source revenues, setting rates that meet O&M budgets, and implementing cities' asset
       management plans.
      External shocks: In this program, implementation was challenged by the COVID-19 pandemic. Such
       external shocks could reduce the ability of cities to raise revenues or disrupt the planning process to
       meet urban infrastructure needs. The NUDP and the modalities implemented in this program set out
       the processes cities need to implement - screening and prioritization - of infrastructure needs. This
       program introduced the EACPs that cities would continue to use under the NUDP to prioritize
       infrastructure investments to reduce poverty and create potential regional hubs.



                                                                                                    Page 17 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Nat'l Urban Devt Program - NM (P143596)




7. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The World Bank's performance in ensuring the quality at entry is rated Satisfactory. The World Bank
  team designed this PforR with the government’s urban development priorities embodied in the NUDP.
  This operation was the first PforR regional pilot of the NUDP. The team used the PforR instrument to
  target seven Northern Mountains cities selected because of their potential as regional
  economic centers—design prescribed prioritization of investments with high socio-economic results to
  optimize development impact. Adequate technical, fiduciary, and environmental and social systems
  assessments informed the design of the incentive schemes. Mitigation measures to address risks were
  adequate. These were included in the Program Action Plan (PAP) and the Program Operations Manual
  (POM). However, the team acknowledged a couple of shortcomings. One, measures in the PAP to
  address land acquisition risks (e.g., site clearance and compensation) could have benefited by
  adding measures such as escrow accounts for land acquisition, sharing best practices in market
  valuation, and how to manage grievances. Second, some risks were missed at the appraisal that
  occurred at implementation. These included changes in tax policy, inflation, adopting the national
  Medium-Term Investment Plan (MTIP, a five-year fixed investment and budget plan of the national
  government) with insufficient project resources, and cities’ ability to pre-finance infrastructure investments
  to raise their revenues. Mitigation measures could have included a more modest target for annual own-
  sources revenue increase, larger DLI advances, or closer engagement with the government for more
  sufficient budgets. Lessons from World Bank urbanization reviews in China, Colombia, and India
  informed the design of DLIs. These included the importance of sustainable urbanization finance,
  connecting smaller cities to a system of cities, and capacity building for improving urban service
  delivery. Findings of urban analytical work in Vietnam on evaluating investment performance on service
  delivery and assessing the constraints and opportunities for enhancing local government capability to
  access financing for infrastructure development also informed design (ICR, footnotes 8 and 9).

  Overall, the Bank's performance at entry is rated Satisfactory. The readiness to implement was reflected
  in the absence of conditions when the project was to become effective. All design elements, including the
  POM, PAP, DLIs, and Project Management Units (PMUs) at city and MOC levels, were in place. Initial
  sets of infrastructure investments were identified. Feasibility studies were completed. Minor shortcomings
  at entry were the lack of an outcome indicator relative to the impact of both the training and technical
  assistance on the improved national urban development capacity, an overestimated target in own-
  sources revenue, missing the risks associated with the national policies limiting local tariff setting or own
  source revenue targeting.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision


                                                                                                     Page 18 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Nat'l Urban Devt Program - NM (P143596)



 The World Bank team conducted 16 supervision missions with technical and operational experts over the
 8-year implementation period. Key staff were based in Hanoi. This facilitated close dialogue with MOC and
 the cities, continuous implementation support, and regular field missions. The World Bank team conducted
 additional technical visits between missions to clarify emerging issues or assist the cities as needed.
 Monthly coordination meetings were held among MOC and the participating cities’ Project Management
 Units (PMUs). The World Bank team trained MOC and the cities on the PforR instrument, environmental
 and social safeguards, procurement, and financial management. The World Bank team acknowledged
 (ICR, paragraph 80) that a PforR performance-based financing expert in the team could have helped to
 address delayed contractor payments. Risk assessment and mitigation efforts did not anticipate the legal
 impediments for cities to determine their local tax rates and utility service charges, affecting their capacity
 to generate their source revenues. A national tax policy change also affected this outcome, which was
 associated with DLI 2 (ICR, paragraph 58 and footnote 33).

 The World Bank team conducted the Mid-term Review (MTR) in May 2018 and identified the following
 issues: (i) insufficient budget allocation in the MTIP and subsequent delays in the annual budget allocation
 to the cities; (ii) delays in land clearance and resettlement; and (iii) cities unlikely to meet DLI 3.2 targets on
 the increase in own-sources revenue. The following corrective measures were adopted: (i) securing
 additional MTIP allocations by closely coordinating with MOC, Provincial People's Committees (PPCs), the
 Ministry of Finance, and the Ministry of Planning and Investment; (ii) closer monitoring of land clearance
 and resettlement actions, and (III) detailed assessments of the cities’ own-sources revenue. Annual
 budgets began to increase by early 2020. Land clearance and resettlement actions improved. The 2021
 restructuring extended the program closing date but left the target for DLI 3.2 unchanged. The COVID-19
 pandemic, beginning in 2020, led to implementation delays affecting consultations with communities on
 infrastructure investment planning, mobilization of contractors to construction sites, and steering and
 monitoring meetings and field visits. The World Bank team extended the closing date to complete delayed
 activities.

 Overall, the quality of Bank performance at supervision is rated Satisfactory with moderate shortcomings
 regarding the mitigating measures to address policy changes to facilitate cities meeting conditions for
 disbursement.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


8. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The M&E system was designed to coordinate data flow between city and national governments, assisted
 by an independent third-party evaluation agency, the State Auditor of Vietnam (SAV). The
 TOC, constructed at closing, showed the causal link from key activities to outputs, intermediate results in
 the results framework that achieved targets that triggered disbursements to achieve the expected

                                                                                                        Page 19 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Nat'l Urban Devt Program - NM (P143596)



 outcomes. The objectives were clearly stated and supported the overall NUDP objectives. The indicators
 encompassed all relevant outcomes. The DLIs were clearly defined, measurable, and aligned with the
 PDOs. The intermediate results indicators and the outputs captured the contribution of the
 activities to achieving outcomes. The indicators were specific, measurable, achievable, relevant, and time-
 bound. All indicators had baselines and targets, data sources, and methodologies. However, the M&E
 design did not include an outcome indicator for the strengthened national urban development capacity.
 The targets for cities to generate their own-source revenues proved to be unrealistic.



b. M&E Implementation
  The MOC implemented the M&E system as designed. The SAV implemented the verification
  protocols and completed their annual assessments. Each city formed a community monitoring group and
  supplemented the reporting of implementation progress. MOC and the cities prepared mid-term reports
  and completion reports. The noted weakness in design regarding the lack of outcome indicators for
  strengthened urban development capacity at the national level remained unaddressed at implementation.
  At closing, informal surveys were conducted to assess impacts on job creation, increase in beneficiaries’
  income, and increased business opportunities.



c. M&E Utilization
  M&E data was used to inform program progress and prepare corrective measures in response to
  implementation challenges. The results verification reports determined disbursements. M&E data-
  informed MOC on areas where cities needed to improve. The World Bank supervision team and MOC
  used M&E reports to assess progress toward achieving the outcomes. M&E data informed the
  restructuring and extension of the closing date.

  Overall, the M&E system is rated Substantial. The M&E was well designed, except for the lack of an
  outcome indicator that would measure strengthened urban development capacity at the national level.
  Cities and MOC measured all outcomes and acknowledged the overly optimistic target of own-sources
  revenue increase by cities. MOC, SAV, and the cities implemented M&E as designed, and data was
  used to inform the operation.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

9. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Environmental and Social Safeguards. The project was not assigned an Environmental Category and did
   not trigger safeguards policies. Instead, as a PforR, the project triggered the Bank’s Operational
   Policy/Bank Procedures (OP/BP) 9.00 (Program-for Results Financing), establishing the policy and planning
   elements necessary to achieve outcomes consistent with the PforR objectives. The Bank policy OP/BP 9.00
   Program for Results (PforR) Financing was first issued in February 2012 and revised in April 2013 and April

                                                                                                  Page 20 of 24
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Nat'l Urban Devt Program - NM (P143596)



  2015. An Environmental and Social Systems Assessment (ESSA) examined the program's scope, context,
  and potential impacts from an environmental and social perspective. The environmental and social
  management systems and implementing capacities of the respective government agencies participating in
  the Program were evaluated as to their consistency with the core principles in the). The assessment
  concluded that the applicable systems were consistent with OP/BP 9.00 (PAD, paragraph 84). The
  consolidated social and environmental risk assessment was substantial, but typical investments were small
  to medium-scale civil works with moderate environmental impacts. The program DLIs and actions in the
  PAPs addressed environmental risk mitigation measures (see Section 3 Relevance above). The
  POM guided the cities on procedures, such as environmental codes of practice (ECOPs) and worker’s code
  of conduct, to avoid, minimize, and mitigate environmental and social impacts. The program supported the
  MOC in building environmental risk management capacity in each city. Environmental Protection Plans and
  Environment Impact Assessments were prepared for infrastructure sub-projects and publicly disclosed in
  the CPC offices, relevant community offices, and sub-project sites. MOC and each city assigned staff to be
  responsible for the program's environmental, health, and safety (EHS) aspects. Construction supervisors
  were assigned to monitor contractors’ compliance with EHS aspects. Contractors undertook timely
  corrective measures to address any concerns in meeting EHS requirements (e.g., disposal of topsoil, use of
  personal protection equipment, and signage at construction sites).

  Social Safeguards: In social risk management, each sub-project prepared detailed plans for compensation,
  support, and resettlement involving land acquisition or physical displacement of people or properties and
  publicly disclosed in the CPC offices, relevant community offices, and sub-project sites to comply with
  national requirements and the POM. MOC and each city assigned staff to coordinate land acquisition and
  resettlement activities. Long-standing resettlement grievance cases were resolved. Implementation delays
  in site clearance, land acquisition, and resettlement were marked by (i) a lack of sufficient funds to
  undertake site clearance and land acquisition, (ii) CPCs lengthy appraisal and approval of design and land
  acquisition plans, and (iii) delays in obtaining consent to resettle from affected households (ICR, paragraph
  60). Some construction works were delayed and contributed to the justification of extending the program
  closing date because resettlement site development lacked funding (e.g., in Dien Bien Phu). No pending
  cases were reported at closing. All cities conducted community participation and consultations as planned.

  The program complied with environmental, health, and safety (EHS) requirements and implemented PAP
  actions that indicated compliance with environmental and social risks (ICR, paragraphs 70-71).




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial management. Financial management complied with the World Bank policy for PforR financing
  (ICR, paragraph 76). The POM included guidance to MOC and the cities on fiduciary requirements and
  procedures, with specific guidance on the performance-based transfer system and funds flow
  arrangements. All required financial audit reports were submitted on time with unqualified opinions.
  Financial issues raised in management letters, such as recategorizing certain expenditures and arithmetic
  errors, were corrected. MOC recruited an independent consulting firm to conduct internal audits in all
  participating provinces. The provinces and cities implemented their recommendations. The delayed annual
  budget allocations by the PPCs affected the program’s disbursement rate in 2016-2019 (ICR, paragraph
  75).



                                                                                                 Page 21 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Nat'l Urban Devt Program - NM (P143596)



   Procurement. Procurement complied with the World Bank policy for PforR financing (ICR, paragraph 76).
   The PAP included a set of procurement-related actions: (i) Action 2 - procurement practices through
   competitive bidding, excluding dependent state-owned enterprises, ensuring valid bids, and excluding
   debarred firms; and (ii) Action 3 - effective internal audit function. The results verification reports confirmed
   that the cities satisfactorily complied with the national procurement law, regulations, and procurement-
   related PAP actions. Nonmaterial shortcomings and deviations in cost estimation, contract amendment,
   price adjustment, and contract documentation were noted and addressed. Most selected contractors were
   qualified (ICR, paragraph 74).




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

10. Ratings
                                                                                   Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                     IEG
                                                                                   Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                          Satisfactory           Satisfactory

Bank Performance                 Satisfactory           Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                   Substantial            Substantial

Quality of ICR                   ---                    High


11. Lessons

The ICR presented six lessons from the operation, slightly paraphrased below (ICR, paragraphs 83-
88):

      Well-defined results assessment protocols and a credible and comprehensive
       verification system may help achieve the planned outcomes. This program used a
       transparent M&E system at national and city levels, linking it with the MIS and independent
       verification. The verification-based disbursement process was an important learning-by-doing
       tool that incentivized results. The verification protocols included the engagement of a credible
       independent agent with clear responsibilities and capacity. World Bank quality assurance
       improved the credibility of the performance assessment SAV conducted. Cities claimed that
       SAV verification improved the quality of their infrastructure investments.
      DLIs and PAPs may target inclusive urban management, strengthen management
       capacity, and contribute to poverty reduction in the target area. In this program, DLIs
       were used to strengthen capacities at the city and national levels. DLIs focused on improving
       the cities’ capacity and systems to plan and implement urban infrastructure investments.
       National capacity to support cities in urban management processes also improved. PAP

                                                                                                       Page 22 of 24
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Nat'l Urban Devt Program - NM (P143596)



         actions ensured the delivery of quality infrastructure that benefited the poorer, vulnerable
         groups such as women and ethnic minorities in these target areas.
        Adding expenditure and payment strategies may boost a city's ability to pre-
         finance infrastructure works. In this program, payment delays to contractors resulted from
         the city's inability to pre-finance infrastructure works. DLI advances, and available
         counterpart funds also proved insufficient. MTIP also had inadequate allocations for both IDA
         and counterpart funds. Future design may find adding expenditure and contractor payment
         strategies helpful to help cities address their lack of capacity to pre-finance investments.
        If national policies do not reflect support for cities to generate their own resources
         and set local taxes and user fees for service delivery to residents, this may affect the
         cities’ capacity to sustain the assets they build and the service delivery provided to
         their residents. The cities' fiscal condition would be enhanced if they could increase their
         revenues from their sources. In this program, cities increasingly assumed more
         responsibilities to deliver urban infrastructure and services to residents. These cities often
         lacked the management capacity to plan, implement, manage, and sustain the financing
         needs of the investments and provide for O&M from their resources. The 12 percent annual
         increase target for revenues set at appraisal in response to high inflation rates proved
         unachievable. This was compounded by a change in tax and public financial management
         policies set at the national level that negated local resource mobilization efforts.
        PforR financing is a useful instrument to improve the performance of both national
         and sub-national governments. In this program, the result indicators focused on improving
         the performance of both the national and sub-national governments. DLI targets enhanced
         the national government’s capacity and improved systems for urban policy and
         implementation support to cities. The program demonstrated the effectiveness of creating
         synergies in assisting two aspects in delivering infrastructure services. One focused on
         strengthening the national agencies' policy environment and oversight system, while the
         other increased technical support to cities.



12. Assessment Recommended?

  No

13. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR followed the guidelines and provided a clear picture of the operation. The ICR was results-oriented,
highlighting the impact of the reforms introduced under the program. The ICR was internally consistent. The
salient points of the operation were adequately summarized. References throughout the report established links
from the PAP and the POM to the SAV use of clear protocols and methodologies to verify
achievements. Evidence was clearly linked to the outcomes. The analysis of the evidence justified the ratings.
The annexes provided visual evidence of the achievements reported under the program. Lessons were
practical and based on the operation. The ICR was candid, acknowledging the risks that were missed, the lack
of a relevant outcome indicator, and the overambitious target for one DLI.




                                                                                                   Page 23 of 24
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Nat'l Urban Devt Program - NM (P143596)



Overall, the quality of the ICR is rated High.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      High




                                                                              Page 24 of 24
