     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     RCIP - APL 4 Comoros (RI) (P118213)



                                                                                Report Number: ICRR0023463

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P118213                                   RCIP - APL 4 Comoros (RI)

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Eastern and Southern Africa               Digital Development


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-D3820,IDA-H8780                       30-Jun-2018                                         29,965,953.78

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 10-Sep-2013                               30-Sep-2022

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                          22,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                           32,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Actual                                       30,053,317.78                                               0.00




 Prepared by               Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Ranga Rajan               Avjeet Singh                  Avjeet Singh                   IEGSD (Unit 4)
 Krishnamani




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO), as stated in the Financing Agreement (Schedule 1, page 5) and
   the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, page 6), is:

   " To support the Union of the Comoros's (hereafter Comoros) efforts to lower prices for international
   capacity and extend the geographic reach of broadband connectivity. "



                                                                                                 Page 1 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     RCIP - APL 4 Comoros (RI) (P118213)



   This review is based on the two PDOs:

   PDO 1: To lower prices for international capacity.

   PDO 2: To extend the geographic reach of broadband connectivity.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  19-Nov-2018

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   This project in Comoros was the fourth phase of the Regional Communications Infrastructure Program
   (RCIP). The first phase was implemented in Kenya, Burundi, and Madagascar, the second in Rwanda, and
   the third in Malawi, Mozambique, and Tanzania. This program was designed as a regional operation to (i)
   accelerate the roll-out of the terrestrial regional and related national backbone infrastructure to ensure
   access to the submarine cables across Eastern and Southern Africa (E&SA) and to extend access to
   broadband services within countries; (ii) finance purchase of broadband capacity (domestic, regional and
   international) for use by Governments and other targeted users (schools, universities and hospitals); and
   (iii) finance related activities such as implementing e-Government applications and extending the
   Information and Communication Technology (ICT) Services in rural areas.

   There were three components (PAD, page 9):

   1. Enabling Environment. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$3.30 million. The revised estimate with
   Additional Financing (AF) was US$5.20 million. The actual cost was as per the revised estimate. This
   component aimed to promote further regional market integration, ICT sector liberalization through the award
   of a second license, and legal and regulatory reforms. This component included technical assistance (TA)
   and capacity building activities, including TA to assist the government with preparatory work for the
   proposed submarine cable FLY - LION3 (the name of the submarine cable consortium to link Comoros with
   Mayotte and Madagascar), including environmental studies and demand analysis.

   The scope of this component was expanded with the AF to include (a) TA, capacity building on national
   market issues such as infrastructure sharing and interconnection principles, restructuring Comoros Telecom
   (CT) and Comoros Cables (CC), access and authorization for Internet Service Provider (ISP) and sector
   taxation; and (b) TA program to develop, implement and manage new government applications through
   study visits, workshops, and training on new applications for key stakeholders and support for developing a
   strategy for digitizing government functions.


                                                                                                 Page 2 of 16
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    RCIP - APL 4 Comoros (RI) (P118213)



  2. Connectivity. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$17.00 million. The revised estimate with AF was
  25.50 million. The actual cost was US$24.24 million. This component planned to finance: (i) Comoros's
  membership fee for participating in the FLY - LION 3 link under Public-Private-Partnership (PPP)
  arrangement for connectivity with LION 2; (ii) advance purchase of additional broadband capacity from the
  East African Submarine System (EASSy), FLY LION 3 and/or LION 2 for providing affordable bandwidth to
  key users such as universities, schools, and hospitals; (iii) additional measures to stimulate demand
  including through creating Internet Service Providers (ISPs) and establishing a carrier- independent Internet
  Exchange Point (IXP).

  The scope of this component was expanded significantly to include (a) developing a backbone network for
  the government and a backup government center, extending bandwidth for central government agencies by
  acquiring an indefeasible right of use for a minimum of five years, facilitating the transfer the country code
  top-level Comoros Telecom domain to the National Authority for the Regulation of Information and
  Communication Technology (ANRTIC) and developing a multi-stakeholder governance framework,
  strengthening cybersecurity, introducing a basic e-visa system and introducing additional e-Government
  services (such as for, online business registration, e-procurement, citizen tax filing system, government
  interoperability platform and coordinating e- Government agency; and (b) introducing a dedicated co-
  working space for ICT business innovation and training.

  3. Project management. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$1.70 million, including US$0.2 million for
  contingency. The revised estimate with AF was US$2.50 million. The actual cost was US$2.56 million. This
  component is planned to finance project management and coordination costs, procurement, and financial
  management. Monitoring and evaluation, communication. Environmental and social safeguards costs, cost
  of equipment, and incremental operating and audit costs.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project cost. The estimated cost at appraisal, including AF, was US$32.00 million. The actual cost was
  US$30.05 million.

  Financing. The project was financed by an International Development Association (IDA) Grant of US$22.00
  million. AF of US$10.00 million was approved on November 19, 2018. With this, the Bank financing was
  US$32.00 million. The amount disbursed was US$30.05 million. There were exchange rate changes during
  implementation.

  Co financing. The private sector was expected to contribute US$12.00 million. According to the team, the
  private sector contributed US$12.00 million during implementation.

  Dates. The project was approved on September 10, 2013, became effective on November 19, 2013, and
  was scheduled to close on June 30, 2018. However, the project closed 51 months, that is, four years and
  three months later, on September 30, 2022.

  Changes. There were four level 2 restructurings, and AF was approved. The changes made are listed
  sequentially as follows.

  The main changes made through the first level 2 restructuring on February 28, 2018, are as follows.



                                                                                                   Page 3 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     RCIP - APL 4 Comoros (RI) (P118213)



         The closing date was extended by 18 months to December 31, 2019, for completing the construction
          of the FLY-LION3 land station that was behind schedule due to the delays in the telecom operators
          reaching an agreement and to allow time for Bank negotiations for the AF.

   The AF was approved on November 19, 2018, to scale up the demand stimulation component (including
   support for digitization of public administration and government services) and account for the budget
   shortfall from exchange rate losses sustained during the initial years. (The project lost about 10% (US$2.00
   million) of original financing due to exchange rate changes). The scope of component one and two activities
   were expanded (discussed above). Although the original PDO was retained, the targets for some original
   activities were expanded with the AF.

   Funds were reallocated from component two to components one and three for strengthening support for
   resolving crucial market issues and capacity building needs through the second project restructuring on
   June 18, 2020.

   The following changes were made through the third project restructuring on May 28, 2021:

         The closing date was extended by a year to June 30, 2022, for completing the ongoing activities.
         Two activities (e-visa and interoperability platforms) were cancelled after the feasibility studies
          concluded that arrangements were not in place for implementing those activities.

   The main changes made through the fourth project restructuring on May 27, 2022, are as follows:

         The closing date was extended by three months to September 30, 2022, for completing the ongoing
          activities.
         Funds were reallocated from component two to component three activities.

   Split rating of Objectives. The PDOs did not change, and the project scope and targets expanded
   substantially with AF. Two indicators on fixed-line internet subscriptions and fixed mainline subscriptions
   were dropped during the AF because they were considered technologically outdated. Therefore, this review
   is not based on a split rating of objectives.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country and sector context. Comoros is a small island developing state in the Indian Ocean. Nearly 40%
of Comoros's population is poor, living on less than US$3.25 a day in 2014. This is due to a combination of
factors, including several political coups in the past and frequent government changes in recent years. The
World Bank classifies Comoros among the fragile, conflict and violent (FCV) countries due to its high
institutional instability (ICR, footnote 1).

At appraisal, the ICT sector in Comoros was underperforming compared to the rest of Sub-Saharan Africa
(SSA). The sector contributed just one percent of Gross Domestic Product (GDP), compared to around four
percent average in the region. Comoros's broadband services were among the most expensive in SSA in

                                                                                                    Page 4 of 16
                       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                       RCIP - APL 4 Comoros (RI) (P118213)



2011. The price of a basket of prepaid mobile services in 2010 was US$24.25 per month (almost double
that of SSA's average of US$14.98). Comoros faced many challenges in terms of connectivity due to its
remote location and the small size of its economy (which meant little scope for economies of scale),
absence of competition in the sector, and weak regulation. Improving the regulatory framework and
increasing private sector participation in the sector to drive down prices was part of the Government
strategy.

Government strategy. The PDO is well-aligned with the Government strategy. At appraisal, the
Government's Poverty Reduction and Growth Strategy Paper (PRGSP) of 2005 identified the ICT sector as
critical for economic growth. The PRGSP also highlighted the need to increase international and in-country
connectivity and provide affordable communications. Before the appraisal, the Government had taken many
steps to liberalize the sector. The steps included enacting the 2014 Communications Act and partially
liberalizing the Internet Service Provider (ISP). The activities added with the AF responded to the
Government strategy outlined in the Strategie Comores Numerique 2028. This strategy recognized the
critical role of fiber optic network infrastructure in increasing national broadband coverage and quality of
service.

Bank strategy. The PDOs continue to be relevant for the Bank strategy for Comoros. At appraisal, the
County Partnership Strategy for 2014 - 2017 highlighted the need for supporting more robust governance,
entrepreneurship and building public sector capacity for ICT sector innovations. The PDO was well-aligned
with the current Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for 2020 -2024. The second focus area of the CPF
articulated the need for promoting inclusive growth through (i) improving the business environment and
governance and (ii) improving connectivity. The PDO was relevant to the Bank's 2020 COVID-19 Response
Paper - "COVID-19 Crisis Response to Resilient Recovery ". This paper viewed digital connectivity as an
enabler for building back better after the pandemic. The PDO was well-aligned with the Bank's Africa
Regional Integration Assistance Strategy (RIAS) dated March 21, 2011, updated in 2018 and 2020.

Bank experience. The Bank had financed three phases of the RCIP aimed to address the connectivity
constraints by leveraging ICTs in SSA. In line with the overarching regional framework, this project sought
to address the connectivity gaps in Comoros through a combination of supply and demand side
interventions. Supply-side interventions included support to finance Comoros' membership and participation
in the FLY-LION 3 regional submarine cable to expand access to broadband services. On the demand side,
the interventions sought to stimulate market demand for connectivity services among target users, including
through advanced purchase of broadband capacity.

The project scope was expanded substantially with AF to scale up the demand stimulation component
(including through digitizing public administration and government services). These activities went far
beyond the original PDO of lowering prices for international capacity and extending the geographic reach of
broadband connectivity. Despite the significant increase in project scope, the original PDO was retained.
The PDO did not reflect the significant changes to the project scope (e-Government services). Therefore,
the relevance of the objective is rated as substantial.


Rating Relevance TBL




Rating
Substantial




                                                                                                  Page 5 of 16
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  RCIP - APL 4 Comoros (RI) (P118213)



   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective

               PDO 1: To lower prices for international capacity.

               Rationale
               Theory of change. The project aimed to address the development challenge of high price for wholesale
               international bandwidth. Activities such as capacity building support for formulating policy, strengthening
               regulatory oversight and enacting legislation and financing studies on the ICT enabling environment were
               expected to help enacting legislation on sector regulation, enabling the use of regional broadband, creating
               the Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV) for strengthening institutional accountability, and the landing of new
               submarine cables. These outputs were expected to aid in lowering prices of international capacity and the
               long-term outcomes of sustaining growth and national and regional integration. The causal links between
               activities, outputs and outcomes were logical. The intended outcomes were monitorable.

               The assumption underlying the theory of change is that the government is committed to separating the fibre
               optic cable assets of CT into a separate SPV called Comores Cables (CC).

               Outputs. (ICR, pages 14 - 16 and 29 - 36).

                     Technical Assistance (TA) was provided under the project as targeted. This contributed to the
                        Government adopting the 2014 Telecom Law, which introduced a licensing regime. The TA also
                        supported the regulations related to interconnection and access to networks and services (Decree
                        Number 15-091/PR of June 10, 2015) and introduction of a new authorization regime to make it easier
                        for potential ISPs to enter the market (Decree Number 15 -093/PR).
                       Prior to the project, wholesale and retail markets were vertically integrated within CT's monopoly. The
                        Government awarded the license for a second telecom license as targeted, thereby breaking the
                        monopoly of the incumbent in both the wholesale and retail markets. The evolution of the market
                        structure from a monopoly to a duopoly was reflected in the Herfindahl-Hirschman Index (which
                        measures market concentration) steadily decreasing for Comoros from a maximum of 10,000 in 2012
                        to 6,752 in 2022 (A measure of 10,000 means that only entity holds 100% of market shares).
                       The project supported the creation of Comores Cable (CC) a Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV) in 2013
                        and subsequent transfer of ownership of all international cables from Comores Telecom (CT) to CC as
                        targeted.
                       846 women benefitted from the dedicated co-working space financed by the project for ICT business
                        innovation and training (the Comor' lab) when the project closed, far exceeding the target of 100.
                       During the COVID - 19 pandemic, the project supported the Government's capacity for home-based
                        work by procuring 300 laptops for key government officials and a secure government e-
                        mail/productivity suite was installed on the laptops.
                       The project leveraged for Comoros more than US$90 million by way of telecom licensing fees and
                        private sector infrastructure investment (estimated at US$122.00 million).


                                                                                                                 Page 6 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   RCIP - APL 4 Comoros (RI) (P118213)



The following activities were not fully completed when the project closed.

      The number of licensed Internet Service Providers (ISPs) increased from one to five when the project
       closed, exceeding the target of four. However, three of the five authorized ISPs were not operational
       when the project closed, as they had not been able to deploy their access networks, due to the lack of
       a proper regulatory framework for ISPs, and the ISPs ' inability to negotiate successfully with the two
       main telecom operators to reach an interconnection agreement.
      Some recommendations of the TA activities of the project aimed to support regulatory reforms such as
       open access, infrastructure sharing, and spectrum management were not enforced due to insufficient
       Government commitment. The PPP arrangement for managing the FLY-LION3 cable was not
       implemented.

Outcomes.

The outputs described above were expected to lower the wholesale price of international capacity in
Comoros.

      The average price of wholesale internet capacity dropped from US$ 5,500 at the baseline to
       US$60.00 on September 30, 2022, surpassing the target of US$1.000.

Given that the project aided in breaking the de facto monopolies of the incumbent in both the wholesale and
retail markets with the approval of a license to a second operator, it is reasonable to assume that the project
contributed substantially to lowering the wholesale price of international capacity in Comoros. The ICR also
notes that the new FLY-LION3 cable created a more diverse supply of international capacity, which allowed
ISPs to leverage competition between cables and led to a further reduction in prices.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
PDO 2: To extend the geographic reach of broadband connectivity.

Rationale
Theory of change. The project activities addressed the development challenge of fostering competition in the
ICT sector. The outputs of activities such as participating in the FLY-LIONS cable, capacity building to assist
the Government with constructing and maintaining the new submarine cable, advance purchase of capacity,
and promoting Internet Service Providers (ISP) with an Internet Exchange Point (IXP), were likely to increase
competition in the sector and connecting households, businesses, ministries and departments to internet
services. These outputs will likely help extend the geographic reach of broadband services. The causal link
between activities, outputs, and outcomes is logical, and the outcomes are monitorable.

The project outcomes were predicated on three assumptions: (i) The Government remains committed to
separating the fiber optic cable assets of Comores Telecom (CT) into a separate particular purpose vehicle;
(ii) Negotiations are ongoing between the telecom operators Comors and neighboring countries to create a

                                                                                                   Page 7 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   RCIP - APL 4 Comoros (RI) (P118213)



consortium to enhance regional connectivity through addition submarine cable (FLY-LION3); and (iii) The CT
is privatized subject to a parallel project financed by the International Finance Corporation (IFC) when this
project was under preparation.

Outputs (ICR, pages 35 - 36).

In addition to the above activities relevant to this objective, the following outputs were completed as targeted.

      The project aided as targeted in providing the FLY-LION3 cable construction and maintenance
       consortium fees, and Comoros became a member of the FLY-LION3 consortium.
      The international internet bandwidth capacity increased from 456 Megabits per second (Mbit/s
       increased from 456 Mbit/s at the baseline on December 31, 2011, to 6,940 Mbit/s on September 30,
       2022, far exceeding the target of 3611 Mbit/s.
      Physical infrastructure to enable cross-connections in Comoros was established at the landing station
       at CC, as targeted. As of June 2019, the new landing station in Moroni was completed as targeted.
       The ICR (page 15) noted that with its investment, CC set up another station to the Africa 2 cable,
       allowing Comoros to be liked with a third cable beyond FLY - LION 3 and EASSy. This cable officially
       landed in Comoros on 12 January 2023.
      The ICR notes that the Internet Exchange Point (IXP) was not established due to the lack of
       commitment from the telecom operators.

Outcomes.

The outputs described above were expected to contribute to the following outcomes: (i) increase international
internet bandwidth capacity, (ii) increase access to internet services and mobile subscriptions, and (iii)
increase the number of direct project beneficiaries with access to internet services.

      The number of people with access to internet services (number of subscribers per 100 people)
       increased from 0.62 at the baseline to 65.93, exceeding the original and revised targets of 4.13 and
       37.70, respectively. The total number of internet subscriptions increased from 5,416 at the baseline to
       536,596, exceeding the original and revised targets of 66,030 and 300,000, respectively
      The number of mobile subscriptions increased to 781,579, exceeding the original and revised targets
       of 459,999 and 582,000. The total number of mobile subscriptions (per 100 inhabitants) increased
       from 27.39 at the baseline to 97.10 when the project closed, exceeding the target of 72.75.
      372 355 people directly benefitted from project activities (new mobile subscribers), exceeding the
       original and revised targets of 215,000 and 365,562, respectively. 50.10% of the beneficiaries were
       women, exceeding the target of 50%. The beneficiaries included people in areas that had no fiber
       optic network coverage.

Given that the outcomes were realized, the efficacy of this PDO is rated as substantial.

The ICR also notes that even though capacity strengthening was not an explicit aspect of the PDO, the
project did contribute towards 'improved institutional resilience and capacity.' As part of the PDO above, the
project helped strengthen the institutions and legislation that regulate the ICT sector. Funds were also
reallocated from Component 2 to Component One under the June 2020 restructuring to ensure sufficient
funding remained to continue supporting the planned national sector reform through TA. In addition to the TA,
e-government services and applications were included as new activities to increase demand stimulation for

                                                                                                    Page 8 of 16
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                RCIP - APL 4 Comoros (RI) (P118213)



                            targeted institutions and measured through intermediate results. The project delivered two e-government
                            platforms to improve the efficiency of government services for the citizens with the online one-stop shop for
                            business registration and transparency in the public procurement process. The project also supported the
                            establishment of the country's first national Tier 3 data center located at CC and managed by ANADEN and
                            acts as the central repository for all government data.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Although some outputs were not met, they did not have substantive implications for achieving the PDO. The
                            overall efficacy is rated as substantial, given that the project met its objectives and the outcome targets.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   Economic analysis. Although an economic analysis was conducted at appraisal, the ICR (para 43) noted that it
   was not possible to compare the results of the economic analysis at appraisal with the results at project closing
   due to the various restructurings and also because the original model used at appraisal could not be located.
   Therefore, an ex-post cost-benefit analysis (CBA) was conducted to measure the project's net present value
   (NPV) and Economic Rate of Return (ERR) for activities that accounted for 92% of the actual cost (including the
   original financing and the AF). Given the difficulties associated with quantifying the full range of positive network
   effects and spillovers derived from the project, the potential macroeconomic benefits were assumed to come
   from the ICT sectors' contribution to the Gross Domestic Product (GDP). The NPV at a 10.5% discount rate was
   US$3.67 million at project closing, and the ex-post EIRR was 32.6%.

   Administrative and Operational Issues during implementation. There were several shortcomings in the
   initial years. The Government failed to abide by several agreed commitments for the project. For example, open
   access policies for the new cable landing station established by the project were to be incorporated into the
   state-owned Comores Cable (CC) statute. However, the National Authority for the Regulation of the Information
   and Communications Technology (ICT) sector (ANRTIC) granted exclusivity of usage of that landing station to
   CC (not allowing other telecom operators to cross-connect). This was only remedied in July 2022 when a new
   Director General was appointed, and negotiations with Telma Comres were reopened. These factors contributed
   to the delays during the initial years. The delays were exacerbated by frequent changes in the Project



                                                                                                                             Page 9 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      RCIP - APL 4 Comoros (RI) (P118213)



Implementation Unit (PIU) during implementation. These factors contributed to the project closing four years and
three months behind schedule.

The project demonstrated good value for money despite the FCV conditions that prevailed throughout the
project's lifetime. Project activities were completed within the budget. The ICR (para 41) notes that procurement
and project management costs were comparable to similar Bank-financed projects in other countries. The
enabling environment and connectivity activities created significant value, which amounted to US$1.25 for every
dollar spent in the neutral scenario, US$0.92 for the pessimistic scenario, and US$1.50 for the optimistic
scenario). The project also attracted US$3 in private investment for every dollar invested in the project.

Overall efficiency is rated as substantial. Although there were administrative and operational shortcomings
during implementation, the project was economically viable and demonstrated good value for money despite the
FCV context in which the project was implemented.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                    0
 Appraisal                                                  0
                                                                                     Not Applicable
                                                                                    92.00
 ICR Estimate                                              32.60
                                                                                     Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of the PDO to the Government and Bank strategy is substantial. Efficacy of the PDO is substantial
with minor shortcomings. Efficiency is substantial. Therefore, overall outcome is rated as satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Government commitment. There is a substantial risk to the sustainability of development outcomes. This
project aided in enacting the 2014 Telecommunications Act aimed at improving the regulatory oversight of
the ICT sector. However, there were issues with the enforcement of the law. The ICR (para 78) notes that

                                                                                                   Page 10 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      RCIP - APL 4 Comoros (RI) (P118213)



although the Government is working on a new Electronic Law to enhance the now obsolete 2014 Act, it has
limited the consultation process to only key interlocutors at the Ministry of Posts, Telecommunications and
Digital Economy (MPTEN). The ICR also notes that the draft of the new law still has some regulatory gaps.

Furthermore, although Comoros has a national regulatory authority, ANRTIC, established in 2009, it still has
a board mainly appointed by MPTEN. The ICR notes that throughout the project, successive ministers of
MPTEN introduced decrees and decisions that ANRTIC had to apply and implement, even if they went
against the current regulatory, competitive principles. The lack of regulatory oversight limits private sector
participation in the ICT sector.

Financial risk. There is a risk that the project development outcomes could be undermined due to lack of
financing. The National Agency for Digital Development (ANADEN) remains vastly underfunded and
understaffed. This project aided in providing a series of laptops and pre-purchase of internet connections.
The continuation of these activities could be undermined due to lack of funding.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The Bank prepared this project in Comoros based on the experiences from the previous Bank-financed
  RCIP phases 1 to 3. Lessons incorporated at design included: (i) Capacity building activities for
  negotiations with the private sector to establish durable Public-Private-Partnership (PPP) arrangements;
  and (ii) Given the limited availability and short supply of qualified staff for project and fiduciary
  management, the project used an existing Project Management Unit (PMU) discussed below. (PAD,
  paras. 33 and 35). The project appropriately included a Project Preparation Advance (PPA) to cover
  preparation activities consisting primarily of regulatory and technical assistance for the open-access
  broadband backbone infrastructure. The project preparation was facilitated by the preparatory studies
  conducted by the Bank before approval (ICR, para 54).

  The implementation arrangements made at the appraisal were appropriate. The unit for follow-up of
  Economic and Financial Reforms (CREF) within the Ministry of Finance was responsible for overall
  project coordination. An existing PIU, which was implementing an ongoing Bank-financed project
  (the Appui a la Bonne Govrnance Economique project), was in charge of day-to-day project
  implementation (PAD, para 36).

  The technical aspects of project design were similar to those of the previous three phases, adapted to the
  country context and set within a coordinated regional framework. The preparation team identified several
  risks at appraisal, as the project envisioned a PPP model in a sector that did not have any private
  sector. At appraisal, the Bank analyzed to assess the project's economic viability. The arrangements
  made at appraisal for safeguards and fiduciary compliance were appropriate (discussed in sections 9 and
  10).

  There was one shortcoming. The preparation team underestimated the governance risk, as demonstrated
  by the fact that the government wavered in its commitment to sector regulation (discussed in section
  five).


                                                                                                   Page 11 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     RCIP - APL 4 Comoros (RI) (P118213)



  Bank Performance at entry is rated as Satisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Nineteen Implementation Status Results Reports (ISRR) were filed over the project lifetime of roughly ten
 years, implying twice a year supervision mission. During implementation, the Bank provided sector policy
 notes for the incoming governments in 2014 and 2019 to address particular issues experienced during
 project implementation and provided a background on the failed privatization process. The supervision
 team restructured the project in a timely fashion and the team proactively proposed changes to budget
 reallocation and included new activities at the government request with the AF for the project.

 However, there were moderate supervision shortcomings. One, although the project activities were
 expanded AF to scale up the demand stimulation component (including through digitization of public
 administration), the original PDO was retained. The original PDO did not reflect the increased level of
 ambition of project activities that were added with the AF for the project. Two, the Financing Agreement of
 the AF grant stipulated that the Bank could suspend the operation if the Special Purpose Vehicle failed to
 perform any of its obligations under the SPV agreement. Proving open access was explicitly stated in CC's
 statute as one of its obligations. However, although ANRITC had agreed to open access, issues about
 cross-connection between CC and Telco were not fully resolved. In hindsight, the supervision team could
 have explored the option to suspend or cancel parts of the project in line with the General Conditions of the
 Financing Agreement or at least signal the intention to do so, which could have accelerated the issue's
 resolution.

 Bank performance at supervision is rated as moderately satisfactory.

 Overall, the Bank performance was rated as moderately satisfactory due to the shortcomings in
 supervision.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The key outcome indicators were standard industry indicators and the same as those for the Regional
 Communications Infrastructure Program (RCIP). These indicators were appropriate for monitoring project

                                                                                                   Page 12 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     RCIP - APL 4 Comoros (RI) (P118213)



 performance. The indicators were: (i) increased volume of international traffic, (ii) lower average price of
 international communications, and (iii) the number of direct project beneficiaries (including female
 beneficiaries).

 However, there were M&E design shortcomings. The M&E framework did not include any indicator that
 could be used to measure the geographic reach of the broadband network. The framework included only
 one indicator for measuring the prices for international connectivity. This made it challenging to link every
 sector development in the country to the project. The assessment of the demand stimulation of e-
 government activities was only through intermediate indicators.



b. M&E Implementation
  The deficiencies in M&E design were not corrected during implementation. The data for monitoring
  progress was collected by the Project Implementation Unit (PIU) from external sources (such as
  TeleGeography, International Telecommunication Union (ITU), and the Global System for Mobile
  Communications Association (GSMA) and information retrieved from the laws passed.

  The ICR (para 62) notes that despite the limited capacity, the PIU regularly collects the data for
  monitoring progress. However, there were difficulties in updating sectoral data, particularly by the
  National Authority for the Regulation of Information and Communications Technologies (ANRTIC). The
  weak institutional capacity at ANTRIC exacerbated these difficulties. Without accurate data from ANTRIC,
  the PIU had to get data for monitoring performance directly from the operators.



c. M&E Utilization
  The ICR (para 64) notes that the data collected during implemented was utilized when the AF was
  approved for reassessing and increasing the original targets.

  Overall, M&E is rated as modest for the shortcomings in M&E framework and M&E implementation.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as a Category B (partial assessment) under the World Bank safeguard policies.
   Three safeguard policies were triggered at appraisal: Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01), Involuntary
   Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12), and Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) (PAD, page ix).

   Environmental Assessment. The deployment of the FLY-LION 3 cable was not expected to have
   significant environmental impacts (PAD, para 61). A draft Environmental and Social Management



                                                                                                     Page 13 of 16
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    RCIP - APL 4 Comoros (RI) (P118213)



  Framework (ESMF) consistent with national laws was prepared and publicly disclosed at appraisal to
  address environmental impacts (PAD, page 62).

  The ICR (para 69) observed that the approved Environmental and Social Impact Assessment was
  implemented appropriately without any incident during implementation.

  Involuntary Resettlement. A Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) was prepared and publicly disclosed
  at appraisal to address land acquisition and resettlement impacts (PAD, para 61).

  The ICR (para 69) noted that around 20 project-affected persons (PAPs) were relocated due to the
  construction work. There were no complaints from PAPs as they had received appropriate compensation.

  Projects on Disputed Areas. This safeguard was triggered as the Island of Mayotte was under French
  administration, although Comoros claims sovereignty over it; the project team discussed the issue with both
  the Comorian government and the Counsellor for Cooperation and Culture at the French Embassy in
  Moroni on September 11, 2012. Both the French Embassy and the Comorian Government
  representatives confirmed that they would have no objection to the project. As per Bank Policy, the Bank
  approved a memorandum to this effect on February 14, 2013 (PAD, para 65).




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial management. The Bank conducted an assessment of the financial management of the PIU at
  appraisal. The assessment concluded that the PIU staff had the requisite experience with the Bank's
  financial procedures. The financial management risk was rated moderate at appraisal (PAD, para 57).

  The ICR (para 67) noted that on April 10, 2021, an external auditor issued a qualified audit opinion on the
  financial statements of fiscal year 2019 of the original grant regarding the loss of three computers. This
  resulted in an ineligible expenditure of US$4,065. As these issues were common in Comoros due to its
  FCV context and the amount involved was low, the bank did not request a refund. The ICR also noted that
  the PIU reinforced its internal control following this incident based on these findings and the external
  auditor's recommendations. The team clarified that the Bank has not yet received the most recent audit
  (dated June 30, 2023).

  Procurement. The Bank conducted a procurement assessment of the PIU at appraisal. The assessment
  concluded that the procurement risk was moderate (PAD, para 58).

  The Bank (para 68) noted several procurement issues during implementation, such as (i) Two cases of
  conflict of interest pertaining to individual consultants in the PIU. The Bank notified the Ministry of Finance
  (MoF) to resolve the issues. As the MoF failed to resolve them, these contracts were declared to be mis
  procurement. The Bank sought refunds of expenditure (around US$80,000). When the project closed, the
  Government had not yet refunded the amount. (ii) Two successive complaints from unsuccessful bidders
  were submitted in October and November 2021 concerning selecting a contractor to implement the e-
  procurement platform. The Bank clarified the reasons for the selection in January and April 2022; (iii) Telco
  filed a complaint in the context of a procurement for the pre-purchase of internet capacity under the project.



                                                                                                   Page 14 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     RCIP - APL 4 Comoros (RI) (P118213)



   Telco submitted a late bid, which was not considered. The complaint alleged collusion by the PIU
   contractor. The Bank found no grounds for the complaint.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   The ICR does not report any unintended impacts.



d. Other
   None.



11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Satisfactory          Satisfactory
                                                                                 There is a discrepancy between
                                                                                 the rating for Bank performance
                                                                                 in the data sheet and the main
Bank Performance                Satisfactory          Moderately Satisfactory    text. This review rates overall
                                                                                 Bank performance as
                                                                                 moderately satisfactory due to
                                                                                 the shortcomings in supervision.
                                                                                 There is a discrepancy in the
                                                                                 rating for M&E in the data sheet
                                                                                 and main text. The review rates
Quality of M&E                  Substantial           Modest
                                                                                 the M&E quality as Modest due
                                                                                 to shortcomings in design and
                                                                                 implementation.
Quality of ICR                  ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR draws the following three main lessons from the experience of implementing this project.

1. A careful analysis of political economy considerations of state-owned assets at appraisal
may help prevent delays during implementation. This is particularly so for countries in FCV
settings. This project experienced difficulties bringing together key stakeholders for policy dialogue
aimed at sector liberalization.

2. Prior Government commitment may not be enough for sustained follow through on key
principles agreed for the project. In this project, the Government reneged on its commitment to

                                                                                                    Page 15 of 16
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       RCIP - APL 4 Comoros (RI) (P118213)



ensure open access. The lesson is that beyond legal covenants and disbursement conditions, it may
be useful to have other mechanisms to encourage the realization of such commitments and reforms,
such as budget support programs that can accompany the Government's effort to reforms.

3. Additional support, particularly on fiduciary matters, may help in low-
capacity environments. Given the fiduciary issues faced during implementation, the lesson is that
systematic capacity building on fiduciary issues needs to be incorporated both during preparation
and during implementation.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is clear and adheres to the recommended length for the most part. The theory of change provided in
the ICR clearly articulates the links between project activities, outputs, and outcomes. The ICR also explicitly
states the assumptions underlying the theory of change. The ICR acknowledges the issues associated with
retaining the PDO while the scope of activities was increased with the AF for the project. The analysis and the
evidence provided in the text is sufficient for assessing project performance.

There are minor shortcomings in the ICR. There is a discrepancy for both Bank performance and M&E in the
data sheet and main text of the ICR. Annex 3 on project costing is incomplete.

Overall the quality of the ICR is rated as Substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                    Page 16 of 16
