     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CARMAC2 (P133705)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0023503

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P133705                                    CARMAC2

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Armenia                                    Agriculture and Food


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-83740,IDA-55040,IDA-55050            31-May-2020                                           26,567,767.30

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 20-Jun-2014                               31-Oct-2022

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           32,670,000.00                                                0.00

 Revised Commitment                            27,492,574.70                                                0.00

 Actual                                        26,567,767.30                                                0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                 ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Alejandra Eguiluz           Fernando Manibog            Avjeet Singh                    IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) of the Second Community Agricultural Resource Management and
   Competitiveness Project (CARMAC2), as stated under Schedule I of both financing documents (Financing
   Agreement of IDA-55040 and IDA55050 credits AND Loan Agreement 8374-AM), is to: (i) improve
   productivity and sustainability of pasture and livestock systems in targeted communities; and (ii) increase the
   marketed production from selected livestock and high value agri-food value chains, which is identical to the
   PDO stated in the PAD (page 4).


                                                                                                   Page 1 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CARMAC2 (P133705)



   The PDO will be parsed, for this review, as follows:

         To improve productivity and sustainability of pasture and livestock systems in targeted communities
         To increase the marketed production from selected livestock and high value agri-food value chains



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The following components were planned at the appraisal.

   Component 1. Community/Pasture Livestock Management System (Appraisal: US$ 27.87 million;
   Closing: US$ 20.93 million). This component built on the previous Community Agricultural Resource
   Management and Competitiveness Project (CARMAC, P120028) and aimed at continuing the
   implementation of an efficient and sustainable community-managed pasture/fodder-based livestock
   production system in communities where livestock was a primary source of livelihood and where there was
   a strong interest in improving pasture production. The main activities included (i) the creation of Pasture
   User Cooperatives (PUCs) in up to 100 communities (in addition to the 86 communities already supported
   by the previous project) and the development of Pasture Management and Livestock Development Plans
   (PMLDPs) to identify measures to improve pasture productivity (ii) setting up of a community fund for the
   implementation of the PMLDPs through the provision of grants (averaging at US$ 200,000/grant) with the
   beneficiaries’ financial contribution; (iii) establishment of a women/youth special support program (US$
   200,000) aimed at enhancing participation of women and youth in the PUCs and the communal decision-
   making around livestock and pasture management.

   Component 2: Value Chain Development (Appraisal: US$ 7.44 million; Closing: US$ 9.68 million).
   The component’s objective was to increase the ability of Armenian agricultural producers and processors to
   meet domestic demand and access international market opportunities (in the food value chains of fodder-
   based milk and meat products and processed fruit and vegetables, where Armenia had a competitive
   advantage). The project would identify bottlenecks such as knowledge gaps in market requirements and
   quality standards and inadequate facilities and equipment to meet national and international food safety
   requirements and product standards. To address the bottlenecks, targeted funding would be provided in
   several areas: (i) support producer cooperatives to standardize their production and to improve on-farm
   quality assurance and good agricultural practices; (ii) increase knowledge of markets and market
   requirements, including food safety systems; (iii) incorporate food safety practices and compliance including
   Hazard Analysis and Critical Control Points (HACCP); (iv) improve processing, storage, product handling,
   marketing, and product quality; (iv) register brands and obtain certification, including organic food
   certification; (v) improve management capacity; and (vi) change techniques to reduce vulnerability to
   climate change in pasture management. The targeted funding would be provided to registered producer
   cooperatives, associations, and rural businesses operating along the value chain based on an application

                                                                                                   Page 2 of 19
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  CARMAC2 (P133705)



process. At the appraisal stage, it was anticipated that around 80 sub-projects from US$ 8,000 up to a
maximum of US$50,000 would be funded.

Component 3: Strengthening Public Sector Institutions (Appraisal: US$ 2.45 million; Closing: US$
3.36 million). The objective of the component was to increase the capacity of public sector institutions to
facilitate business development and enable market access in the selected value chains supported under
components 1 and 2. The core activities under this component consisted of (i) Animal Health Services,
including providing training and equipping around 20 community veterinarians (CVs), in addition to the 100
CVs trained under CARMAC 1, and establishing four regional-level Veterinary Service Centers (VSCs) to be
operated by the CVs; (ii) Food Safety Services, including increasing capacity of food safety inspectors at the
Marz (region) and district level; (iii) Support to the Scientific Center of Vegetable and Industrial Crops to
produce high-quality vegetable seeds and seedlings of the locally-adapted varieties; and (iv) Introduction of
Good Agricultural Practices, which will include support to the Agrochemical Service State Non-Commercial
Organization to analyze soils and chemicals and to test techniques more resilient to climate change
vulnerability in farming systems and livestock breeding.

Component 4: Project Coordination and Management (Appraisal: US$ 2.24 million; Closing: US$
1.97 million). This component aimed to manage the project activities, which would be coordinated by the
existing Agriculture Projects Implementation Unit State Agency (APIU) of the Ministry of Agriculture (the
implementing agency for the previous CARMAC project).

Changes to components

The following changes in the activities of components were introduced in the restructuring of August 2020:

Component 1. Community Pasture/Livestock Management System. Specific changes to the
component’s description include: (i) replacing “Marz Support Teams” with “Marz Coordinators” to recognize
earlier changes made to the project management structure; (ii) removing sub-component C dealing with
mobilization of women and youth due to completion of community mobilization process; and (iii) making
provision to support additional GOA measures for strengthening sustainable pasture use in direct
conformance with the PDO.

Component 2. Value Chain Development. Specific changes to the component’s description include (i)
making provision to expand the range of potential products benefiting from value chain investments in
direct conformance with the PDO and subject to sound technical justification and (ii) removing the Food
Business Operators (FBO) survey activity because it had already been implemented using another funding
source.

Component 3. Strengthening Public Sector Institutions. Changes include: (i) making provision to
support additional public sector institutions identified by the new agriculture sector strategy 2020-2030 in
direct conformance with the PDO and subject to sound technical justification; (ii) removing the
activity dealing with Good Agricultural Practices; and (iii) making provision for potential support to establish
linkages with global centers of excellence for agricultural sciences, research and development and
technology.

A split evaluation is not necessary since the changes in the activities mainly increased the ambition of the
project while reallocating project funds without changing the PDO. More specifically, the changes include
additional GOA measures, expansion of potential products, support to additional public sector institutions,
and linkages with global centers. Even though the target for one of the PDO indicators, i.e., the number of

                                                                                                    Page 3 of 19
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    CARMAC2 (P133705)



  sheep sold, was reduced from 67,000 to 44,000, it was due to the reduction in the baseline (from 56,000 to
  36,000) since the majority of CARMAC 2 settlements had only cattle which could not be estimated at
  appraisal given the demand-driven nature of the participatory process.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project cost. At appraisal, the total project cost was US $42.67 million, including US $32.67 million of the
  Bank’s contribution and US $10 million of the borrower’s contribution. The Bank’s contribution was as
  follows: US $5.87 million IDA 55040; US $3.8 million IDA 55050; US $23 million IBRD loan 8374-AM.

   The revised amounts (after restructurings of August 2020 and August 21, RES48290) resulted on the
  Bank’s financing of US $ 27.49 million, distributed as follows: IBRD loan US $20.63 million and IDA credits
  (combined) US $7.64 million (borrower's contribution was revised to 0).

   At project closing the project cost was US $26.57 million (IBRD loan 8374-AM was US $19.85 million and
  IDA credits combined was US $6.72 (IDA-55040 was US $4.32 and IDA 55050 was US $2.4 million).

  The percentage of total project disbursement was 66% of the total project amount at appraisal (including the
  borrower's contribution) and 81% of the Bank's financing at appraisal.

  Financing. At appraisal, the lending instruments for the project included two credits, IDA-55040 (US $5.87
  million) and IDA-55050 (US $3.8 million) and an IBRD loan (US $23.0 million). The fourth restructuring in
  August 2020 reduced the IDA-55040 credit by US $0.9 million, following a request from the GoA originated
  by the need to direct more funds internally to hospitals, due to the COVID pandemic. The fifth restructuring
  of August 2021 (RES48290) cancelled US$2.37 million from the IBRD loan and US$1.13 equivalent from
  the IDA credits. The combination of the cancellations of the fourth and fifth restructurings resulted on the
  amounts being revised as follows: the combination of IDA credits was reduced from US $9.67 million to US
  $7.64 million and the IBRD loan was reduced from the original US $23 million to US $20.63 million.

  Borrower contribution. At appraisal, the planned contribution of the Government of Armenia was US $10
  million. The ICR presents, in the summary table (page 2) a revised amount of this contribution equaling 0
  and an amount at closing of US $1,75 million, but with no reference or explanation about it.

  Dates

  The IDA credits and the IBRD loan were approved on August 6, 2014. The project was effective on Jan 23,
  2015 and had an original closing date of May 31, 2020. The closing date was moved to October 10, 2022
  after restructuring processes. Six restructuring processes took place between July 2017 and April 2022, as
  follows:

  First Level 2 Restructuring (July 2017). It comprised changes in implementation arrangements, when
  the GoA established the Agriculture Development Fund (ADF), which replaced the previous PIU and
  became the implementation unit for all agriculture projects in the country.

  Second Level 2 Restructuring (May 2019). It involved changes in implementation arrangements, as the
  ADF had been liquidated by a court decision following a change in government. Nine months later
  the Ministry of Agriculture (MOA) was merged with the Ministry of Economy (MOE) and the Agricultural


                                                                                                   Page 4 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CARMAC2 (P133705)



   Projects Implementation Department (APID) was formed in the MOE to implement all agriculture-related
   projects. Project procurement and financial management functions were also reassigned to the APID.

   Third Level 2 Restructuring (April 2020). It comprised a project extension of 23 months (to April 30,
   2022) and changed baseline and target of one PDO-level indicator (number of sheep sold). It also
   reallocated the budget and dropped sub-component for women/youth (US$ 200,000) under Component 1,
   as well as the Good Agricultural Practices (GAP).

   Fourth Level 2 Restructuring (August 2020): Following the GoA’s request, it reduced financing of US$
   0.9 million equivalent from the IDA portion of the project financing, to reallocate the funds to the Bank-
   funded health project to support the COVID-19 pandemic response.

   Fifth Level 2 Restructuring (September 2021): Following the GoA’s request, it cancelled US$ 3,15 million
   (undisbursed and considered unnecessary to complete all activities).

   Sixth Level 2 Restructuring (April 2022): It extended the project [AE3] [FM4] for the second time, from
   April 30, 2022 to October 31, 2022, to allow for completion of activities previously agreed upon, including: (i)
   construction of stock watering points in five communities (Component 1); (ii) construction of animal pens in
   25 communities for facilitating efficient animal vaccinations (Component 3); and (iii) construction of a
   Veterinary Services Centers including provision of necessary equipment (Component 3).




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Context at Appraisal

At appraisal, Armenia, a small (29,800 km2), landlocked, lower-middle income country with a population of
about 3 million, had an average per capita Gross National Income of US$ 4,170. In 2014, the poverty rate
totaled 30%, a 2-percentage point decrease from 2013, but the regional disparities remained high.
Agriculture accounted for 18.1 percent of the country’s Gross Domestic Product (GDP) and 35 percent of
employment. Crop production in 2014 accounted for 61 percent of total agricultural production, while
livestock accounted for 39 percent. The agri-food sector produced 17 percent of export earnings. The
sector, ridden by relatively low productivity and commercialization levels, could not take full advantage of
the expanding consumer demand, which led to a widening agrifood trade deficit (ICR, page 6).

Challenges remained in the path of increasing agricultural productivity: livestock production was primarily
constrained by unmanaged and unsustainable use of pasture resources, poor quality and shortage of winter
fodder, animal health problems, and poor genetic resources. The links between the food processing
industry and agricultural producers remained weak, and many rural enterprises lacked technology and
technical knowledge that could improve their competitiveness. At the time of project preparation, the
agriculture sector was dominated by approximately 335,000 smallholder households. Although a shift
towards increased commercialization had begun, only around 15 percent of farmers were cultivating leased
land. Farmers in remote areas were among the most vulnerable, with about one-third still living in poverty,
while some regions had poverty rates as high as 46 percent (ICR, page 6).


                                                                                                      Page 5 of 19
                       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                       CARMAC2 (P133705)



Consistency with Country Strategy

At appraisal, the project’s objectives were aligned with the country’s agricultural development strategy, the
Rural and Agriculture Sustainable Development Strategy for 2010-2020 for Armenia, which included the
promotion of sustainable agricultural development, greater food security, and increased rural incomes
among its objectives. Key priorities of the strategy were to (a) continue and deepen agrarian reform; (b)
ensure food safety and improve food security; (c) promote the application of advanced agricultural
technologies; (d) improve animal health; and (e) promote agri-processing and the supply and service
infrastructure (PAD, page 4). The ICR notes that the project's objectives are aligned with the Government’s
Strategy for Sustainable Agricultural Development for 2020-2030. One of its key priorities is to increase
agricultural competitiveness and enhance efficiency, which is well-aligned with the CARMAC 2 goals.

Consistency with Bank Strategies The proposed project contributed to the Bank’s twin goals of ending
extreme poverty and boosting shared prosperity by focusing on sustainable agricultural development and
increasing rural incomes. The project was also designed to partially address four of the seven policy
recommendations in the Bank’s Agriculture and Rural Development Policy Note at the time: (i) value chain
and market integration; (ii) food safety; (iii) structural transformation and rural employment, including the
development of small and medium-sized rural enterprises; and (d) agricultural practices, including
development of a Code of GAP and combating over-exploitation of natural resources.

The PDO was aligned with the FY14-FY17 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) and was explicitly
mentioned under Cluster 1: Supporting Competitiveness and Job Creation, aimed at supporting private
sector-led growth and job creation considering the evidence-based importance that job creation has on
poverty reduction. The alignment still exists in the current Country Partnership Framework 2019-2023,
particularly for 2 of the three main clusters: exports and sustainable management of natural resources.

Previous Bank experience

The project design was guided by the lessons from two previous agriculture projects in the country,
particularly the previous CARMAC project. The Bank was able to draw on substantial institutional memory
and experience designing and supporting agriculture projects in Armenia, namely the Rural Enterprise and
small-scale agricultural development project (PAD), which closed in 2009, and the CARMAC 1 project
(closed in 2016), which was still under implementation at the time of the CARMAC 2 project preparation.
Overall, the design of the CARMAC 2 project, built on the implementation arrangements and approaches,
widened the scope of activities under the CARMAC 1 project, and added agriculture productivity and
production volume-related investments and a focus on better linkage of primary producers to processors.

Level of Ambition of the PDO. Given that CARMAC 2 was the continuation of CARMAC 1, lessons
learned were applied, and adequate adjustments were made in the design, making the technical content of
the PDO adequately ambitious.


Rating Relevance TBL




Rating
High


4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

                                                                                                    Page 6 of 19
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  CARMAC2 (P133705)




EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               To improve productivity and sustainability of pasture and livestock systems in targeted communities

               Rationale
               Theory of change (ToC)

               The project’s ToC was not made explicit in the PAD but is laid out in the ICR (Figure 1 of the ICR, page 8).
               The following ToC is made explicit in the ICR: the interventions leading to creating the cooperatives (PUCs),
               the elaboration of the management plans, and the establishment of the community fund (inputs) would lead to
               the actual set up of the cooperatives and the implementation of the management plans (outputs), that would
               ultimately lead to improved productivity and sustainability of pasture and livestock systems (outcome). The
               ICR adds long-term impacts (improved incomes, livelihoods, and a modern and competitive agriculture
               sector).

               The following are the outcome-level indicators pertaining to PDO1:

                       Improved community-level pasture and livestock system management effectiveness (METT score).
                       Annual milk production per dairy cattle (liter per year)
                       Number of animals sold (sheep number)
                       Number of animals sold (cattle number)

               In addition to the criteria related to pasture management and organization, the METT score looks at
               productivity levels, financial sustainability (payment of fees and financial plans), economic benefits, adequate
               infrastructure, animal health, conflict resolution within the cooperative organization, etc. It is a very
               comprehensive score that reflects the PDO1 adequately (Annex 2, METT, provided by the Bank team).

               Outputs

                     56% of community households who are members of pasture users cooperatives engaged in livestock
                        farming, compared with the original target of 51%. More than achieved.
                     The total number of households engaged in livestock farming who are members of a pasture user
                        cooperative was 9,840 (target was 10,500). Almost achieved (at 95% of the target).
                     2,316 female-headed households who are members of a pasture users cooperative engaged in
                      livestock farming, whereas the target was 2,500. Almost achieved (93% of target)
                     The land area where sustainable land management practices were adopted was 128,150 Ha of a
                      target of 110,000 Ha because of the project. More than achieved (117% of target).
                     109 communities (more than the 100 planned at appraisal) elaborated, approved, and developed their
                      PMLDPs. (109 % of target) More than achieved.
                     A management mechanism (that collects fees from pasture users) is developed according to which an
                      Agreement or MOU is signed between beneficiary communities & MoE. Achieved.



                                                                                                                  Page 7 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   CARMAC2 (P133705)




       Days of training in pasture management organization is 4,468 days when the target was 2,240 days
        (and 1027 days for women trained vs. the original target of 240 days). Achievement exceeded (200%
        of target).

Outcomes

       Improved community-level pasture and livestock system management effectiveness (score). The
        indicator is measured using the Management Effectiveness Tracking Tool (METT) score, a tool initially
        developed by the WWF and the World Bank for tracking the progress of management effectiveness of
        protected areas. According to the METT assessment, the average score of all assessed communities
        was 54.7, above the final target of 50. More than achieved.
       Annual milk production per dairy cattle (liter per year) 1,827.00 l/year at completion vs. 1,700 target.
        More than achieved.
       Number of animals sold (sheep number) 29,895 sheep sold vs 44,000 (the target had been reduced in
        the third restructuring of April 2020, from an original target of 67,000, to adjust to the fact that most
        participants had cattle and not sheep). Target 68% achieved.
       Number of animals sold (cattle number) 21,402 vs. 33,000 target. Target 65% achieved.

Of the four outcomes, two were more than achieved (METT and milk production); one was achieved at 65%
(cattle) and the other one at 68% (sheep) of targets.

A Substantial rating, with shortcomings on two out of four outcome indicators, is deemed for Efficacy of the
PDO1.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To increase the marketed production from selected livestock and high value agri-food value chains

Rationale
ToC

The ICR lays out the following theory of change logic for PDO2: interventions at the level of the value chains,
such as the grants that allow for investments, the training, and ,the equipment for veterinaries (inputs), will
address bottlenecks in value chains and improve the capacity of the public administration (outputs), which will
lead to increased marketed production (outcome). The ICR adds a long-term impact relating to improved
incomes and livelihoods. The ToC would have benefitted from making explicit the causal chain between the
input-level activities, such as the training, equipment, and grants, and the outputs and intermediate outcomes,
such as the removal of bottlenecks in the value-chain (thanks to focused investments realized), the improved
skills for farmers and the increased quality of the production. These outputs and intermediate outcomes lead
to the outcome of increased income. Likewise, the causal links between the activities of training the
veterinaries and the results on food quality could have been made more explicit with a measure of better

                                                                                                   Page 8 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   CARMAC2 (P133705)



results from inspections (as a measure of the public administration's increased capacity regarding food
safety).

Outputs

      Number of the sub-project investments completed (cumulative). The project successfully funded 99
       food-based operators with grants distributed over five rounds of the selection process (the target was
       80 operators). More than achieved.
      Number of food safety inspectors trained under the project (cumulative): 55 inspectors were trained
       (same as target). Achieved.

The training and the grants are activities that lead to improved skills in food safety standards (output of the
training activity for the veterinaries) and the removal of bottlenecks thanks to investments (output of the
grants). Indicators that would have captured these would have contributed to having a complete ToC that
reflects project achievements comprehensively.

Outcome

The outcome indicator for this PDO2 is the following:

Increase in value of annual marketed milk production, meat, fruits, and vegetables (in AMD million). The
figure is 4,500 million AMD, considerably exceeding by almost six-fold the target of 800 million AMD—more
than achieved. The measurement of the indicator has been done by collecting data on the revenue of the
participant farmers using tax forms. This indicator measures the actual income farmers receive, which is an
adequate measure of the outcome sought.

Other output and outcome results reported in the ICR as having been achieved, for which no targets
are set in the RF

      Four Veterinary Service Centers were built.

      Based on the end-line survey of 400 respondents, 57 percent of pasture users (livestock farmers)
       indicated that the project’s contribution to increased income was significant or highly significant, 52
       percent indicated significant (or highly significant) improvements to their livelihoods and welfare, and
       66 percent indicated significant (or highly significant) improvements to their knowledge and skills.
       Businesses reported that the grants supported them to invest in upgrading their production facilities
       and equipment and revealed new potential for development (ICR, page 15).

Independent evaluations and surveys reveal other benefits attributable to the project. These include improved
processing and marketing practices, increased production value, penetration of new and higher value market
niches, hiring an additional 140 employees by the 51 enterprises, and substantial improvement of the food
safety situation at production enterprises (ICR, page 17).

Based on the above, the rating is Substantial for PDO2.



Rating

                                                                                                    Page 9 of 19
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               CARMAC2 (P133705)



                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            PDO1 is Substantial with moderate shortcomings and PDO2 is Substantial, which results in an overall rating
                            of Substantial with moderate shortcomings.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



   5. Efficiency
   Economic efficiency

   Ex-ante analysis. At appraisal, the base case internal rate of return (IRR) was estimated at 18.1% on average
   for both components. The base case net present value of the project’s net benefit stream, discounted at 12%,
   was US$15.2 million. This was calculated as an average of the two separate economic analysis applied for the
   management plans (component 1) and the value chains (component 2). The economic viability was not
   expected to be threatened by either a 20% decline in benefits or a 20% increase in costs. The analysis showed
   that the project would be economically viable even if benefits decreased by 31% and investment costs increased
   by 46% (PAD, page 67).

   Ex-post analysis. For the two components combined, the ICR presents an estimation of economic benefits
   between 13.1% and 22.8% internal rate of return (IRR) and net present value (NPV) between US$ 0.7 and
   US$11.9 million (Table 1 ICR). Under constrained assumptions, the EIRR is marginally above the estimated
   opportunity cost of capital, and the NPV is significantly below the one estimated at appraisal (US$ 15.2 million).
   The ICR presents the following reasons for this: (i) overly optimistic early projections; (ii) the contraction of the
   agriculture sector by 30.2% between 2016 and 2021 (performing well only in the last year of the project). The
   following paragraphs present a more detailed analysis per component.

   Component 1 (PMLDP)

   The comparison of the economic benefits of the activities under component 1 is shown in Tables A5 and A7 of
   the ICR. The estimates were 34.1 percent IRR and US$ 51.52 million NPV at appraisal. In closing, two
   scenarios are presented. One uses the project monitoring data, with its more modest productivity increases. The
   second one uses the survey data of the last year of implementation. Whereas the first model results in negative
   NPV (from US$ -6.72 million to US$ 2.50 million), with IRR ranges from 1.2 percent to 8.5 percent, the latter
   uses higher production levels with a more positive corresponding scenario: NPV ranges from US$ 720,000 to
   US$ 11.85 million, and IRR from 13.1 percent to 22.8 percent (ICR, Table A7).



                                                                                                                          Page 10 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      CARMAC2 (P133705)



The likely reasons for the more modest endline results include economy-wide factors related to COVID-19 and
the Armenia-Azerbaijan conflict and the assumption that cattle and sheep sales would increase more
significantly than they did.

In contrast, the ICR presents a comparison at project closure of the evolution of the total head of livestock in
project communities with the evolution at the national level. Whereas cattle in project communities declined by
5.7%, at the national level, the decline was 20.2%. For sheep, the project communities show a slight total
increase over the six years, of 6.1 %, compared to a national decline of 7.2%—this comparison data points
towards the project’s positive effect on livestock in participating communities.

Component 2- value chains

A sensitivity analysis has been elaborated for the value chains at closure, showing that, depending on how
much change is attributed to the project, the project generated a financial return for grantees between 181 and
302 million AMD the year following implementation (assuming average profits of 15 percent). This is based on
removing outliers (large firms with increased marketed production of more than 800 million AMD) and is thus a
conservative range. Considering the increase in sales, attribution levels estimated by the grantee, investments
through matching grants, and cumulative changes, Component 2 (value chains) appears to have generated high
returns.

Operational and administrative efficiency.

The overall project implementation period was more than eight years, exceeding the original closing date by
more than two years The following issues negatively affected the efficiency of implementation:

      The anti-government protests in March-May 2018 resulted in the change of government and subsequent
       institutional and administrative changes. Overall, the project saw seven different Ministers of Agriculture
       and Economy. The high staff turnover in key institutional positions resulted in a lack of qualified technical
       staff within the PIU (including in procurement), delaying implementation (ICR, para 43).

      The decrease in growth in the agriculture sector for several years affected sales of animals and thus the
       project’s ability to meet its target for that indicator. The construction boom in 2019, measured at 10.5
       percent, contributed to a slowdown of project construction works that year due to the lower availability of
       service providers.

      The Armenia-Azerbaijan conflict in September-November 2020 froze the implementation for several
       months. In regions at the border, the number of household members participating in project activities
       decreased.

      Finally, in 2020-2021, the pandemic and lockdown forced the Project Implementation Team (PIT) to
       cease operations for several months.

The economic analysis shows that the overall project NPV was below what was expected for Component 1
and reported high returns for Component 2. The lower NPV regarding component 1 is justified by the country's
crisis in the agriculture and livestock sector and the political conflict with Azerbaijan. Additional analysis for
component 1 (comparing the evolution in project communities with the national average) shows positive results.




                                                                                                      Page 11 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      CARMAC2 (P133705)



Given the below expectations IRR % for component 1 and the implementation delays, the Efficiency rating is
deemed Modest. The percentages below relate to component 1 only, for which comparable IRR exists. The ICR
estimate is an IRR for component 1 in the range of 13.1% to 22.8%, taking data from the last year of
implementation. The value used below is the medium value of the range.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?            Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     70.00
 Appraisal                                                 34.10
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     58.00
 ICR Estimate                                              17.95
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The rating for Relevance is High, the rating for Efficacy is Substantial with moderate shortcomings, and the
rating for Efficiency is modest, which results in an overall outcome of Moderately Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The following risks are identified:

Stakeholder ownership risk. In the absence of project oversight and support, there is a risk that some
PUCs will no longer collect dues (financial risk), that members will stop participating, and that the structure
will stop functioning. This would negatively affect pasture management and lead to its degradation, affecting
livestock productivity and the environment.

Technical risk. If agricultural machinery provided by the project’s grants is not serviced or maintained, it
may be disused. The same could happen with some of the project’s facilities that could stop being used at
their full potential, such as the ANAU classroom or the Veterinary Service Centers (according to the ICR, this
may already be the case at closing).


                                                                                                    Page 12 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CARMAC2 (P133705)



Economic risk: Growing costs for inputs, driven by inflationary pressures, may lead to a decline in
investments by farmers and entrepreneurs, hurting productivity.

Political risk: The Armenia-Azerbaijan conflict and related border tensions could prevent communities in
border zones from taking advantage of support. If the conflict spreads, more farmers and land could be
negatively affected.

Exposure to natural disasters: Extreme climate changes could damage crops and livestock productivity.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The overall design of CARMAC 2 was built on and informed by the preceding CARMAC 1, using the
  lessons learned on important aspects of project implementation, including the need to ensure
  participation and community engagement from the beginning or the need to ask grantees to provide
  matching amounts to the grants received. The project appropriately identified risks and mitigation
  measures. It was relevant, and its interventions were clearly and comprehensively laid out in the four
  components. The preparatory sector analysis and the ongoing dialogue with the Government was
  effective. Implementation arrangements were thorough and based on the experience of the CARMAC 1.

  The shortcomings at appraisal consist of the following: (i) the need for a more robust RF and M&E
  arrangements as elaborated in the M&E design section; (ii) insufficient planning for information campaign
  around the project activities under Component 1 that led to farmers at times having inadequate
  understanding of the cooperative model, its legal status, low awareness about their rights and
  responsibilities which in some instances, led to reluctance to joining the cooperative and contributing user
  fees; (iii) the missed opportunity to have introduced a gender approach that would have impacted the
  women in cooperatives.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Following the significant slowdown after the institutional changes in 2017-18, the WB team worked with the
 client to develop an Action Plan to bring the implementation back on track, resulting in many activities
 under Components 1 and 2 regaining the implementation pace by late 2019. The World Bank team was
 also proactive in expanding the Component 2 for the addition of the fourth and fifth rounds of the calls for
 proposals for grants at the value-chain level, aimed at mitigating the negative influence of COVID-19,
 allowing for some flexibility around the implementation of activities under the Component 3.


                                                                                                   Page 13 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CARMAC2 (P133705)



 The WB team organized 18 implementation supervision missions. There was only one change of TTL, and
 key WB team members had the institutional memory since CARMAC 1. The team made efforts to ensure
 consistent communication with the Government during the various administrative changes, aiming to
 ensure project implementation was not interrupted. However, the institutional changes had a negative
 effect on the quality of data collected and analysis for M&E.

 The Bank team undertook measures to address some of the data deficiencies for M&E, such as the
 surveys and independent evaluations that took place, contributing with key additional information on
 impact. What remained unchanged despite the recommendations of missions was the verification of the
 database and data collection system, the need to add indicators that would capture project impacts, and
 the need to focus on the ones that had not achieved their targets (ICR, page 22).



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The RF builds on the RF of the CARMAC 1 project. The frequency and responsibility for data collection and
 its instruments were outlined at the appraisal. M&E activities envisioned field supervision, safeguard
 compliance of works, surveys, mapping instruments, progress reporting, a baseline survey, a mid-term
 evaluation, and a completion report.

 There were some shortcomings in the design of the RF. The ICR acknowledges that the livestock
 productivity indicator “number of animals sold” was outside the project’s control, and changes in these
 numbers depended on several exogenous factors, e.g., market and climate conditions. Given the demand-
 driven nature of the project, PDO-level indicators used baseline values informed by the CARMAC 1 project.
 While this was a reasonable approach, the baseline of the communities participating in the project differed
 from appraisal assumptions. Since no baseline survey was conducted to measure livestock production and
 milk productivity at the community level, the baseline for the PDO-level indicator was not fully aligned from
 the beginning.




b. M&E Implementation
  M&E implementation was strong at the beginning of the project, and the implementation arrangements
  were put in place. A full-time M&E Specialist was employed in the APIU, and various point persons were
  assigned to conduct M&E for different activities (value chain sub-projects, seeds and seedling
  development and GAP activities, and the performance of the community veterinarians). The initial M&E

                                                                                                  Page 14 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CARMAC2 (P133705)



  team was proactive in planning new monitoring tools to collect farm-level data and ensure reliable project
  monitoring.

  Following the institutional changes, the M&E implementation suffered due to changes in the long-term
  M&E specialist. The Management Information System, while developed, was not operational for some
  time during the second institutional change of PIU. No mid-term impact evaluation of the project, as
  called for in the PAD, was conducted (delayed at first and then canceled due to COVID-19).

  The baseline used in CARMAC2 was extrapolated from the data of CARMAC1. The assumption was that
  the participants, like in CARMAC 1, would own sheep and cattle. However, the majority of CARMAC 2
  settlements had only cattle. As no baseline survey was conducted to measure livestock production and
  milk productivity at the community level, the baseline for the PDO-level indicator was not adequate from
  the beginning.

  At the third restructuring (April 2020), changes were introduced to clarify the description of some of the
  intermediary indicators and to make the necessary adjustments to the changes in the activities per
  component. The baseline was adjusted after consulting project beneficiaries. The target of one of the
  PDO-level indicators (number of sheep sold) was reduced from 67,000 to 44,000 to adjust to the fact that
  most participants had cattle instead of sheep.

  At project closing, as part of the Borrower Completion Report (BCR), an independent firm was hired to
  obtain alternative productivity measures under the PDO Indicator 2 and survey FBOs at project close to
  assess project impacts as seen by the beneficiaries. At the project close, the Bank team explored the
  possibility of conducting a counterfactual analysis comparing hypothetical outcomes in the absence of the
  project to actual project outcomes. However, it was not feasible. This was because control groups were
  not identified, and reliable country-level data for specific project indicators were unavailable. Data on
  communities outside the project that did not receive similar support was not collected.




c. M&E Utilization
  The shortcomings related to M&E implementation and data quality prevented the utilizing M&E results to
  the fullest. The M&E specialist of the project implementing team prepared and regularly submitted semi-
  annual Project Progress Reports. For this purpose, respective databases were designed, the information
  collection (mostly feeding the METT and RF indicators) was regular, and regular processing, analysis,
  and reporting took place. The situation deteriorated during late 2017-2018 following the institutional
  changes described earlier. The new M&E specialist 2018 issued a package of suggestions related to the
  amendment of the project activities and changes to intermediate indicators.

  Independent evaluations and surveys revealed in detail the impacts, level of satisfaction of beneficiaries,
  and constraints found. Component 1 revealed the challenges for pasture management (the METT score
  measured progress on the outcome), such as the maintenance of equipment, the rise in fuel prices, and
  the need for irrigation. For component 2, the independent assessments of the rounds of grants revealed
  important information on the impact for the exporting small firms: increased production, increased sales
  (of which exports), and increased number of employees. Aggregated productivity measures at the
  regional level were used in the progress reports, making it difficult to attribute changes in marketed


                                                                                                   Page 15 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CARMAC2 (P133705)



  production to project investments fully. Surveys and the efficiency analysis established a level of project
  attribution of 30-60%.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project triggered the following safeguards: OP/BP 4.01 Environmental Assessment, Involuntary
   Resettlement OP/BP 4.12, and OP 4.09 Pest Management (crop activities might imply the use of
   pesticides). The project was classified as environmental Category B. Environmental performance under the
   CARMAC 2 project remained Satisfactory throughout the project’s life (ICR, page 23).

   A few generic issues were encountered with the waste management during project implementation due to
   deficiencies in the national waste management system and generally weak corporate environmental
   practices of work providers. Most important were on-site waste management and its final disposal and
   adhering to worksite health and safety rules. No occupational health and safety incidents have occurred
   under the project.

   An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) was developed to guide the application of
   environmental safeguards under all project components as required. The ESMF was disclosed and
   discussed with relevant stakeholders in spring 2014. ESMF included detailed instructions on developing
   investment-specific Environmental Management Plans (later called Environmental and Social Management
   Plans and Pest Management Plans). The project’s Operation Manual included institutional arrangements
   and environmental management procedures. The Borrower consistently maintained sufficient in-house
   capacity for assessing and managing the project's environmental risks despite significant changes in the
   institutional arrangements.

   Community-based participatory planning and decision-making were closely monitored to ensure and
   promote equitable access to project benefits for women, youth, and vulnerable people. Public awareness of
   the project activities, including among women, youth, and representatives of vulnerable groups, was
   ensured through public consultation meetings conducted under ESMF requirements, training sessions, and
   other awareness-raising activities at the community meetings. The project's website provided public access
   to project-related documents, including safeguard documentation. All construction activities under the
   project were carried out in the community or state-owned lands. No private lands were impacted, and
   project implementation did not cause any resettlement impacts. Overall, the PIT provided regular
   environmental and social monitoring reports for the active construction sites ensured regular site visits, and
   provided progress reports to the World Bank.

   A grievance redress mechanism (GRM) was established and maintained throughout the project’s lifecycle. It
   was disseminated among the beneficiaries during public consultation meetings and on banners and
   billboards in publicly visible places of the community administrative offices and construction sites. The
   implementing team did not receive any formal grievances.



                                                                                                    Page 16 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CARMAC2 (P133705)




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management. FM was rated Satisfactory during the project's implementation period. The FM
   arrangements were adequate and acceptable to the Bank, including planning and budgeting, accounting,
   financial reporting, external audit, funds flow, internal controls, and staffing arrangements. The project FM
   risks were rated Moderate, as the FM arrangements mainly were in place from the previous CARMAC 1.
   There were no delays in processing reports and payments and internal control recommendations were
   mostly followed. Controls over operating expenses were reviewed during the regular FM supervision. The
   semiannual Interim unaudited Financial Reports were received on time and were acceptable to the Bank.
   The auditor expressed an unmodified (clean) opinion on the FY2021 project financial statements, which
   were received by the due date, and the author of the management letter did not raise any issues.

   Procurement. Procurement was rated Satisfactory during most of the project’s implementation period. The
   procurement functions under the project were carried out by two full-time procurement staff with adequate
   knowledge and experience of the Bank’s procurement regulations. Institutional changes caused a transfer
   of the procurement responsibility to a different implementing unit and slowed the procurement processes.
   Following the 2019 restructuring, the procurement function was transferred again, and the processes
   improved by early 2020.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   CARMAC 1 and CARMAC 2 were the first World Bank projects to successfully address issues related to
   pastures and animal health in Armenia, and since have served as example for other donors to implement
   activities, i.e. by Swiss Development Cooperation (SDC), UNDO, GIZ initiated activities, to complement
   CARMAC 1 and 2 projects in relation to pasture management.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
                                Moderately
Outcome                                               Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
                                Moderately
Bank Performance                                      Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
                                                                                 Note: The ICR's rating for M&E
Quality of M&E                  Substantial           Modest
                                                                                 Quality is Modest (page 23).
Quality of ICR                  ---                   Substantial



                                                                                                    Page 17 of 19
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       CARMAC2 (P133705)



12. Lessons

The following lesson is drawn from IEG:

Analyzing the key factors of performance of projects that have subsequent phases helps to
capitalize and build operational knowledge in the sector. In this project, key lessons learned
from CARMAC 1 guided the design of CARMAC 2. An analysis of how the lessons have been
applied in CARMAC 2 and what results they have produced, extracting new lessons from CARMAC
2, may build important operational knowledge in the sector.

The following lessons are derived and rephrased from the ICR as they are found particularly
relevant:

Continuity of government ownership of a project is essential for the success of its
implementation. Institutional changes underpinning the project implementation resulted in a partial
loss of the government’s ownership of the project, leading to delays and impacting the
implementation quality. Working closely with the government during the implementation and keeping
professional standards high at the PIU level was crucial for maintaining trust, preserving institutional
memory of the implementation process, and ensuring consistency in implementation.

Establishing a baseline for the demand-driven project components is critical for measuring
project outcomes. Where project elements are primarily demand-driven (such was the case for the
value chains in this project), it is important to ensure that baselines are established for the
participating sub-activities to allow for good progress monitoring and subsequent evaluation of
results and impacts.

Matching grants, when implemented with a solid and efficient management mechanism, can
serve as a good tool for private capital mobilization and could be a good model for fragile
and conflict settings. The approach is flexible and can be adapted to fit the needs of many
different target groups, value chains, and production environments. It can serve different target
populations and is a replicable model in fragile and conflict settings.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

Quality of Evidence. The ICR presents a thoughtful and complete analysis of evidence. The quality of evidence
is substantial, based on the surveys and impact assessments conducted to assess the impact and the level of
satisfaction of the beneficiaries.

Quality of Analysis. There is a clear link between the narrative, the ratings, and the evidence. The ToC is made
explicit and depicted graphically in detail. The economic efficiency is thoroughly analyzed, considering different


                                                                                                    Page 18 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CARMAC2 (P133705)



scenarios and being conservative, comparing figures for components 1 and 2 separately and specifying the
different methodologies of comparative economic analysis applied. A minor shortcoming relates to a more
candid review of the gaps in the ToC.

The ICR is results-oriented. The discussion on achievements was adequately balanced between reporting on
the achievement of outcome indicators and what the project achieved on the ground (with candid criticism of
the M&E mechanisms). It provides a transparent, accurate, and substantiated set of observations aligned to the
project development objective. It digs deeply to reveal the project’s shortcomings in a candid way.

It provides comprehensive coverage of the implementation experience. It follows the guidelines, seeks to
triangulate data to reach conclusions (using the impact assessments and the independent evaluations), and is
focused on results. The lessons are clear and well-explained with concrete project examples.

There is inconsistency between the data sheet and main text on the ratings for (i) Bank Performance and (ii)
Monitoring and Evaluation.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                  Page 19 of 19
