     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     RY: Emergency Health & Nutrition Project (P161809)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0023437

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P161809                                    RY: Emergency Health & Nutrition Project

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Yemen, Republic of                         Health, Nutrition & Population


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-D1630,IDA-D1640,IDA-D1950,IDA- 31-Jan-2020                                                692,441,952.73
 D1960,IDA-D2310,IDA-D2320,IDA-
 D4640,IDA-D4650

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 17-Jan-2017                                30-Jun-2022

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           200,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                            682,997,398.12                                              0.00

 Actual                                        692,441,952.73                                              0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Denise A. Vaillancourt      Judyth L. Twigg              Eduardo Fernandez              IEGHC (Unit 2)
                                                          Maldonado




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   As stated in the February 4, 2017 Financing Agreement between the World Health Organization (WHO) (for
   the benefit of the Republic of Yemen) and the International Development Association (IDA) (Schedule 1, p. 5),
   and in the February 4, 2017 Financing Agreement between the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) and
   IDA (Schedule 1, p. 6), the original project development objective (PDO) was “…to contribute to the provision


                                                                                                  Page 1 of 26
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     RY: Emergency Health & Nutrition Project (P161809)



   of basic health and essential nutrition services for the benefit of the population of the Republic of Yemen.” The
   design document presents the same statement (Project Appraisal Document, PAD, pp. 1, 12, and 30).

   On the occasion of a second Additional Financing (AF) for the project, and as captured in the September 7,
   2017 Financing Agreement between WHO and IDA (Schedule 1, p. 5) and in the September 7, 2017
   Financing Agreement between UNICEF and IDA (Schedule 1, p. 6), the PDO was amended as follows: “The
   objective of the Project (was) to contribute to the provision of basic health, essential nutrition, water and
   sanitation services for the benefit of the population of the Republic of Yemen.” The revised design document
   presents the same revised statement (Project Restructuring Paper dated August 14, 2017, p. 17). This
   change included the addition of several new PDO-level and intermediate indicators. The project's scope and
   ambition were expanded with three AFs and three Contingency Emergency Response Component (CERC)
   activations to address emerging needs in an emergency situation. The Bank's guidelines state that if a
   project's scope expands and becomes more ambitious, a split rating is not applied. Not undertaking a split
   rating is also justified by the fact that achievement of both the original and revised objectives was high.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  25-Aug-2017

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Original Components:

   Component 1: Improving Access to Health, Nutrition, and Public Health Services (original estimate
   of $191.00 million; revised estimate of $610.57 million including three AFs; actual cost: $616.00
   million)

   Subcomponent 1.1: Strengthening the Integration of Primary Health Care (PHC) Model (implemented
   by UNICEF). This subcomponent was to ensure the continued delivery of health and nutrition services
   through three channels at the primary level: (1) PHC facility-based health and nutrition services
   (supporting the operations and services offered inside fixed PHC facilities (medical and non-medical
   equipment, nutrients and medicines, training of staff, and costs associated with clinical and administrative
   supervision; (2) integrated outreach health and nutrition services, catering to the needs of the
   population (a) in remote areas and internally displaced persons (IDPs) through outreach rounds (zones 2
   and 3, where there are fixed facilities in zone 1), and (b) in areas without functioning fixed facilities through
   bi-weekly visits by mobile teams. Services under this model were to include: maternal and neonatal health;
   child nutrition; Integrated Management of Childhood Illness; mental health; routine delivery of selected
   public health programs (immunization and malaria, among others); water chlorination, sanitation and
   hygiene; and social mobilization; and (3) community-based health services, delivered at the household

                                                                                                      Page 2 of 26
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  RY: Emergency Health & Nutrition Project (P161809)



level through a nationwide network of community health volunteers and midwives, trained to also provide
psychosocial support for women and children. This subcomponent’s support to all three of these service
delivery channels was to cover basic equipment, medical and non-medical supplies, nutrients and
medicines, vaccines, training, and associated implementation expenses.

Subcomponent 1.2: Supporting Health and Nutrition Services at the First Level Referral Centers
(implemented by WHO). In complement to the PHC model, this component was to ensure the continuum
of care at the first referral level by supporting: (1) management of severe acute malnutrition cases; (2)
provision of Basic Emergency Obstetric and Neonatal Care and Comprehensive Emergency Obstetric and
Neonatal Care services in targeted referral centers; and (3) provision of equipment, maintenance, medical
and non‐medical supplies, essential drugs, vaccines, training, and associated implementation expenses.
Also slated for support were the provision of basic supplies (water and fuel) and essential medicines to PHC
facilities within an integrated supply chain system serving the referral centers in coordination with UNICEF’s
targeted PHC facilities.

Subcomponent 1.3: Sustaining the National Health System Preparedness and Public Health
Programs (implemented by WHO). Support to this component was to focus on three areas: (1) disease
surveillance and outbreak response, including the roll‐out of the current electronic Disease Early Warning
System (eDEWS) nationwide through improvements to the core functions of the system (data collection
from health facilities, field investigation, implementation of preparedness plans, stockpiling, vector control,
and field activities to respond to outbreaks such as cholera, dengue fever, and malaria, among others); (2)
national public health campaigns, supporting the implementation of nationwide immunization and
treatment campaigns for diseases such as polio, measles, trachoma, and schistosomiasis. Funds were to
support the campaign implementation and procurement of vaccines and drugs, as needed; and (3) cholera
management, supporting a multifaceted approach to prevent and control cholera and reduce deaths,
comprised of surveillance (through eDEWS), case management, and treatment interventions. In
complement to UNICEF’s ongoing water chlorination, sanitation and hygiene, and social mobilization efforts,
the project was to finance WHO‐developed cholera kits for the prevention and control of cholera outbreaks.

Component 2: Project Support, Management, Evaluation and Administration (original estimate of
$9.00 million; revised estimate of $32.43 million including three AFs; actual cost: $35.94 million).
This component aimed to support project administration and monitoring and evaluation (M&E) activities,
including: (1) general management support for WHO and UNICEF; (2) hiring of a third-party monitoring
(TPM) agency to complement the TPM arrangements for both agencies; and (3) technical
assistance/advisory services provided by agency staff. UNICEF and WHO were to perform project core
management and implementation support activities through their multidisciplinary teams located in their
offices in Sana’a and satellite offices throughout Yemen, including: (a) monitoring of project targets and
results in coordination with the existing local health workforce; (b) handling procurement, financial
management, and disbursements, including preparation of withdrawal applications; (c) ensuring
independent audits of project activities; and (d) ensuring that all reporting requirements for IDA were met.

Component 3: Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC) (original estimate of $0;
revised estimate of $40.0 million including three AFs and three CERC activations; actual cost:
$40.51 million). This component aimed to improve the country’s response capacity in the event of an
emergency, following the procedures governed by OP/BP 10.00 paragraph 12 (Rapid Response to Crises
and Emergencies). In the case of an epidemic or outbreak of public health importance or other health
emergency occurring during the life of the project, this component would allow UNICEF and/or WHO to
receive support by reallocating funds from other project components or serving as a conduit to process

                                                                                                  Page 3 of 26
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  RY: Emergency Health & Nutrition Project (P161809)



additional financing from the Pandemic Emergency Facility or other funding sources for eligible
emergencies to mitigate, respond, and recover from the potential harmful consequences arising from the
emergency situation. Disbursements under this component were to be subject to the declaration of
emergency and the preparation of an “Emergency Response Operational Manual” by UNICEF and WHO,
agreed upon by the Bank.



Revisions to Components

Three Additional Financings, approved respectively on May 19, 2017, August 25, 2017, and May 4, 2019,
supported the expansion and scaling up of project activities under Component 1, to address issues of
exacerbated food insecurity (AF1) and an unprecedented cholera outbreak (AF2) and to sustain and
expand the delivery of health, nutrition, and water and sanitation services (AF3) as follows:

Subcomponent 1.1:

      AF1: the project added its support for community-based targeted supplementary feeding programs,
       blanket supplementary feeding programs for all children and pregnant/lactating women, and fortified
       nutritious supplements and/or food for households with a malnourished child.
      AF2: the project expanded its support to include cholera case treatment centers, emergency
       operating centers, and community-level operational support to oral cholera vaccine (OCV)
       campaigns.
      AF3: the project scaled up community interventions, complemented psychosocial support with
       mental health services, and supported system strengthening measures.

Subcomponent 1.2:

      AF2: the project expanded its support to the response and control of cholera at hospital levels,
       diarrhea treatment centers and oral rehydration points.
      AF3: the project added activities to ensure the continuum of care for mental health interventions at
       referral centers and hospitals, where severe cases were referred for appropriate management.

Subcomponent 1.3:

      AF1: the project expanded its support for scaling up the Integrated Nutrition Surveillance System
       (INSS).
      AF2: the project added activities related to OCV campaigns, laboratory capacity, electronic disease
       early warning systems, and rapid response teams as eligible support.

Subcomponent 1.4:

      AF2: the project added a three-pronged, integrated approach to control the cholera epidemic,
       prevent its resurgence, and support local health and water systems to deal with any future
       outbreaks. Activities included:
            o rehabilitation of critical infrastructure; provision of parts, supplies, fuel, and other
              implementation expenses for system operations; and piloting of innovative techniques for
              remote areas;

                                                                                               Page 4 of 26
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     RY: Emergency Health & Nutrition Project (P161809)



               o water supply activities to health facilities through the existing public water supply system; and
               o improving local capacity at urban/rural areas, through water safety planning, water quality
                  testing and monitoring, and capacity building of water user associations, thereby enhancing
                  water security by protecting water resources in urban and rural areas.

   In addition, the CERC under Component 3 was triggered three times: on April 18, 2017 to address
   increasing food insecurity; on May 17, 2017 to support WHO in addressing the cholera outbreak; and on
   October 9, 2020 to respond to the COVID-19 pandemic. In December 2021, it was agreed to drop the water
   and sanitation sub-projects under AF3 that were unlikely to be completed before the project closing date.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Cost. The total cost estimated at appraisal was 147.8 million SDRs ($200 million equivalent). Three AFs
   introduced during the course of implementation (itemized below) brought the total estimated cost to 495.3
   million SDRs ($683 million equivalent), or more than triple the original estimate.

   Financing and Borrower Contribution. The project was 100 percent financed by a series of IDA grants,
   including an original grant of 147.8 million SDRs ($200 million equivalent), and a series of three additional
   grants, respectively of: 60.7 million SDRs ($83 million equivalent) under AF1, 143.9 million SDRs
   ($200 million equivalent) under AF2, and142.9 million SDRs ($200 million equivalent) under AF3. No
   government contribution was planned or provided. Each of these four grants was fully disbursed in terms of
   SDR amounts (the original currency of commitment).

   Key Dates. The project was approved on January 17, 2017, became effective on February 6, 2017, and
   underwent a mid-term review on January 19, 2019. It was amended through a series of restructurings and
   AFs to respond to increasing demands for support. These changes to the project included the following,
   presented chronologically. A first restructuring (April 18, 2017) triggered the first CERC activation to address
   growing food insecurity. A second CERC was triggered (May 17, 2017) to respond the cholera
   outbreak. AF1 was approved on May 19, 2017 to help scale up the delivery of essential health and nutrition
   services in response to the unprecedented malnutrition situation in Yemen. AF2 was approved on August
   25, 2017 to help scale up the delivery of integrated health and water and sanitation services, in response to
   the cholera outbreak. AF3 was approved on May 14, 2019 to help sustain and expand the delivery of
   integrated health, nutrition and water and sanitation services. A third CERC was activated on October 9,
   2020 to reallocate funds for the COVID-19 response. A second restructuring was approved on April 13,
   2021, recording the third CERC activation and reallocating funds for direct and TPM costs. In December
   2021 it was agreed to drop the water and sanitation sub-projects under AF3 that were unlikely to be
   completed before the closing date and to reprogram these funds to fund water, sanitation, and hygiene
   (WASH) supplies and some pre-approved, health-related activities. Some of these amendments to the
   project included extensions to the closing date. The project closed on June 30, 2022, two years and five
   months after the original closing date of January 31, 2020.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale

                                                                                                     Page 5 of 26
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     RY: Emergency Health & Nutrition Project (P161809)



The PDO is highly relevant to current country conditions. As noted in the Bank’s Country Engagement
Note (CEN) for the Republic of Yemen for the Period FY22-23 (Report No: 169022-YE), issued in 2022,
Yemen’s seven years of continuous conflict have caused massive damage and prompted a major
humanitarian crisis. Over 80 percent of the population is in need of assistance, and two million children are
acutely malnourished. There is a continued outbreak of diseases, and close to 18 million people lack
access to safe water and sanitation. Events of recent years have exacerbated the situation, including
massive flooding and worsening displacement with over four million IDPs as of early 2002. Various conflict-
related shocks in recent years (large swings in violence, changes in governance from the capture of the
territory, intermittent tightening of air and sea blockades, natural disasters, widespread disease outbreaks,
and currency crisis) also contribute to the volatile country context. Widespread trauma from prolonged
exposure to conflict, combined with weak psychosocial support services, has left Yemenis highly vulnerable
to mental health challenges. In the face of escalating costs, households are unable to afford food and basic
services.

Yemen’s health indicators are among the worst in the world, and malnutrition affects a large portion of the
population. Communicable diseases, including cholera, diphtheria, dengue, and measles, have been
rampant due to poor water and sanitation conditions. Riddled with severe shortages of human resources
and supplies, only about half of health facilities are functioning. The rapid spread of COVID-19 and its effect
on diminishing donor funds have overwhelmed service capacity and contributed to funding shortfalls. The
volatile country context has exacerbated exclusion and inequality among vulnerable groups, in a protracted
context of women and girls deeply disadvantaged in all dimensions of life.

According to the Humanitarian Needs Overview for 2023, issued in December 2022 by the United Nations
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, more than 20 million people in Yemen are expected to
need health assistance, while 11.9 million, including vulnerable women and children, will require nutrition
assistance. In addition, approximately 15 million people will need assistance in accessing adequate water,
sanitation, and hygiene services.

The PDO is also relevant to the Bank’s above-cited CEN for the Republic of Yemen, covering FY22-
23. The World Bank Group’s priority, articulated in this document, is to stay engaged across multiple
possible scenarios, with the overarching goal of supporting the people of Yemen and preserving the
institutions that serve them. The focus of the Bank’s engagement is on: (i) supporting basic service delivery
and human capital preservation; and (ii) promoting food security, resilience, and livelihoods. The strategy is
to anchor the Bank’s support in scalable platforms with flexible, shock-responsive, and adaptive project
design, with prioritization and allocation decisions to be informed by (i) integration and consolidation; and (ii)
flexibility and adaptability. Additional financing to scale up existing operations with demonstrated results,
multi-sectoral integrated approaches, and geographically targeted packages drive the design and
prioritization of support. Addressing growing malnutrition is also a key component of the Bank’s
strategy. The CEN also specifically prioritized work with United Nations institutions, just as the project did.

The World Bank has partnered with UNICEF and WHO under previous health sector operations in
Yemen, giving it a comparative advantage in supporting a project of this nature in Yemen’s volatile
context. As noted in the design document (PAD, pp. 10-11), the Bank opted to have UNICEF and WHO
serve as implementing agencies for two earlier health projects (Health and Population Project and
Schistosomiasis Project), with good results. Both agencies were successful in setting up workable
mechanisms that facilitated project implementation, enabling the delivery of services to vulnerable
populations through outreach rounds and the delivery of drugs, equipment, and supplies to service
providers. This experience culminated in lessons that informed the design of this project, including an

                                                                                                       Page 6 of 26
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      RY: Emergency Health & Nutrition Project (P161809)



               emphasis on flexibility during implementation, preserving and supporting health sector capacity, partnering
               with agencies (and their technical teams in Yemen) to ensure smooth implementation, and the inclusion of
               public health interventions.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To contribute to the provision of basic health and essential nutrition services for the benefit of the population
                             of the Republic of Yemen

                             Rationale
                             The theory of change for this objective held that project support for scaling up a minimum service package to
                             provide essential health and nutrition services at the primary and first referral levels for (1) general clinical
                             services and essential trauma care; (2) child health and nutrition; (3) communicable diseases; (4)
                             reproductive health and sexually transmitted infections; (5) non-communicable diseases and mental health;
                             and (6) environmental health, would equate to provision of basic health and essential nutritional services for
                             the population.



                             Outputs and intermediate results

                                        The project supported activities to strengthen service delivery at primary health care centers, including
                                         quality improvement and supervision field visits, and the training of health care workers.
                                        The project provided life-saving equipment and medical/non-medical supplies to 4,246 health facilities,
                                         exceeding both the original target of 300 and the revised target of 3,800 facilities.
                                        The project also supported the delivery of primary health care services closer to communities,
                                         specifically:
                                              o 3,188 mobile team rounds, exceeding both the original target of 1,500 and the revised
                                                 target of 2,000 rounds. Mobile teams were expected to cover areas where there are no fixed
                                                 facilities, on a twice weekly schedule. To this end, the project supported the activation of 76
                                                 mobile teams, financed communication and social mobilization campaigns, and trained 3,060
                                                 community health workers.
                                              o 41,477 outreach rounds, far exceeding both the original target of 3,000 and the revised target
                                                 of 12,000. These outreach rounds were to be conducted by fixed facility staff, expected to
                                                 cover five rounds per year in 300 districts. In an email to IEG dated July 16, 2023, the Bank's
                                                 team explained that targets for outreach rounds were tempered with the realities of unstable

                                                                                                                                    Page 7 of 26
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
RY: Emergency Health & Nutrition Project (P161809)



             security conditions and complications in obtaining security permit approvals by the
             authorities. However, thanks to implementing agencies' significant efforts (utilizing available
             local resources and partners, and convincing authorities to issue security permits),
             considerably more outreach rounds than planned were carried out.
          o A total of 48 local non-governmental organizations (NGOs) were involved in service provision
             activities supported under the project, exceeding the original target of 15 and the revised
             target of 30.
    The project supported outputs to strengthen service delivery at the first level referral centers,
     including:
          o Hospitals provided with basic supplies and staff trained;
          o Quality improvement and supervision missions conducted; and
          o 33.4 million liters of fuel delivered and 3.3 million oxygen cylinders refilled.
    With strong emphasis on systems and institutional strengthening and capacity building, the project
     provided clinical and health system strengthening training to 41,137 healthcare workers, ten times
     the original target of 4,000 and almost triple the revised target of 15,000.
    The project’s efforts to strengthen the health system included fostering effective governance and
     leadership, improving human resources for health, and strengthening health information systems. The
     project also worked closely with local stakeholders to help improve quality and coverage of service
     delivery at the decentralized level, financing regular supervision and support to health facilities.
    A total of 56,700 staff of health care facilities and community health workers received CERC-funded
     personal protective equipment to protect them from COVID-19, two and a half times the target of
     20,000.
    Because of the project’s support in strengthening the quality of care through structural and clinical
     competency improvements, 97 percent of the project beneficiaries were satisfied with services
     provided, exceeding the target of 60 percent.
    The project supported the health sector’s efforts to contain the cholera outbreaks by strengthening
     surveillance, clinical management, and immunization campaigns (complementing activities to improve
     safe drinking water and sanitation services reported below under Objective 2).
          o It supported the vaccination of over 3.59 million people with OCV, substantially achieving the
             end target of 3.65 million people (98 percent achievement). The project only achieved 36
             percent of the original target of 10 million, which was reduced substantially in light of the
             decreasing trend of cholera cases with Yemen’s successful containment in outbreaks from
             2019 onwards. The project could not conduct as many vaccination campaigns as expected or
             reach all intended beneficiaries due to lack of authorities’ approvals for vaccination campaigns,
             and to increasing vaccine hesitancy and misinformation in the context of COVID-19.
          o It also supported the delivery of life-saving services through 229 diarrhea treatment centers
             with in-patient capacities and 400 oral rehydration corners for early detection, treatment, and
             referral. A total of 1,613,157 people received cholera treatment, over five times the initial
             AF2 target of 300,000 people, and double the revised end target of 800,000.
          o A total of 2,379 new eDEWS data collection sites were established under the project,
             exceeding the original target of 600 and the revised target of 2,000; and rapid response
             teams (RRTs) were established to cover all 333 districts in the country. Approximately 1,800
             RRTs and 3,0900 surveillance officers received training in disease surveillance and
             response. This has helped Yemen to effectively detect recurring disease outbreaks (i.e.,
             cholera, measles, diphtheria, COVID-19, and 16 other diseases) and conduct field
             epidemiological investigations for appropriate case referral and outbreak containment.


                                                                                                Page 8 of 26
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  RY: Emergency Health & Nutrition Project (P161809)




    Over 7.3 million people received hygiene consumables to protect them against cholera and COVID-
     19, exceeding both the original target of 4.5 million and the revised target of 6.0 million.
    A total of 300 new INSS sites were established and implemented at the secondary level of health
     care, fully achieving the revised target of 300. The original target was to establish 1,100 INSS sites
     at the community level, but WHO revised the implementation and methodology of the INSS design,
     given the challenges encountered in establishing these sites at the community level.



Outcomes

    The ICR reports that by the project’s end, 32,031,437 people received essential health, nutrition and
      reproductive health services, over 4.5 times the original target of 7 million and double the revised
      target of 16 million, and, of these 32 million beneficiaries: 52 percent were female (95 percent
      achievement of the target of 55 percent); 8 percent were IDPs (80 percent achievement of the target
      of 10 percent); and 37 percent were children under five (74 percent achievement of the target of 50
      percent).
           o Given that the total number of beneficiaries reported is equivalent to 95 percent of Yemen's
             estimated population (Bank data for 2022), IEG asked the Bank's team whether there may
             have been double counting of beneficiaries. In an email dated July 24, 2023, the team noted
             that for this indicator the project counted the number of beneficiaries who received particular
             services that were included in this PDO indicator. As itemized in footnote 11 of the ICR (p. 14),
             services under this indicator included: immunizations first dose (campaigns and routine
             immunization at primary care level), antenatal care first visit, hospital outpatient consultations,
             cholera treatment in diarrhea treatment centers and at primary health care level, and neglected
             tropical diseases interventions (schistosomiasis, trachoma, and onchocerciasis campaigns in
             priority districts supported by the project). In reporting on this indicator, the Bank's team stated
             that the project chose particular services that do not double count the beneficiaries in a given
             year, but that it is very likely that the project counted the same beneficiary more than once over
             the project years.
           o There is no disaggregation of the 32 million across the various services included in the ICR's
             definition of this indicator, nor are baselines and targets provided.
           o IEG notes that the definition of this indicator in the PAD (p. 13, footnote 4) differs from the
             above-cited ICR's definition. The PAD defines this indicator as "...a composite indicator with
             the sum of (a) children immunized; (b) women and children who have received basic nutrition
             services; and (c) deliveries attended by skilled health personnel." The PAD provides baselines
             and targets for each of the three categories. IEG's review of the restructuring papers did not
             uncover a formal change in definition, making it unclear when the definition of this indicator
             evolved or if/when increased targets were based on the original definition or the definition
             provided in the ICR. The ICR presents a different definition of the "original" indicator (p. 9,
             footnote 7): "It is a composite indicator with the sum of: (a) children immunized (first dose); (b)
             antenatal care first visit; (c) outpatient consultations at supported hospitals (gynecology &
             obstetrics, internal medicine, surgery, pediatric, ophthalmology, dentistry and other services);
             (d) people treated for cholera; and (e) people receiving treatment for schistosomiasis,
             onchocerciasis or trachoma."
           o For these reasons, IEG questions the evaluability of this particular indicator.


                                                                                                   Page 9 of 26
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
RY: Emergency Health & Nutrition Project (P161809)




  Fortunately, the ICR provides data on some of the other essential services provided to target
     populations with project support (and more in keeping with the original PDO definition), which
     provide a strong basis on which to assess achievement of Objective 1, all of them exceeding original
     and revised targets:
          o The ICR reports a total of 14,527,343 people who received essential health, nutrition and
             population services, exceeding the original target of 6,340,000 and the revised target of
             12,025,000, disaggregated as follows:
                   A total of 1,523,267 women received basic nutrition services, more than 7.5 times the
                     original target of 200,000 and almost double the revised target of 800,000.
                   A total of 4,477,639 children under five received basic nutrition services, exceeding
                     both the original target of 600,000 and the revised target of 4.0 million.
                   The cumulative number of children immunized with project support (with vaccines
                     purchased through the project and with vaccines purchased with other resources,
                     delivered through a Bank-supported project) was 7,810,714, exceeding both the
                     original target of 5.5 million and the revised target of 7.0 million. The ICR’s results
                     framework notes that this indicator captures the number of children immunized and not
                     the number of vaccinations.
                   A total of 715,723 women delivered with the assistance of a health provider as a result
                     of Bank-financed activities, far exceeding the original target of 40,000 and the
                     revised target of 225,000.
    In addition:
          o A total of 1,365,770 pregnant women received antenatal care during a visit to a health provider
             as a result of project activities, far exceeding the original target of 200,000 and the revised
             target of 700,000.
    Evidence shows that the project contributed to improved service availability. Data reported from WHO
     and Health Resources and Services Availability Monitoring System reveal that:
          o At the primary care level, 80 percent of the 1,950 healthcare facilities supported by the project
             continued delivering four core maternal, neonatal and child health services, a substantial
             increase over the 26 percent level in 2017. These achievements were attributable to the
             project’s critical inputs (operating costs, per diems, capacity building activities, and supplies
             such as primary healthcare kits and personal protective equipment).
          o At the first referral level, 81 percent of the 72 hospitals supported by the project, across all
             governorates, offered services addressing communicable diseases in 2020, an increase of 10
             percentage points over the 71 percent level in 2016. Moreover, 75 percent of supported
             hospitals offered general clinical and trauma care services in 2020, an increase of 20
             percentage points over the 55 percent level in 2016.
    TPM and WHO M&E data show that there was a 73 percent increase in outpatient utilization at the
     project-supported hospitals from 2016 to 2019. Though routine services were disrupted by the
     COVID-19 pandemic in 2020 and 2021 (due to temporary suspension of elective services and lower
     demand for routine services due to fear of COVID-19 infections), there was still a 49 percent
     increase between 2016 and 2021. On the other hand, an increasing trend for emergency services
     was noted, as beneficiaries visited emergency hospitals when in need instead of visiting outpatient
     departments during the COVID-19 pandemic.
    Making more services available at lower-tier facilities increased utilization, improved system efficiency,
     and reduced out-of-pocket expenditures. A study conducted by Garber, et al (2018) estimated that
     over 12 million people in Yemen need to travel over an hour to visit the nearest fully or partially
     functional health facilities, while an additional 8.8 million take more than 30 minutes to access health

                                                                                                Page 10 of 26
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   RY: Emergency Health & Nutrition Project (P161809)



         facilities. Thanks to project support, which made more services available at lower-tier facilities that are
         closer to communities, the average number of outpatient consultations in intra-district hospitals
         showed a 116 percent increase between 2017 and 2021, while district hospitals saw an increase of 67
         percent. The delivery of services at lower levels of care improves system efficiency and also reduces
         out-of-pocket expenditures, both direct (consultation fees, medicines) and indirect (transport and
         opportunity costs).



Rating
High


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To contribute to the provision of water and sanitation services for the benefit of the population of the Republic
of Yemen

Rationale
This objective was introduced six months after project effectiveness (under AF2 in August 2017) in response
to major cholera outbreaks in Yemen. In order to achieve the objective of contributing to the provision of water
and sanitation services with a view to mitigating and preventing further outbreaks, the project sought to
improve the population’s access to these services through: improvements to WASH facilities at schools and
health establishments; the distribution of hygiene consumables to the population; support to the regular
monitoring of water quality; rehabilitation and other support to improved functioning of wastewater treatment
plants; and training and capacity building.



Outputs and intermediate results

        In complement to health sector interventions reported under Objective 1 to fight cholera outbreaks
         (prevention, early detection/screening, and treatment of cholera cases, vaccinations against cholera,
         strengthened surveillance, and establishment of rapid response teams), the project:
              o provided 1.1 billion liters of chlorinated water to designated health facilities for over 8 million
                people;
              o worked with the National Water Resources Authority to conduct water quality monitoring for
                cholera at 46 health facilities and 84 diarrhea treatment centers in 17 high-risk districts across
                six governorates; and
              o provided training for 470 Local Water Supply Corporation technical staff in quality monitoring,
                surveillance of outbreaks, and maintenance of water, sanitation and hygiene services.
        Rehabilitation and maintenance of water and sanitation facilities were completed in 71 hospitals.
        The project supported the installment of 1,500 toilets, 1,400 wash basins, 640 manholes, 450 fans,
         220 polyethylene water tanks, 100 fiberglass water tanks, and 30 concrete water tanks.
        The project supported the construction of 3,611 latrines and the trucking and delivery of 239,959 cubic
         meters of water, and procured 61,000 basic hygiene kits, 578,000 consumable hygiene kits, and
         186,450 20-liter jerrycans.

                                                                                                     Page 11 of 26
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  RY: Emergency Health & Nutrition Project (P161809)




    The project also procured water and sanitation-related equipment, installed solar water systems for
     water wells, and rehabilitated water networks and existing water reservoirs.
    Support to wastewater treatment plants included rehabilitation, replacement, and maintenance of
     sewer networks; installation of latrines in IDP camps; supply of spare parts, equipment pumps, and
     spare parts for sewer suction trucks and vehicles; and fuel for operation of plants, pipes, pumps, and
     generators.
    The project rehabilitated WASH facilities according to needs at 225 schools, falling short of the target
     of 500 schools (45 percent achievement), and 568 health care establishments, falling short of the
     target of 1,200 schools. These activities, implemented by UNICEF, did not meet targets due to
     implementation challenges: (1) sustainability issues in WASH in schools and health facilities, in which
     TPM findings have flagged that rehabilitation interventions were not maintained by the authorities due
     to lack of operations and maintenance costs; (2) the Bank team requiring 100 percent TPM coverage
     for all targeted schools and health facilities; and (3) major delays in field technical assessments.



Outcomes

    The project provided access to improved water sources in selected cholera areas to a total of
       3,365,983 people, almost double the original target of 1.8 million, and slightly exceeding the revised
       target of 3,309,418 people (102 percent achieved). Of these:
             o 326,000 were rural residents, achieving 72 percent of the original target of 450,000, and
                exceeding the revised target of 300,000 (109 percent achievement); and
             o 3,039,983 were urban residents, exceeding the original target of 1.35 million and slightly
                exceeding the revised target of 3,009,418.
      The project provided one million people with access to a water source monitored for quality using
       critical parameters related to cholera and other water-borne disease, exceeding the target of
       830,000 people (120 percent achievement). Of these:
             o 0.3 million were rural residents, exceeding the target of 249,000 (120 percent achievement);
                and
             o 0.7 million were urban residents, exceeding the target of 581,000 (120 percent achievement).
      A total of 344,166 IDPs benefited from the project’s emergency water and sanitation response
       (services such as water trucking, latrine construction, well rehabilitation, and rehabilitation of water
       distribution points targeted to IDPs in specific locations, including refugee camps), exceeding the
       target of 300,000 (115 percent achievement). Of these:
             o 103,250 were rural residents, exceeding the target of 90,000 (115 percent achievement); and
             o 240,196 were urban residents, exceeding the target of 210,000 (115 percent achievement).
      The project provided 3,244,192 people with access to improved sanitation services in
       selected cholera-affected areas, almost two and a half times the original target of 1.40 million (232
       percent achievement) and slightly exceeding the revised target of 3,178,307 (102 percent
       achievement). Of these:
             o 200,000 were rural residents, exceeding the original target of 150,000 and fully achieving
                the revised target of 200,000; and
             o 3,044,192 were urban residents, far exceeding the original target of 1.25 million and slightly
                exceeding the revised target of 2,978,307.
      As a result of health support (reported under Objective 1) and water and sanitation interventions
       (reported in this section), the numbers of suspected cases and deaths due to cholera decreased

                                                                                                Page 12 of 26
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                RY: Emergency Health & Nutrition Project (P161809)



                                    significantly, from over one million suspected cases and 2,200 deaths in 2017 to 70,000 cases and 45
                                    deaths in 2021.



                            Rating
                            High


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The high achievement of both Objective1 and Objective 2 is particularly noteworthy given that the project was
                            implemented in a heightened security and fragile operating context, whose challenges included disrupted
                            logistics/supply chains, movement restrictions, and security concerns for the implementing agencies and their
                            local partners.

                            In a July 16, 2023 email to IEG, the Bank's team provided the following insights on project attribution. Yemen
                            received significant financial and technical support, largely for humanitarian responses, from donors and
                            partners, including the United States Agency for International Development, European Union Civil Protection
                            and Humanitarian Aid Operations, the United Kingdom Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office, and
                            Gavi, the Vaccine Alliance. While the project also provided emergency support, it had further significant
                            impacts in sustaining essential health service delivery, scaling up thematic and geographical coverage of
                            essential services, and strengthening the health system for resilient service delivery and public health
                            preparedness and response. The Bank's support was the most significant among all partners, covering the
                            entire country at all levels of care, while the support of other partners and donors was limited to specific
                            geographical locations and/or thematic areas (e.g., immunization, maternal, neonatal, and child health, and/or
                            nutrition).



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            High



    5. Efficiency
   The project yielded high economic returns. The economic analysis undertaken during project preparation
   estimated a total of $350 million in benefits from life-years saved as a result of project interventions, of which
   $89 million was from averted maternal mortality, $88 million from averted infant mortality, and $170 million
   from life-years saved of others benefiting from essential and critical medicines and services made available by
   the project. These benefits are net of other expected benefits not included in this analysis (economic productivity
   and welfare of beneficiaries). The internal rate of return was expected to be 75 percent, and the benefit-cost
   ratio was estimated at 1.5 (for every $1 spent, an estimated $1.5 gained [as a benefit] or saved [as a cost]).



                                                                                                                            Page 13 of 26
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      RY: Emergency Health & Nutrition Project (P161809)



An end-of-project cost benefit analysis carried out as part of the ICR exercise estimated that the project yielded
benefits that far exceeded the total project cost of $692 million. Benefits accrued from selected project
interventions were estimated at $3.613 billion, broken down as follows: $11.2 million from a reduction in
maternal deaths; $28.1 million from a reduction in stillbirths; $486.3 from child immunization interventions; $3
billion from the provision of under-five nutrition services; and $87.3 million from enhanced access to improved
water sources and sanitation. This translates into a benefits-cost ratio of 5.22, suggesting that for every $1
invested, the project will yield an economic return of $5.22. This significantly exceeds the ratio of 1.5 estimated
at appraisal. At its completion, the project had an estimated net present value (NPV) of $280.7 million. The
appraisal economic analysis did not estimate the NPV.

The project’s design was strategic, both in its focus on the most vulnerable groups (women, children, and
IDPs in high-risk, low coverage areas) and in its efforts to support the delivery of highly cost-effective (maternal
and child health and nutrition) services at the primary level. It also put strong emphasis on public health and
prevention.

Implementation was very efficient. Originally designed as a three-year, $200 million emergency project, the
project accommodated three CERC activations and three AFs, and fully disbursed $692 million – almost four
times the original amount – in the space of 5.5 years – less than twice the original implementation period. The
multiple CERC activations and AFs demonstrated strong project flexibility to expand its scope to respond to
unfolding emergencies and to undertake needed systems strengthening activities. The AFs, reallocations for
CERC activations, and restructurings showed proactivity and culminated in significant increases in almost all
intermediate outcome and outcome targets, most of which were highly achieved, with the rest fully
achieved. Both through its original objective (to improve health and nutrition services) and through a new
objective (to improve water and sanitation services), the project synergistically addressed the cholera outbreaks
and significantly reduced cases and deaths in later years through preventive activities, such as vaccinations,
clean water and sanitation, and disease surveillance, among others.

Despite the extremely fragile and challenging environment, the project made every effort to increase
value for money and improve efficiency. The extremely competitive global market, characterized by supply
shortages, delays, and increased prices due to the COVID-19 pandemic, posed significant challenges. Local
procurement was thus prioritized, where feasible. The project deployed global supply expertise and resources
from both UNICEF and WHO and from implementing agencies, and it made effective use of the WHO catalogue
and hubs in Dubai, and of technical support in Kuala Lumpur and Geneva. UNICEF used economies of scale
effectively through long-term agreements made by its Copenhagen Supply Division for the procurement of
supplies for the project. Both UNICEF and WHO set implementation mechanisms in place and further
strengthened and expanded their operational capacities and presence in the country. Their implementation
capacities relied on the heavy presence of expanded UN teams in Yemen (technical staff, consultants,
contractors based mainly in Sanaa, with multiple satellite offices in the regions). Both agencies used existing
networks of governorate health offices, district health offices, and international/local NGOs to help deliver
essential services and ensure availability of equipment, supplies, vaccines, and medicines nationwide. The
implementing agencies worked with existing local health system structures at the governorate, district, facility,
and community levels to preserve national capacity and maintain the core functions of the health system. The
scope of work for the rapid response teams and eDEWS, initially supported to respond to cholera, was
expanded to cover 27 diseases. Local contractors were engaged and directly supervised rehabilitation activities
in hospitals. Use of local rather than international contractors avoided multiple layers of subcontracting and
transaction costs. Implementing agencies also engaged technical experts from regional and global levels
virtually, where possible, to minimize travel costs.



                                                                                                       Page 14 of 26
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       RY: Emergency Health & Nutrition Project (P161809)



Even considering the shortcomings noted in the ICR (particularly the inability to maintain new WASH
installations in schools and health facilities due to lack of budget, and the dropping of a few water and sanitation
activities that could not be finished by the project’s extended closing date), project efficiency is rated high, as it
exceeded all expectations.


Efficiency Rating
High


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                 Rate Available?              Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                        0
 Appraisal                                                    0
                                                                                         Not Applicable
                                                                                        0
 ICR Estimate                                                 0
                                                                                         Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The relevance of the PDO is rated high because as the objectives were responsive to current country
conditions and to the Bank’s current strategy. Moreover, the Bank’s previous experience working on the health
sector in Yemen’s fragile context, including working with UN agencies as implementing agencies, rendered it
well placed to design and oversee this operation. Efficacy in achieving Objective 1 (to contribute to the provision
of basic health and essential nutrition services for the benefit of the population) is rated high; and efficacy in
achieving Objective 2 (to contribute to the provision of water and sanitation services for the benefit of the
population) is also rated high. Key outcome targets measuring both objectives, most of which were increased
over the life of the project, were ultimately exceeded. Efficiency is also rated high. Economic returns on the
project and implementation efficiency both exceeded expectations. These ratings indicate that there were
essentially no shortcomings in the project's design, implementation, and achievement, translating into a highly
satisfactory outcome.


a. Outcome Rating
   Highly Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The risk that the project’s development may not be sustained is high due to continued conflict in
Yemen, inherent institutional risks, and the macroeconomic context. Notwithstanding some risk mitigation
measures established and implemented by the Bank (noted in Section 8 of this ICRR), the ICR (para. 92)

                                                                                                        Page 15 of 26
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      RY: Emergency Health & Nutrition Project (P161809)



notes a number of ongoing risks to development outcome, moving forward, all assessed as “high.” These
include: (i) the conflict/security situation in the country, which inflicts considerable physical damage to
infrastructure; (ii) Yemen’s weak economy, aggravated by the crises, which undermines the country’s ability
to fund the operational costs of health facilities, including the salaries of health care workers; (iii) brain drain
and staff turnover, which undermine the country’s ability to sustain the delivery of needed services; (iv) global
supply chain disruptions and limited local availability of supplies, causing a shortage of medical and non-
medical supplies in health facilities; (v) emerging conflicts worldwide, causing significant funding gaps, which
result in further uncertainty on the provision of essential services; and (vi) the population’s vulnerability to
poverty, water scarcity, and natural disasters, which could result in disease outbreaks and changes in
disease patterns.

The project's deliberate pivot to system strengthening interventions (ICR, p. 50) and its support to the
establishment of digital information systems (ICR, p. 51) are important contributions to the sustainability of
outcomes. Moreover, the Bank is supporting a follow-on project to this operation, the Emergency Human
Capital Project (EHCP), which supports the same objectives: to provide essential health, nutrition, water, and
sanitation services to the population. This new operation, currently under implementation, draws on the
sound design, lessons, and experience of the current project, including: (i) relying on local-level resilience
and recovery mechanisms; (ii) ensuring a quick disbursing mechanism and working through specialized
existing partner agencies; (iii) building flexibility into project design to ensure adequate response to emerging
needs; (iv) having a simple design and feasible implementation arrangements; and (v) providing support to
further strengthen the capacity of local partners. The nine-month overlap of the projects’ implementation
periods (from October 2021 to June 2022) facilitated a seamless transition from one operation to the other,
preventing service disruptions and continuing further system strengthening support.

At project closing, over 24 million people (80 percent of Yemen’s population) remain in need of assistance,
with two million children acutely malnourished. Considering the continuing outbreaks of vaccine-preventable
diseases and the still-inadequate coverage of safe water and sanitation (with an estimated 18 million people
lacking access), Bank support to Yemen to achieve the objectives of the CEN FY22-23 is critical. The EHCP
plays a crucial role in safeguarding the continuum of care to those in need and is helping to build resilient
health and water and sanitation systems through capacity building at the decentralized level.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project was designed to be of strategic relevance: aligned with the Yemen CEN for 2016 and the
  World Bank framework for engagement in the Middle East and North Africa region; responsive to the
  urgent needs of the country; and involving and reflecting the views of actors and stakeholders at the local
  level. The PDO and activities were determined by the Ministry of Public Health and Population's Health
  Engagement Plan, developed with support from WHO and UNICEF, and agreed to by local stakeholders
  and development partners. The hiring of TPM agencies was factored into the design to monitor project
  activities to reflect beneficiaries’ perceptions of services. The design maintained a strong focus on
  supporting communities and health facilities at the primary and secondary levels. It also wisely sought to
  strengthen local capacity (existing local delivery networks at the governorate and district levels) as an
  essential means to maintain service delivery and to prepare for service delivery for the post-conflict
  recovery. To mitigate sensitive political economy concerns, the implementing agencies worked with

                                                                                                        Page 16 of 26
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     RY: Emergency Health & Nutrition Project (P161809)



  politically neutral local partners, such as NGOs. In a July 16, 2023 email to IEG, the Bank's team noted
  that NGOs were critical partners in implementing activities at the community and primary health care
  levels. NGOs were also part of the Health Cluster, coordinating with the implementing agencies to
  explore the potential of complementary support and synergies. This partnership was especially
  effective in areas controlled by different political and armed factions.

  The risk assessment undertaken at appraisal captured the many high risks of the country’s context,
  encompassing political, governance, macroeconomic, technical, and institutional risks, among
  others. Mitigation measures included building of local capacity for continued service delivery; relying on
  existing local networks of providers and suppliers; and use of UNICEF's and WHO’s technical and
  operational capacities for procurement and financial management. The project also sought to mitigate the
  prolonged health crisis caused by the fragility, conflict and violence (FCV) context through a three-
  pronged approach, comprised of: (i) response to the short-term needs of the population; (ii) prevention to
  address the supply- and demand-side issues of malnutrition and the spread of disease; and (iii)
  institutional capacity building to support and develop local health, water, and sanitation institutions to
  prevent, detect, and control future outbreaks.

  The decision to select UNICEF and WHO to be the grant recipients and implementing agencies was a
  sound one, based on the limited fiduciary and technical capacities of the Ministry of Public Health and
  Population, and on experience already gained under the two previous IDA-funded health operations in
  Yemen in which these agencies effectively took on this role. Through their own network of providers and
  contractors, and the decentralized health offices of the Ministry and NGOs, both agencies had viable
  channels for supporting essential service delivery. The M&E design was strong, with a clear objective and
  results framework, appropriate and measurable indicators, and workable arrangements and tools for the
  implementing agencies to collect data from the local and service-provider levels and monitor
  implementation. Safeguards and fiduciary aspects of the project were appropriately designed.

  Project design also reflected lessons learned from previous operations in Yemen, as well as experience
  from global disaster risk management and emergency recovery and reconstruction. The Bank’s focus on
  the inclusion of activities to promote resilience through the strengthening of local institutions was wise
  and responsive to the challenges of the country context and enhanced the project’s ability to contribute to
  service delivery restoration and expansion. The project’s flexible and simple design facilitated its ability to
  respond adequately to emerging needs, with a focus on quick wins to ensure positive impact on the
  affected population during the conflict.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Highly Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The Bank’s supervision of the project was proactive. The task team effectively used an internal guidance
 note on how to strengthen implementation support in similar contexts to Yemen. Guidance included regular
 (weekly) meetings, acting on TPM observations and reporting, quarterly reverse missions (implementation
 support meetings with the implementing agencies that take place in a third country), and in-depth
 discussions on specific technical topics where progress, results, and challenges were discussed. A mid-
 term review provided the opportunity to review project progress, issues, and mitigation measures, which

                                                                                                      Page 17 of 26
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                     Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    RY: Emergency Health & Nutrition Project (P161809)



were monitored following this exercise. Throughout implementation, risks were consistently identified and
monitored. Implementation Status and Results Reports were timely and candid in their reporting of
progress, challenges, and risks.

Against a backdrop of a fragile country context, with limited ability of authorities to provide basic services
for those in need, the Bank remained flexible and adaptive. The Bank’s strong and consistent focus on
results was agile and creative, with consistent attention to ongoing identification of critical and emerging
needs of the population. The Bank successfully responded to health emergencies (cholera, polio,
malnutrition, and COVID-19 outbreaks) through the design and implementation of three AFs and three
CERC activations. These restructurings and additional funding helped ensure delivery of health, nutrition,
water, and sanitation services to those in need. It is this proactivity that enabled the project to fully disburse
all funds within five and a half years and surpass its (increased) targets.

The Bank provided close and timely support to the implementing agencies to strengthen their capacity to
carry out safeguards and fiduciary elements of the project, including preparation of the Environmental and
Social Safeguards instruments and holding of regular meetings to provide guidance on the Bank’s fiduciary
and safeguards requirements. The Bank was able to improve its fiduciary compliance monitoring through
its use of real-time and remote monitoring data that the project collected through geo-tagged remote
sensors and a shipment tracking system.

A particularly noteworthy feature of the Bank’s strong supervision performance was the analytical work
undertaken with the implementing agencies, which provided a useful platform to understand the impact of
the ongoing conflict on the health system, and of the project’s impact in terms of outputs and
outcomes. This analytical work helped identify areas where additional support and monitoring, and further
analysis, were needed. Moreover, the Bank’s team coordinated with donors on a regular basis to ensure
complementarity and avoid overlap. Jointly with implementing agencies, the Bank’s team coordinated with
the authorities in planning project activities, identification of bottlenecks, and mitigation measures, and
regular sharing of project information and reports. The Bank, together with the implementing agencies, also
published various stories via websites and social media platforms to share positive impacts of the project
with Yemen’s population.

While the contracting of TPM agencies was a strong feature of project design, enabling access to more
granular data on service delivery and visits to all health facilities, there were several challenges in the
collection and reporting of data. These included: (i) delays in obtaining clearances from authorities for field
visits; (ii) heightened insecurity for field visits; (iii) lack of verification documents at the health facilities; (iv)
lack of cooperation of the management at some facilities in terms of sharing data and facilitating the TPM
agencies’ work; (v) issues with the quality of data available at health facilities; and (vi) the impact of
restrictions set by authorities on these agencies to collect utilization data completely and in a timely
manner, and to conduct beneficiary interviews. These challenges affected the quality and timeliness of
TPM agencies’ reports. Nevertheless, they were still considered useful for tracking progress on the
ground. The Bank’s team used and triangulated all data available, harnessing geospatial analysis, remote
monitoring tools, service delivery data, and TPM data, to monitor implementation and apply adjustments to
achieve the PDO.

Transition arrangements for sustaining project results, in this context of continued emergency needs,
centered on the development and (ongoing) implementation of the follow-on Emergency Human Capital
Project, whose design is informed by the successes and lessons of this project.



                                                                                                            Page 18 of 26
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     RY: Emergency Health & Nutrition Project (P161809)




  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Highly Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Highly Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 Project objectives were clearly stated but modest, given that this was an emergency operation. The results
 framework was well designed, with plausible links between inputs, outputs, intermediate outcomes, and
 outcomes. PDO-level indicators (appropriately) went beyond the formally stated objective, “to provide
 health, nutrition, water and sanitation services,” setting targets and measuring the number of people who
 utilized/benefitted from the various services that were developed and strengthened under the project. Many
 of these indicators were disaggregated by gender and rural/urban residence, and noted coverage of IDPs,
 all providing a glimpse of coverage of those most in need. Intermediate outcome and outcome indicators
 captured well all aspects of the PDO statement, encompassing primary health services, nutrition services,
 clean water, and sanitation facilities, as well as key contributions of project components (e.g., personnel
 receiving training, outreach activities conducted). Indicators were specific, well defined, measurable,
 achievable, relevant, and timebound. Baselines and targets were set during the design stage based on the
 initial IDA grant amount. They were increased during implementation (see below) in the context of
 restructurings (three CERC activations and three AFs).

 Arrangements for data collection and reporting were sound and appropriate both for the project and the
 challenging country context. As laid out in the PAD (para. 45), for their respective activities, UNICEF and
 WHO were to use data collected by the Governorate Health Offices (GHO) and other implementing
 partners (local and international NGOs) according to the standard reporting formats for levels/workers,
 including those for mobile team reporting, integrated outreach reporting on all interventions, quarterly
 reports by community health workers, and monthly reporting by health facilities on services and supplies.
 Databases for each service were maintained at national, governorate, and lower levels. Each UNICEF or
 WHO zonal office was responsible for collecting and reviewing data before its consolidation at the central
 level by focal points from the GHO and NGO partners. Information management officers, working at zonal
 and country offices of UNICEF and WHO, supported this process. As the security situation would allow,
 UNICEF and WHO health and nutrition officers at zonal field offices conducted regular field visits to monitor
 and report on progress. UNICEF and WHO also relied on an already established independent TPM
 mechanism to undertake quarterly performance verification and field monitoring and to report on project
 outputs and the delivery of services to the intended beneficiaries. UNICEF and WHO submitted technical
 and financial progress reports to the Bank every six months. Since the Bank team could not directly
 perform in-country supervision due to security and access constraints, these reports were used as a tool for
 monitoring and verification of project activities, along with semi-annual progress reports submitted by the
 implementing agencies.




                                                                                                  Page 19 of 26
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     RY: Emergency Health & Nutrition Project (P161809)



b. M&E Implementation
  The project was compliant with the data collection and submission protocols established at appraisal. The
  implementing agencies submitted technical and financial progress reports, including updates on the
  results framework, every six months. For the water and sanitation activities, technical reports were
  submitted on a monthly basis. TPM reports were submitted in a timely manner, although there were
  challenges with the quality of data, which affected analyses and decision-making. In response, the Bank’s
  team provided guidance to TPM agencies through the implementing agencies to improve the quality of
  reporting. Interventions to this end included revisions to the TPM tools and methodology, reporting
  template, and information to be included in each section of the reports. The project also expanded the
  TPM arrangements to include more local agencies, thus diversifying TPM arrangements.

  During the course of implementation, the project’s end targets for many of the outcome and intermediate
  outcome indicators were both expanded (with the addition of an objective to contribute to the provision of
  water and sanitation services, under AF2) and significantly increased with the restructurings (three CERC
  activations and three AFs), commensurate with the substantial increase in project financing and scope.

  There was one moderate shortcoming in M&E implementation. A key outcome indicator established
  during project design was "people who have received essential health, nutrition and population services,"
  defined in the PAD (p. 13, footnote 4) as "...a composite indicator with the sum of: (a) children
  immunized; (b) women and children who have received basic nutrition services; and (c) deliveries
  attended by skilled health personnel." The ICR's reporting (p. 14, footnote 11) on this indicator presented
  a different definition of services included under this indicator, "immunization first dose (campaigns and
  routine at primary care level), antenatal care first visit, hospital outpatient consultations, cholera treatment
  in diarrhea treatment centers and at primary healthcare level, and neglected tropical diseases
  interventions (schistosomiasis, trachoma and onchocerciasis campaigns) in priority districts supported by
  the project." The ICR did not disaggregate data by type of service, or provide baselines and targets by
  service, which undermined the evaluability of this outcome indicator (see Section 4, Outcomes, under
  Objective 1 for details).



c. M&E Utilization
  Project M&E activities provided a transparent, evidence-based mechanism to guide the prioritization of
  project activities and the design of the follow-on operation (Emergency Human Capital Project). This
  mechanism helped identify the health, nutrition, water, and sanitation needs in each governorate, and
  activities were planned and implemented accordingly. Activities designed under project restructurings,
  AFs, and CERC activations were based on the progress reported by the implementing agencies. One
  example of this was the activation of CERC at AF2, which responded to reports on the growing numbers
  of people infected with cholera. Both the project’s progress reports and lessons of experience informed
  the subsequent operation.

  From 2018 onward, the Bank and the implementing agencies utilized readily available data to analyze
  health sector performance. The results of this study were published in Lancet Global Health (October
  2020), “Estimating access to health care in Yemen, a complex humanitarian emergency setting: a
  descriptive applied geospatial analysis.” The article included commentary noting that the methodological
  approach employed in the study should help humanitarian and development partners to “bridge the
  current health service gaps and prioritize the most affected districts" (ICR, p. 23).


                                                                                                       Page 20 of 26
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     RY: Emergency Health & Nutrition Project (P161809)



  The project provided affirmation of the value of data in influencing decision-making. The project
  compiled a significant amount of data from TPM reports, M&E officers, and other health information
  systems and surveys, including the eDEWS, supported under the project. Moreover, the implementing
  agencies engaged in constant advocacy for data sharing. These activities helped improve M&E capacity
  of the implementing agencies and service providers, which, in turn, is expected to sustain M&E functions
  in the health and nutrition sector. M&E findings were disseminated and used to inform the direction of
  the project and to provide lessons for the design and implementation of other projects in Yemen.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project triggered the World Bank’s policy on Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01), and the project
   was classified as Environmental Category B. The Bank’s social safeguards policy (OP 4.12) was not
   triggered because no land acquisitions, loss of livelihood income, or restriction of access to parks and
   cultural sites were envisaged under the project. The implementing agencies prepared the following
   instruments: (i) Safeguards Action Plan; (ii) Medical Waste Management Plan; and (iii) the implementing
   agencies’ “Beneficiaries’ Satisfaction Checklist,” administered through TPM to measure the population’s
   satisfaction with the project’s provision of the essential package of health and nutrition services. As new
   interventions were added under AF2, AF3, and CERC (2020), an Environmental and Social Management
   Framework (ESMF) was prepared and disclosed. A gender-based violence retroactive plan was also
   prepared. Subsequent site-specific environmental assessment instruments (Environmental and Social
   Management Plans/ESMPs) were prepared as needed.

   Several challenges were encountered in preparing and implementing mitigation actions in accordance with
   required instruments. Inadequate medical waste disposal at health facilities presented a serious concern
   under the project, as documented through consecutive TPM reports. Both WHO and UNICEF were planning
   to install incinerators at some health facilities to address this issue, but installations were significantly
   delayed. The lengthy process to clear the ESMPs by the Bank caused installations to be started only started
   in January 2022. By the project’s closing, incinerators were installed in seven PHC facilities and 22
   hospitals. The follow-on Emergency Human Capital Project is slated to continue needed investments for
   improved medical waste management at health facilities by installing fit-for-purpose and economically
   efficient incinerators in health facilities that require them. In short, efforts to ensure full compliance with the
   Bank's safeguard policies are ongoing under the above-cited follow-on project.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management (FM). The project’s FM arrangements were governed by the Financial
   Management Framework Agreement (FMFA) between the World Bank and the UN agencies, which



                                                                                                       Page 21 of 26
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  RY: Emergency Health & Nutrition Project (P161809)



provides for the use of the UN’s Financial Regulations. The ICR (p. 24) reports that the implementing
agencies complied with the Bank’s FM requirements as set out in the legal agreements.

The task team used the un-audited Interim Financial Reports (IFRs) submitted by the implementing
agencies and the TPM reports submitted by the TPM agencies to assess the project’s FM
performance. TPM reports did not include sufficient FM-related information to provide the needed
assurance, as this was not within the scope of the TPM agencies, which do not have access to the
implementing agencies’ financial data. On the other hand, the FMFA does not grant the Bank access to
information needed to conduct the financial assessment. To compensate for this, Bank FM staff joined
regular meetings and missions to provide implementation support and identify challenges and risks faced
by the project.

In compliance with the World Bank’s fiduciary requirements, and due to capacity constraints in Yemen, the
project leveraged technology to enhance real-time and remote monitoring. This included: geo-tagging of
WASH urban sub-projects; remote sensors for real time monitoring of fuel consumption of the main water
pumps to avoid unplanned or fraudulent use of funds; Rapid-Pro for informing health workers of the
payment cycle; and a Shipment Tracking System, which provided a real-time tracking solution through the
use of the global positioning system.

On August 5, 2019, several media reports referred to possible mismanagement of funds under the WHO
program in Yemen. At the Bank’s request, WHO shared a copy of the audit report. The Bank suspended
disbursements to WHO on August 23, 2019, due to non-compliance with reporting requirements specified
in the Financing Agreement. The Bank and WHO collaborated to enhance overall controls and flow of
funds, and a time bound action plan was agreed. The suspension was lifted on September 24, 2019,
based on an agreement that WHO would implement the action plan in line with the agreed timeline and
provide periodic updates to the Bank on progress in implementing the action plan. By December 14, 2020,
WHO had successfully implemented all required actions. Recognizing the high-risk environment, UNICEF
also strengthened its controls (enhancing its regular spot checks for implementing partners, applying more
direct disbursements and reimbursement modalities, and closely monitoring fund utilization by the
implementing partners).

Procurement. The project complied with the procurement requirements in the financing agreements. The
implementing agencies used their own procurement procedures as an Alternative Procurement
Arrangement allowed by the Bank’s New Procurement Framework Policy Section III.F. Contracts were not
subject to prior or post review. The World Bank’s Systematic Tracking of Exchanges in Procurement tool
was not required for this project. The implementing agencies used their own tracking systems, which
generated procurement-related reports on a regular basis. The task team prepared the Project
Procurement Strategy for Development for this project and provided the implementing agencies’
procurement teams with support and guidance on developing and monitoring the implementation of the
procurement plans. However, the task team was unable to cross-check the procurement updates provided
in the progress reports and TPM reports with the information included in the cleared procurement plans,
due to report quality issues. Some measures to improve the quality of procurement reporting (for better
understanding of procurement activities and processes) have been proposed (public reporting of
procurement on websites) under the follow-on project (EHCP). One of the significant procurement
challenges faced was the extremely competitive global market characterized by supply shortages, delays,
and increased prices, due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Local procurement was prioritized, where feasible,
to mitigate this.



                                                                                              Page 22 of 26
        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
        RY: Emergency Health & Nutrition Project (P161809)




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   Gender. Over and above the project’s success in filling gaps in women’s access to essential services and
   other opportunities, reported in Section 4 on Efficacy, the project integrated gender as a crosscutting
   development agenda, with a view to raising awareness on gender equality and gender-based
   violence. Awareness-raising was integrated as an information session in project activities, such as training
   workshops, to reach a wide and diverse audience. Attendees were introduced to key concepts such as the
   importance and benefits of advancing gender equality, and other environmental and social safeguards
   were conducted by WHO for 817 Yemeni participants (of which 27 were women).

   Institutional Strengthening. Demotivation of the health workforce in a context of limited-to-no salary
   payments and the brain drain to the private sector and abroad is an underlying issue that affects health
   system capacity to deliver services and had a negative impact on all project activities. To mitigate this
   challenge, the project invested in capacity building activities such as the Hospital Care and Management
   training program to help address major issues in hospital management. The training materials were
   developed by the WHO Regional Office for the Eastern Mediterranean, in collaboration with specialists and
   academics, as well as International Hospital Federation trainers. More than 1,450 individuals, including 150
   hospital managers and senior health workers at project-supported hospitals, participated in the training
   program.

   Support to Private Sector. The project prioritized local procurement of goods and services to contribute
   to local economies and helped to develop the market in Yemen. The implementing agencies used vendors
   in the local market for procurement of goods, such as furniture, information technology equipment, and
   reagents that have a short shelf life. The implementing agencies also conducted sensitization workshops
   for potential local vendors/suppliers to inform them of processes and requirements to become eligible
   vendors/suppliers under long-term agreements. It also invested in continuous on-the-job capacity building
   of local private sector suppliers, such as TPM agencies and engineers, who contributed to project
   activities.



d. Other
   --



11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                            ICR                       IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                            Highly Satisfactory   Highly Satisfactory

Bank Performance                   Highly Satisfactory   Highly Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                     Substantial           Substantial



                                                                                                    Page 23 of 26
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     RY: Emergency Health & Nutrition Project (P161809)



Quality of ICR                    ---                   High


12. Lessons

The following lessons are a subset of the six relevant and insightful lessons presented in the ICR,
slightly reworded by IEG to be more succinct:

      A simple PDO and flexible design enables operations to be adaptive and responsive to
         unexpected shocks. Project components encompassed a wide range of interventions,
         combining emergency responses to crises and systems strengthening activities. These
         enabled the delivery of critical services in Yemen’s conflict setting, while also building system
         resilience.
        Even in an emergency situation in which coverage of all geographical areas and
         population groups is critical, the use of available M&E mechanisms and data to
         routinely assess evolving beneficiary needs allows the targeting and tailoring of
         context-specific support, instead of the uniform provision of the same package of
         support to all facilities, regardless of their individual needs and absorptive
         capacities. The project’s use of information and data for transparent and evidence-based
         targeting and monitoring included security/safe access to beneficiary sites, as well as
         continuous monitoring of the needs of the catchment population and service delivery
         capacity, all of which may change over time in an FCV context.
        TPM is an effective monitoring mechanism for project management, but it requires
         well thought out, context-appropriate methodology and tools in order to produce
         viable data. TPM was a complement to the M&E system and also served to strengthen
         M&E capacity. The design of human development projects in conflict settings would do well
         to address and mitigate challenges encountered under this project, by ensuring: (i) clear
         definitions of issues to be flagged by TPM agencies; (ii) TPM tools that are commensurate
         with TPM agencies’ capacities; and (iii) a standard reporting template to ensure consistent
         reporting.
        Data-driven, intensified implementation support helps the World Bank monitor project
         performance in real time, identify potential risks, and act on appropriate mitigation
         measures at an early stage. Weekly meetings, quarterly implementation support missions,
         frequent monitoring, and real-time data together enabled effective remote implementation
         support, kept the Bank apprised of changing needs and risks, and enhanced the Bank’s
         proactivity in addressing them.
        Partnering with competent and capable implementing agencies and establishing a
         clear understanding of their roles and responsibilities and lines of communications
         are critical for achieving results in a challenging and fragile environment. UNICEF and
         WHO were chosen to serve as implementing agencies in light of their technical and
         operational expertise in Yemen. Criteria for their selection included assessment of these
         agencies’: geographical coverage, sector/thematic coverage, and technical expertise,
         including public health knowledge and capacities. A stakeholder mapping exercise revealed
         that UNICEF and WHO were the only partners that could cover all 22 governorates for both
         health and nutrition. They were also the only partners that could mobilize resources to
         provide population-wide interventions, such as immunizations.



                                                                                                      Page 24 of 26
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       RY: Emergency Health & Nutrition Project (P161809)



IEG offers an additional lesson:

        Even -- and perhaps especially -- if a project is operating in the most challenging of
         emergency situations with evolving needs, the documentation of full and accurate
         definitions of indicators (especially those that may aggregate several services and/or
         several groups of beneficiaries) is likely to enhance clarity and accuracy of reporting
         and strengthen the evidence base for the purposes of accountability, evaluation, and
         learning. The difference between the original (PAD's) definition of a key indicator, "people
         who have received essential health, nutrition and population services" (p. 13, footnote 4),
         and the ICR's definitions of that indicator (p. 9, footnote 7; and p. 14, footnote 11), and
         the failure to disaggregate beneficiaries by service and to provide baselines and targets for
         each of the services, rendered the information contained in this indicator less effective for
         assessing efficacy.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

Quality of Evidence was strong, overall, with a caveat. The project prioritized data collection and was stringent
in assessing data quality, and, where feasible, sought to triangulate data for more accurate and insightful
findings. Data on project indicators were collected at the local and service delivery levels, with the help of M&E
staff of the two implementing agencies located at sub-regional levels. These were supplemented by remote
means of data access and site visits, and by TPM data and reports. The setting and resetting of baselines and
increased targets, during the course of various project restructurings, and the reporting of end-target
achievements were systematic and based on all of this evidence. The reporting on one outcome indicator under
Objective 1 prompted some follow-up questions and research on the part of IEG. The ICR reported that over 32
million people received essential health, nutrition, and population services under the project, or 95 percent of
Yemen's population in 2022. IEG learned from a follow-up exchange with the Bank's team that there was some
double counting of beneficiaries from one year to the next. IEG also notes that the PAD's definition of this
indicator (in terms of services included) differed from the ICR's definition. Moreover, the ICR's reporting of
data did not disaggregate beneficiaries by the type of services included in the definition, nor did it provide
baselines and targets by service. This undermined the evaluability of data reported under this
indicator. Nevertheless, other data on additional essential health, nutrition, and population services targeted
to specific populations provide unequivocal evidence of the project's high achievement of Objective 1.

Quality of Analysis was strong. Thanks to a sound results framework, and the compilation of both quantitative
and qualitative data, the analysis was rich and insightful. The Bank was candid in assessing – and working with
– some of the shortcomings of the TPM data and reports. The analysis was systematic in drawing on data on
the outcome and intermediate outcome indicators, but at the same time embraced a more holistic and
comprehensive assessment of the achievement of project objectives, rather than just a tally of performance
against indicators. This analysis was also strengthened with the project’s use of data and experience to analyze



                                                                                                    Page 25 of 26
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      RY: Emergency Health & Nutrition Project (P161809)



health sector performance, more broadly speaking, including a published article on Lancet Global Health in
October 2020 (see Section 9 on M&E).

Quality of Lessons. The lessons offered in the ICR were based on the evidence and analysis presented in the
report. While they drew from specific experiences and findings for the project, they also provided relevant
experience and guidance to the design and implementation of other emergency human capital development
projects, especially those in FCV countries.

Results Orientation was strong, thanks to systematic reporting on the project’s results, and the tracing of
these results through the results chain to show the plausible links between inputs, outputs, and intermediate
outcomes that led to impressive results.

Internal Consistency/Adherence to Guidelines. The report was internally consistent and well written, with a
strong narrative of this unique and successful experience.

All of these factors taken together – strong evidence base, exceptional analysis, and rich, insightful, and
relevant lessons – result in a highly satisfactory rating.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      High




                                                                                                     Page 26 of 26
