     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BW-Integrated Transport SIL (FY09) (P102368)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0023427

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P102368                                    BW-Integrated Transport SIL (FY09)

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Botswana                                   Transport


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-77130                                 31-Jan-2020                                        167,055,263.54

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 28-May-2009                                30-Jun-2022

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                          186,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                           186,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Actual                                       167,055,263.54                                               0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Ranga Rajan                Vibecke Dixon                 Avjeet Singh                   IEGSD (Unit 4)
 Krishnamani




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) as stated in the Loan Agreement (Schedule 1, page 5) and in the
   Project Appraisal Document (PAD, page 7) is:

   " To enhance the efficiency of the transport system by building modern business management
   capacity, and improving the strategic planning aspects of inter-regional transport and critical
   transport infrastructure ".


                                                                                                  Page 1 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BW-Integrated Transport SIL (FY09) (P102368)




b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   There were three components (PAD, pages 8 - 9).

   1. Capacity building, institutional strengthening, and training. The estimated cost at appraisal was
   US$20.7 million. The actual cost was US$18.6 million. This component is planned to finance pre-investment
   technical advisory services. There were two sub-components.

   Sub-component one: (i) developing a regional integration vision; (ii) studies of three new railway links; (iii)
   developing the conceptual design and bidding documents for 800 kilometers (km) of roads using the Output
   and Performance Based Road Contracting (OPRC) method for Kanye road depot; (iv) feasibility study for
   Gaborone City traffic improvements; (v) developing environmental and social management frameworks
   (ESMF) for OPRC contracts; and (vi) pre-investment capacity building program and staff training in
   transport planning and project management.

   Sub-component two: (i) developing a national multi-modal transport plan, including a transport master plan
   for Greater Gaborone City; (ii) training government agencies in the Ministry of Transport and Public Works
   (MTPW) and technical assistance (TA) support to the Transport Hub ; (iii) technology and logistics upgrade
   for MWT; (iv) preparing designs and bidding documents for intersections in Greater Gaborone city; (v)
   independent technical and financial audits; and (vi) training to the local consulting and contracting
   industries.

   2. Road sector investment. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$236.8 million. The actual cost was
   US$156.4 million. There were two sub-components: (i) a road asset management program of 800 km of
   rural and semi-urban roads using the OPRC method for the network in Kanye road depot (unlike the
   traditional method, road rehabilitation and maintenance are combined in one contract in this method); (ii) TA
   for supervising execution. The number of km of roads to be rehabilitated using this method was reduced
   from 800 km to 335 km with a Level 2 restructuring (discussed below).

   3. Urban roads infrastructure investment. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$81.4 million. The
   actual cost was US$107.1 million. There were two sub-components: (i) implementing an urban roads
   improvement program in Greater Gaborone city to solve urban congestions along major
   roads/streets/intersections through advanced planning, design, and implementation strategies.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates

                                                                                                     Page 2 of 16
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  BW-Integrated Transport SIL (FY09) (P102368)



Project cost. The estimated cost at appraisal (inclusive of price and physical contingencies) was US$385.2
million. The actual cost was US$282.2 million. The actual cost was lower than the appraisal estimate due to
the reduced project scope during implementation.

Project financing. The project was financed by an International Bank and Reconstruction and
Development (IBRD) loan of US$186.0 million. The amount disbursed was US$167.0 million.

Borrower contribution. The Borrower contribution was planned at US$199.2 million at appraisal. Their
actual contribution was US$115.2 million.

Dates. The project was approved on May 28, 2009, became effective on May 17, 2010, and was scheduled
to close on January 31, 2020. The ICR does not explain the delay between loan approval and project
effectiveness. The project closed 29 months (two years and five months behind schedule) on June 30,
2022.

Other changes. There were four Level 2 restructurings.

The following changes were made through the first restructuring on June 29, 2017.

      The number of km of roads to be rehabilitated under the OPRC method was reduced rather
       substantially from 800 km to 335 km due to the cost increases associated with the lengthy delays in
       commencing the OPRC contract.
      The results framework was amended. One PDO indicator relating to user surveys among road users
       on project roads in Gaborone was dropped, and targets for some intermediate indicators were
       reduced.
      The Bank financing for works was increased from 50% to 60% to utilize the undisbursed loan
       proceeds before project closing.

The following changes were made through the second restructuring on June 24, 2019.

      The closing date was extended by 23 months from January 31, 2020, to December 31, 2021, to
       complete the ongoing activities that had been delayed in the initial years, and the
       implementation schedule was revised to reflect the new loan closing date.

The change was made through the third project restructuring on June 24, 2020.

      Funds were reallocated from Component Two to Component Three to accommodate a funding gap
       for Component Three activities.

The change was made through the fourth restructuring on December 11, 2020.

      The closing date was extended by six months from December 31, 2021, to June 30, 2022, for
       completing the activities that had been delayed in the wake of the COVID-19 pandemic.

Split rating. Although the PDO did not change, the project scope shrank substantially while the project
financing remained unchanged. Therefore, this review is based on a split rating of objective when US$51.3



                                                                                               Page 3 of 16
                         Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                         BW-Integrated Transport SIL (FY09) (P102368)



                       million (about a third of the loan) was disbursed before restructuring on June 29, 2017, and the balance of
                       US$115.76 million after restructuring.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country context. Landlocked Botswana is strategically located at the center of the southern Africa region,
with South Africa to the south, Namibia and Angola to the west, and Zambia and Zimbabwe to the east.
During the last four decades, Botswana had an impressive average growth of 9%. The growth, however,
had a narrow economic base and was driven by the mineral sector (with diamonds representing 60% of
exports and only 3.4% of total employment). A third of Botswana's population was classified as poor. The
Government's long-term vision was to sustain growth through diversifying the economy into non-mineral
sectors and position Botswana as the second regional transport hub of Southern Africa.

Sector context. The two land transport modes in Botswana are roads and railways, with roads accounting
for over 90% of freight and passenger traffic. Although Botswana has an extensive road network, the
network (particularly in urban and peri-urban areas in and around Gaborone) had deteriorated due to
increased traffic flows and maintenance backlog. Botswana's railways consisted of a single main line of 900
km and three short branch lines. Rail traffic declined due to increasing road competition and outdated
management practices. Improving the asset management practices of the land transport modes was
important to the government strategy.

Government strategy. The Government's tenth National Development Plan (NDP) for 2009 - 2016
identified economic diversification as a major policy goal. The plan articulated the need to shift priorities
from building new roads to maintaining existing ones and increasing private sector participation. The current
eleventh NDP for 2017 - 2023 highlights the transport sector as a key pillar to sustaining economic growth.

Bank strategy. The PDO was well-aligned with the Bank strategy for Botswana. At appraisal, one of the
four strategic elements of the Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for 2009 - 2013 articulated the need for
improving competitiveness through investments in efficient, secure, and cost-effective transport
infrastructure. The PDO remained relevant to the three areas of engagement of the current 2016 - 2020
Country Partnership Framework (CPF): (i) promoting private-sector led jobs and inclusive growth; (ii)
strengthening human and physical assets; and (iii) supporting effective resource management. The Bank's
current Systematic Country Diagnostics (SCD) and CPF are currently under preparation.

Bank experience. The Bank had not operated in the transport sector of Botswana for two decades, so
there was no recent precedence. This project included institutional and capacity-building activities alongside
physical road infrastructure investments to test new methods of asset management and optimize the use
of transport modes. This project aimed to introduce, as a pilot operation, the rehabilitation of 800 km of
roads using the OPRC method to the Kanye road depot catchment area (one of Botswana's most traveled
road networks). If the method proved successful, it would be replicated across the country. The relevance
of the PDO to the Government strategy and the Bank strategy for Botswana is rated as "substantial."


Rating Relevance TBL




                                                                                                                       Page 4 of 16
                   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                   BW-Integrated Transport SIL (FY09) (P102368)



               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                OBJECTIVE 1
                Objective
                To enhance the efficiency of the transport system by building modern business management capacity, and
                improving the strategic planning aspects of inter-regional transport and critical transport infrastructure .

                Rationale
                Theory of change. The project aimed to enhance transport sector asset management practices and improve
                the strategic planning aspects of inter-regional transport and critical transport infrastructure by combining
                capacity-building activities alongside physical infrastructure investments.

                The outputs of capacity building activities to the MTPW, such as completing a national transport master plan,
                transport policy whitepaper, and training sector entities on planning, designing, and managing modern sector
                management practices, alongside physical investments on 800 km of roads using the OPRC method and
                road safety features, were likely to help in enhancing transport sector efficiency (in terms of reduced travel
                time, reduced vehicle operating costs and reduction in accidents) and to the long-term development outcome
                of increasing the competitive edge of Botswana and diversifying its exports.

                 The outputs of capacity building activities aimed at implementing an urban roads improvement program,
                studies on railway links, Greater Gaborone multimodal transport study along with physical urban transport
                infrastructure investments (such as installing traffic signals in intersections and establishing a traffic control
                center) were aimed at improving the planning of inter-regional transport for reducing traffic congestion in
                Gaborone city.

                The causal links between activities, outputs, and outcomes were logical, and the intended outcomes were
                monitorable. The outcomes were predicated on two assumptions. One, a single project management
                framework will be effective in coordinating activities across the various implementing transport agencies, and
                two, the OPRC approach would be replicated across the country.

                Outputs (ICR, pages 15 - 18).

                      335 km of roads were rehabilitated under the OPRC method, not achieving the original target of 800
                       km. Road safety features, such as railings, improved pavement shoulders and signage, pavement
                       markings, and other safety interventions, were provided on roads. A further 90 km of roads under the
                       OPRC method was procured when this project closed.
                      Capacity-building activities were provided under the project. No targets were specified for this
                       indicator. The activities included: (i) in-house capacity to procure and supervise OPRC contracts, with
                       three officers retained for over seven years; (ii) local contractors were trained on construction and
                       maintenance works; and (iii) OPRC contracts were financed by local banks which provided banking
                       services for the OPRC contractor.

                                                                                                                       Page 5 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BW-Integrated Transport SIL (FY09) (P102368)




      The OPRC projects directly employed over 300 persons over five years. MTPW Staff were trained to
       plan, design, procure, and manage OPRC contracts. There were no targets for these indicators.
      100% of the OPRC contracts were awarded successfully within the contract as targeted, and there
       were no complaints on the procurement processes.
      These studies were completed as targeted: (i) Three railway studies. Based on these studies, the
       Ministry was undertaking pre-feasibility studies for two rail lines (Mosetse-Kazungula and
       Mmamabula-Lephalale lines) and feasibility study for the third line (Trans-kalahari) was planned under
       the two-year Transitional National Development Plan (T-NDP); (ii) The Greater Gaborone Multimodal
       Transport study; (iii) The National Multimodal Transport Master Plan; and (iv) The Gaborone
       Pedestrianization study.
      The activities associated with technical solutions to reduce traffic congestion in Gaborone (such as
       installing traffic signals and Centralized Traffic Control Center (CTC) were not yet completed when the
       project closed.

Outcomes.

The outputs were expected to lead to the following outcomes: (i) reduced vehicle operating cost (VOC) due to
improved pavement and design, (ii) a decrease in road accidents on project roads, and (iii) reduced travel
time in Gaborone.

      The average VOC on OPRC roads for three types of vehicles (cars, buses, and heavy trucks)
       decreased from US$0.51 at the baseline in 2009 to US$0.40 (target US$0.41 km). The disaggregated
       data for the three types of vehicles are: for cars, the VOCs decreased from US$0.26 at the baseline in
       2010 to US$0.23 (not achieving the target of US$0.18); for buses, from US$0.48 to US$0.40 as
       targeted and for heavy trucks from US$0.79 to US$0.69 as targeted.
      There was no project-specific data at appraisal to establish a baseline for traffic crashes and injuries.
       An ex-post assessment undertaken in 2022 along the project roads using data from the traffic police
       and the Motor Vehicle Accident Fund showed a 24% reduction in traffic accidents in 2020 using 2009
       data as a baseline. The ICR noted a spike in accidents during the peak construction period in 2017
       and 2018, possibly due to inadequate construction management provisions. However, progressive
       reductions (17% average) were registered in 2019 and 2020. According to the information provided
       subsequently by the team, information from the Road crash statistics of the Monitoring and Evaluation
       report showed a 55% reduction in road accidents by 2020 over a five year period, Data for the years
       2021 and 2022 were not available. While it is possible that COVID-19 restrictions may have
       contributed to some reduction in accidents, it is reasonable to assume that the activities contributed to
       road safety.
      The data on travel time reduction in Gaborone was not adequately collected to conclusively confirm a
       reduction. Data on vehicle delays modeled under the approved 2022 Gaborone Transport Master Plan
       supported under the project indicated that total delays (vehicle hours) in the network reduced from
       38,850 in 2016 to 21,231 in 2022. As vehicle delays are likely to be linked to travel time, it is plausible
       (though not conclusive) that project activities contributed to reducing travel time in Gaborone.
       According to the information provided subsequently by the team, information from the Ministry of
       Transport and Public Works (letter of August 8, 2023) indicated that: (i) travel time along the
       Molepolole corridor reduced from roughly 10 - 15 minutes to about 5 to 7 minutes depending on the
       time of day: (ii) travel time along the Machel Drive reduced from about 7 - 10 minutes to about 3 - 5
       minutes because of the synchronization of traffic lights; (iii) traffic along the Western Bypass at the 3


                                                                                                    Page 6 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BW-Integrated Transport SIL (FY09) (P102368)



       grade-separated Intersections is now uninterrupted and queues have almost been eliminated during
       off-peak hours; and (iv) Queue lengths on most project roads have reduced at improved junctions.

The project partially achieved the original target of rehabilitating 800 km of roads (42%). However, according
to the information provided subsequently by the team, there is conclusive evidence that the project activities
contributed to enhancing efficiency by reducing road accidents, reducing travel time savings in Gaborone,
and alleviating urban congestion in Gaborone city. Therefore, the PDO is rated as modest after restructuring.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
The objectives were not revised. However, the project scope shrank, while the project financing was
unchanged.

Revised Rationale
Outputs.

      335 km of roads were rehabilitated with road safety features under the OPRC method, thereby
       meeting the revised target.
      Capacity building activities were provided under the project as described above.
      The activities associated with technical solutions to reduce traffic congestion in Gaborone described
       above were nearly complete when the project closed.
      These studies were completed as targeted: (i) Three railway studies. Based on these studies, the
       Ministry was undertaking pre-feasibility studies for two rail lines (Mosetse-Kazungula and
       Mmamabula-Lephalale lines) and feasibility study for the third line (Trans-kalahari) was planned under
       the two-year Transitional National Development Plan (T-NDP); (ii) The Greater Gaborone Multimodal
       Transport study; (iii) The National Multimodal Transport Master Plan; and (iv) The Gaborone
       Pedestrianization study.

Outcomes.

      The average VOC on the 335 km of OPRC roads for three types of vehicles (cars, buses, and heavy
       trucks) decreased from US$0.51 at the baseline in 2009 to US$0.40 (original target US$0.41 km,
       target not revised). The disaggregated data for the three types of vehicles are as follows: For cars, the
       VOC decreased from US$0.26 at the baseline to US$0.23 (original target US$0.18, target not revised
       and not met); For buses from US$0.48 to US$0.40 (original target less than US$0.40, target not
       revised) and for heavy trucks from US$0.79 to US0.69 (original target less than US$0,69, target not
       revised).
      The end target for traffic accident reduction along the OPRC roads was 20 percent. An ex-post
       assessment undertaken in 2022 along the project roads using data from the traffic police and the
       Motor Vehicle Accident Fund showed a 24% reduction in traffic accidents in 2020 using 2009 data as
       a baseline. The ICR notes that there was a spike in accidents during the peak construction period in

                                                                                                  Page 7 of 16
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                BW-Integrated Transport SIL (FY09) (P102368)



                                   2017-2018 due possibly to the inadequate construction management provisions. However,
                                   progressive reductions (17% average) were registered in 2019 and 2020. According to the information
                                   provided subsequently by the team, information from the Road crash statistics of the Monitoring and
                                   Evaluation report showed a 55% reduction in road accidents by 2020 over a five year period. Data for
                                   the years 2021 and 2022 were not available.
                                  According to the information provided subsequently by the team, information from the Ministry of
                                   Transport and Public Works (letter of August 8, 2023) indicated that: (i) travel time along the
                                   Molepolole corridor was reduced from roughly 10 - 15 minutes to about 5 to 7 minutes depending on
                                   the time of day: (ii) travel time along the Machel Drive was reduced from about 7 - 10 minutes to about
                                   3 - 5 minutes because of the synchronization of traffic lights; (iii) traffic along the Western Bypass at
                                   the 3 grade-separated Intersections is now uninterrupted and queues have almost been eliminated
                                   during off-peak hours; and (iv) Queue lengths on most project roads have reduced at improved
                                   junctions.

                            The revised target of rehabilitating 335 km of roads (as opposed to the original objective of 800 km) was met
                            and there is conclusive evidence that the project activities contributed to enhancing efficiency as measured
                            through reducing road accidents, reducing travel time savings in Gaborone and alleviating urban congestion
                            in Gaborone city. Therefore, the PDO is rated as substantial after restructuring.



                            Revised Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Efficacy of the PDO is rated as modest before restructuring and substantial after restructuring.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   Economic analysis: An economic analysis was conducted for the activity of rehabilitating roads using the
   OPRC method. This activity accounted for 70% of the appraisal estimate and 55% of the actual cost. The
   methodology assessed benefits and costs using the Highway Development and Management Model (HDM -
   4). The ex-ante analysis assumed that the benefits came from vehicle operating cost savings, reduction in road
   accidents, and average travel time reduction in Gaborone. The ex-post analysis assumed that the benefits
   would come from savings in VOC and road safety (as there was no data on travel time reduction in
   Gaborone). The Net Present value (NPV) at a 12% discount rate at closure was US$268.7 million compared to


                                                                                                                               Page 8 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      BW-Integrated Transport SIL (FY09) (P102368)



the NPV of US$85.2 million at appraisal. The ex-post Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR) was 30.8%
compared to the ex-ante EIRR of 31%.

The OPRC method for rehabilitating 335 km of roads was cost-effective, with the average cost per km using this
method being Botswana pula (BWP) 3.45 million (US$300,000), as compared to BWP 5.63 million
(US$490,000) under the traditional method.

Operational and administrative issues during implementation. There were significant delays in the initial
years, partly due to the delays in creating a dedicated project management structure to manage the project, as
stipulated in the PAD and the legal agreements. The original contractor selected for implementing the two
OPRC packages did not have the required skills. This resulted in poor contract execution and eventual
termination of the contractor. The initial delays were exacerbated in the final years due to the physical
restrictions in the wake of the COVID-19 pandemic.

The project did not demonstrate good value for money. The cost of rehabilitating 800 km of roads under the
OPRC method was underestimated due to factors such as (i) underestimation of the scope of works as the
original design did not take into account 94km of access roads; (ii) changes over time due to adjustments in
works (17 km of road had be upgraded to bitumen standard): and (iii) general escalation of prices over time (the
estimates were developed in 2007 prices while the first bids were only received five years later in 2013). These
factors led to a 50% reduction in project scope (with 335 km of roads rehabilitated compared to the 800 km
envisioned at design).

Overall, while the project was economically viable, there were operational shortcomings such as (i) the planned
two and half years of rehabilitating roads took over seven years, delaying the economic and social benefits of
improved roads; (ii) the benefits from reduced travel times, congestion and road traffic crashes were deferred
due to the delayed completion of the urban infrastructure component: and (iii) reduction from 800 to 335 km led
to a reduced scope, hence fewer beneficiaries. Therefore, overall efficiency is rated as modest.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                    70.00
 Appraisal                                                31.00
                                                                                     Not Applicable
                                                                                    70.00
 ICR Estimate                                             30.80
                                                                                     Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome


                                                                                                    Page 9 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      BW-Integrated Transport SIL (FY09) (P102368)




The relevance of the PDO to the Government strategy and the Bank strategy is substantial. The efficacy of the
PDO is rated as modest both restructuring and substantial after restructuring. While the project was
economically viable, efficiency was modest due to shortcomings in the operational efficiency. Considering these
ratings and weighting by the share of disbursements before and after restructuring, the overall outcome is
moderately unsatisfactory, indicating significant shortcomings in the project's achievements of its objectives and
its efficiency.

                                     PDO and targets before the 2017 PDO and targets after the 2017
                                     restructuring.                     restructuring.
Relevance of Objective                                           Substantial
Efficacy                                        Modest                               Substantial
Efficiency                                                         Modest
Numeric value of outcome rating                    3                                    4
Disbursements                                   51.3                                 115.76
Share of disbursements                       0.31 (31%)                            0.69 (69%)
Weighted value                                   0.9                                  2.8
Final overall outcome rating                        3.7 (4) (Moderately Satisfactory)
a. Outcome Rating
    Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Government commitment. Under the project, 335 km of roads were rehabilitated using the OPRC
approach. When the project closed, an additional 91 km of roads were to be rehabilitated using this
approach. Of the local contractors trained under this project to build in-house capacity to execute OPRC
contracts, three officers were retained for over seven years to execute the new OPRC contracts. While the
risk to the sustainability of development outcomes due to government commitment to the OPRC approach is
rated moderate, the CR notes the need for continuous capacity development.

Technical risk. There is a modest risk that activities related to introducing modern management, such as
traffic signs and the centralized control center) which was now managed by international contractors, will not
be adequately managed by the Ministry of Local Government once the three-year operations and
maintenance contracts expire.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The Bank prepared this project based on the experiences from Bank-financed OPRC operations in Latin
  America, Africa, and Asia. Lessons incorporated included: (i) packaging road links to contract sizes that
  would be commensurate with the capacities of local contractors and (ii) financing capacity-building
  activities alongside physical investments in rehabilitation and maintenance of 800 km of roads using the

                                                                                                    Page 10 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BW-Integrated Transport SIL (FY09) (P102368)



  OPRC approach (PAD, para 35). The analytical underpinnings of the project were sound and based on a
  joint 2006 study by the Bank and the Botswana Institute for Development Policy Analysis - Prospects for
  Export Diversification. This study recommended various reforms and infrastructure investments for
  diversifying Botswana's economy.

  Given the many stakeholders involved, the Bank prepared this project in collaboration with a broad
  spectrum of transport agencies, including the MTPW, the Roads Directorate (RD), the Department of
  Road Transport and Safety (DTRP), the Gaborone City Council, the Department for Town and Regional
  Planning (DTRP) and the Ministry of Local Government (PAD, para 36). The Bank conducted an analysis
  to assess the project's economic viability at appraisal. The arrangements made at appraisal for
  safeguards and fiduciary compliance were appropriate.

  There were significant shortcomings at Quality-at-Entry. (i) The implementation arrangements specified at
  appraisal were not adequate, and the project was not ready for effectiveness. The PAD and the legal
  agreements stipulated setting a dedicated special project management unit (SMU) in the RD to
  coordinate activities relating to OPRC contracts. The delays in setting up SMU led to delays during the
  implementation of rehabilitating roads using the OPRC approach. The absence (until 2016) of a
  dedicated project officer for managing the urban components of the project was problematic, as the urban
  component was the responsibility of the Ministry of Local Government (MLG) while the SMU was in the
  RD. The RD, to which all implementation arrangements were assigned, did not have authority over
  several areas as these areas were under ministries or departments. Hence the RD was not able to
  demonstrate overall responsibility for all project components; (ii) The project activities, which included a
  pilot of as much as 800 km of roads using an approach untested in Botswana, were ambitious, given the
  weak implementation capacity; (iii) Given that the OPRC approach was tried for the first time, it would
  have helped to have capacity building activities precede infrastructure investment, as opposed to
  implementing capacity building activities alongside infrastructure investments; (iv) As indicated in section
  five, costs were underestimated, and the project ended financing a much reduced scope of activities
  (from 800 km to 335 km); (v) Risk assessment carried out during preparation focused mainly on fiduciary
  risks and rated overall risk "low." The mitigation measures applied for addressing the weak
  implementation capacity of RD were inadequate, and (vi) There were shortcomings in M&E design
  (discussed in section 10).



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The ICR (para 86) noted that the Bank team regularly conducted supervision missions. The teams included
 multidisciplinary teams such as procurement, financial management, and environmental and social
 management specialists. The notice from the Bank threatening suspension of disbursement on June 23,
 2017, as well as discussing possible project cancellation, might have helped pressure the government to
 set up a dedicated, full-time project management unit and office with an appropriate budget. The Bank
 team was also proactive in carrying out multiple restructurings to support the project in changing course.
 While these factors helped improve performance in the final years, they were not enough to overcome the
 challenges in the initial years.


                                                                                                   Page 11 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BW-Integrated Transport SIL (FY09) (P102368)



 There were shortcomings in supervision. One, given that this was the first transport project in Botswana
 after a long time, the ICR notes that a dedicated Task Team Leader (TTL) located in Botswana could have
 helped in providing closer and more responsive implementation support and likely mitigated some of the
 risks and delays experienced during implementation; Two, the financing agreement stipulated that a Mid-
 Term Review (MTR) should be held no later than June 30, 2014. However, the MTR was held two years
 later, in August 2016. Having the MTR as stipulated in the financing agreement could have helped capture
 problematic areas of implementation; and three, the M&E shortcomings were not rectified during
 implementation. Bank performance during supervision is rated as moderately unsatisfactory.

 Overall, the Bank's performance is moderately unsatisfactory, mainly because of the shortcomings of
 Quality at Entry and Supervision.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 There were shortcomings with the M&E design. The ICR notes that the PDO was ambitious given the
 client's low capacity (Para 54). The project included six PDO indicators. Some of the outcome indicators
 were not sufficiently outcome-oriented. The outcome indicator- the length of the km of roads using the
 OPRC approach was output-oriented and clearly not sufficient to track the outcome pertaining to the
 introduction of this approach. Likewise, there were no indicators to monitor the extent to which the project
 activities contributed to improving the strategic planning aspects of inter-regional transport and critical
 transport infrastructure in Gaborone city. The design envisioned tracking progress on this PDO through
 user surveys was dropped with the project restructuring.

 The Roads Directorate (RD) in the MTPW was in charge of collecting the data for monitoring project
 performance (ICR, para 67). The M&E design also allowed for the partial outsourcing of the data collection
 process.



b. M&E Implementation
  The PAD stipulated that several indicator baselines would be collected early in the implementation phase,
  as two of the six initial indicators did not have a baseline. Important indicators, such as decreased annual
  accidents, were not collected, even though 50% of the OPRC road packages were completed. The ICR
  (para 71) noted that even after project restructuring, M&E problems persisted with data collection
  remaining suboptimal with staff not in place and most indicators and data for key outcome indicators,
  such as average travel time reduction, not collected through project closing. The ICR did try to garner the



                                                                                                   Page 12 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BW-Integrated Transport SIL (FY09) (P102368)



  results data using other sources; however, for some indicators, such as reduction in travel time, it notes
  that one cannot conclusively confirm the results data and the project's contribution.



c. M&E Utilization
  The ICR (para 72) acknowledges that M&E utilization was hindered by inadequate data collection and
  reporting during the project's lifetime. As of the 2017 mid-term review mission, data were unavailable to
  update the results indicators. The ICR notes that there is no evidence that throughout the project
  lifetime, indicators included in the Results Framework were used to assess project performance and
  progress results to inform project management and decision-making.

  Overall, M&E is rated as Negligible due to the shortcomings in M&E design, implementation, and
  utilization.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Negligible

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as a Category B (partial assessment) under the World Bank safeguard policies.
   Two safeguard policies were triggered at appraisal (PAD, page 28): Environmental Assessment (OP/BP
   4.01) and Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12). The ICR (para 79) notes that the safeguards on Physical
   Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) should have been triggered, as multiple sites of archeological importance
   were identified along the project-intervened areas.

   Environmental assessment. The potential environmental project impacts were expected to be minor and
   localized. An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) was prepared and publicly
   disclosed at appraisal to address the environmental impacts (PAD, para 63).

   Site-specific Environment and Social Assessment (ESIA) and related Environmental and Social
   Management Plans (ESMP) were prepared during implementation to address environmental impacts. The
   ICR (para 45) noted that the project had a functioning grievance redress mechanism (GRM) to respond to
   gender-related complaints.

   As part of the social mitigation measures, the ESMF recommended establishing a gender office by the
   contractor to respond to workplace issues. This was not implemented. The project did not comply with the
   environmental safeguards as some activities (rehabilitation of borrow pits in component two activity) and
   drainage works for component three activity were pending when the project closed. The ICR also notes
   non-compliance (with the environmental and social policies) as a larger contractor did not follow this up with
   their subcontractors. The ICR does not provide information on whether there were any issues associated
   with the safeguards on physical cultural resources.




                                                                                                   Page 13 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BW-Integrated Transport SIL (FY09) (P102368)



   Involuntary resettlement. The implementation of civil works under the physical investment components
   was expected to remain within existing roads. However, the possible land acquisition and involuntary
   resettlement impacts could only be ascertained for the urban traffic component when the feasibility studies
   were complete. Therefore, the RD prepared and publicly disclosed a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF)
   to address land acquisition and involuntary resettlement impacts (PAD, para 61).

   According to the ICR (para 80), the project experienced persistent delays in implementation due to the sub-
   optimal management of social safeguard issues due to factors such as a longstanding backlog of issuing
   land titles to Project-Affected Persons (PAPs) and preparing safeguard risk assessment reports and
   reporting on the status of COVID - 19 management and grievance redressal. 225 properties were affected;
   12 did not need amended land titles, either because the land was not affected in the end (avoided or
   bypassed) or because the land was unregistered and did not require amendment of title. Of the remaining
   213 properties, 204 were amended. Of these, 181 were collected, and the remaining properties were still
   pending when the project closed.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial management. The Bank conducted a financial management assessment of MTPW at
   appraisal. The assessment concluded that MTPW's financial arrangements were satisfactory. The financial
   risk was rated as moderate (PAD, para 55). The ICR (para 82) noted that financial management during
   implementation was "Satisfactory." The project complied with financial covenants during implementation.
   The MTPW submitted unqualified audit reports in a timely fashion.

   Procurement management. A procurement assessment conducted by the Bank at appraisal concluded
   that procurement risk was moderate (PAD, para 58). The risk mitigation actions included recruiting an
   experienced procurement specialist and TA to build the RD's procurement capacity.

   There were procurement issues during implementation, such as suboptimal bid evaluations for the Traffic
   Signal Modernization contract, awarding the OPRC contract to consultants who were not able to guide the
   RD properly on appropriate engineering options, awarding a contract without an agreed work program and
   lack of a dedicated procurement specialist. The procurement improved during the later years with the hiring
   of a dedicated procurement specialist (ICR, para 81). The ICR does not report any mis-procurement.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   The ICR does not report of any unintended impacts.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings


                                                                                                 Page 14 of 16
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       BW-Integrated Transport SIL (FY09) (P102368)



                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                   IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
                                 Moderately
Outcome                                               Moderately Satisfactory
                                 Satisfactory
                                 Moderately           Moderately
Bank Performance
                                 Unsatisfactory       Unsatisfactory
Quality of M&E                   Negligible           Negligible

Quality of ICR                   ---                  Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR draws the following main lessons from the experience of implementing this project, with
some language adaptation.

1. Frontloading capacity-building activities may help to minimize unforeseen complexities
during implementation. This is particularly so when a new concept is introduced for the first time in
a country. This project introduced the OPRC concept in Botswana. The design entailed capacity-
building activities alongside physical infrastructure investments for the new concepts. This
contributed to delays during implementation as the Road Directorate could not undertake the new
concept.

2. Using the legal sanctioning mechanism available to the Bank (as stipulated in the
Financing Agreement) can help resolve noncompliance issues. In this project, the financing
agreement stipulated the establishment of a dedicated Special Management Unit (SMU). However,
the SMU was only established several years after effectiveness. This contributed to the delays and
cost overruns during implementation.

3. Intensive support from the Bank, including the presence of an experienced task team
leader and key team members, helps enhance project implementation. This is especially so
when the government is unfamiliar with a new concept, such as the OPRC approach in this project.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is well-written and clear. The theory of change provided in the ICR clearly articulates the links between
project activities, outputs, and the intended outcomes. The ICR candidly acknowledges the shortcomings of
Quality at Entry and the Monitoring and Evaluation framework. The analysis provided in the ICR is adequate to
assess project performance. The ICR draws suitable lessons from the experience of implementing this project.



                                                                                                    Page 15 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BW-Integrated Transport SIL (FY09) (P102368)



Annex 5 in the ICR (Borrower, Co-financier, and other partner/stakeholder comments) provides useful
information for assessing project performance.

There were some shortcomings. One shortcoming of the ICR is its excessive length. The main body of the text,
at 27 pages, is almost twice the recommended length of 15 pages. The ICR could have provided more
information on the reasons for the one-year delay between Bank approval and project effectiveness.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                               Page 16 of 16
