     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MP Higher Education Quality Improvement (P150394)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0023319

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P150394                                    MP Higher Education Quality Improvement

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 India                                      Education


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-57030                                  31-Aug-2021                                         262,051,280.17

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 30-Jun-2015                                30-Jun-2022

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           300,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                            262,051,280.17                                               0.00

 Actual                                        262,051,280.17                                               0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Salim J. Habayeb            Judyth L. Twigg              Eduardo Fernandez               IEGHC (Unit 2)
                                                          Maldonado




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The objective of the project was to improve student outcomes, especially for disadvantaged groups in
   selected higher education institutions, and to increase the effectiveness of the higher education system in
   Madhya Pradesh (Financing Agreement and Project Appraisal Document).

   During implementation, one associated outcome target was revised upward, and another one was revised
   downward. Both original and revised targets were exceeded, making a split evaluation irrelevant.


                                                                                                   Page 1 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MP Higher Education Quality Improvement (P150394)




b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   I. Grants Support to Higher Education Institutions (HEIs) (Appraisal Total: US$387 million, including
   IDA: US$270 million; Actual Total: US$370.8 million, including US$234.8 million from IDA).
   This component would use grants for eligible government colleges and universities through two windows:
   (1) Strategic Plan Grants to support HEIs, and (2): Establishment of Centers of Excellence. The Strategic
   Plan Grants (under window 1) would enable colleges and universities to pursue the goals set out in their
   respective Strategic Plans to be prepared under the project. It was expected that through these plans,
   institutions would improve institutional performance and quality in higher education. Strategic Plans would
   be developed through consultations with key stakeholders, including students and faculty, before being
   finalized. Centers of Excellence support (window 2) would provide financing to a limited number of
   college and university departments for establishing best practice "teaching-learning and research" in focus
   areas. A limit of 25 percent of total costs was to be used for civil works. Grants would also reinforce system
   reforms under the project, such as for increased autonomy and accountability, and for accreditation by the
   National Assessment and Accreditation Council (NAAC).

   II. State Level Initiatives (Appraisal Total: US$21.5 million, including IDA: US$15 million; Actual
   Total: US$35.4 million, including US$24.8 million from IDA). This component would support
   interventions to be undertaken by the state to (a) improve the system of financial support through
   scholarships to disadvantaged and meritorious students; (b) upgrade qualifications and skills of new and
   existing faculty members; (c) establish a state institute of higher education training and research; and (d)
   extend technical assistance for strategic planning and for seeking NAAC accreditation for all government
   HEIs.

   III. Improving System Management (Appraisal Total: US$21.5 million, including IDA: US$15 million;
   Actual Total: US$4.6 million, including US$3.2 million from IDA). The main objective of this component
   was to provide technical assistance to the Department of Higher Education (DHE), the State Higher
   Education Council (SHEC), the Project Directorate, and the HEIs to strengthen implementation capacity,
   governance, and management. This component would include: (a) helping a larger number of institutions
   attain autonomous status; (b) helping government HEIs to prepare annual reports on performance; (c)
   strengthening governance structures of government colleges with clear mandates related to governance
   and accountability; (d) fiduciary strengthening of government colleges; and (e) capacity building activities to
   help SHEC, the Project Directorate, and HEIs to carry out project implementation effectively.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
                                                                                                     Page 2 of 18
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  MP Higher Education Quality Improvement (P150394)



Context: In 2013, the Ministry of Human Resource Development at the central level introduced the
Rashtriya Uchchatar Shiksha Abhiyan Scheme (RUSA) to promote the development of higher education in
the country. At the same time, and to speed up quality improvement and to calibrate investments with state-
level needs, it was felt that there was a need for a more focused project at the state level to complement the
central government’s RUSA initiative (Summary of Borrower’s Completion Report, ICR, p. 67). The PAD
also noted that the World Bank was engaged in providing technical assistance services in higher education
to other low-income states to facilitate cross-state learning. This project constituted an incremental
operation to DHE, whose overall budget was estimated at US$1.7 billion during the same period.

Cost and financing: The total project cost was estimated at US$430 million equivalent. The project would
finance the implementation of additional DHE activities as envisaged in the State’s Vision 2018 on higher
education. The World Bank would finance US$300 million through an IDA Credit, and the Government of
Madhya Pradesh (MP) would finance US$130 million.

World Bank financing was provided under an Investment Project Financing modality with a hybrid Results-
Based Financing (RBF) arrangement. Components I and II would be results-based with project funds being
disbursed against an Eligible Expenditure Program (EEP) up to a capped amount, against the achievement
of agreed Disbursement-Linked Indicators (DLIs) under selected line items in the annual budget of DHE.
Component 3 would use a traditional investment approach with direct reimbursement of project
expenditures (PAD, p. 6).

Dates and restructurings: The project was approved on June 30, 2015 and became effective on March
28, 2016. A Mid-Term Review was carried out on July 17, 2019. The project underwent several
restructurings listed below. The PDO statement and project components were not revised.

      November 9, 2015: Changes to DLI definitions.
      June 28, 2018: Changes in disbursement arrangements and results framework, largely in response
         to early implementation delays.
      October 4, 2020: This restructuring and the subsequent one on December 9, 2020, were carried out
         to recalibrate the project in light of COVID-19 pandemic-related closures and disruptions, The
         restructuring cancelled US$30.2 million and introduced changes in the results framework,
         component costs, and reallocations between disbursement categories.
        December 9, 2020: Changes in component costs, reallocation between disbursement categories,
         and results framework.
        August 18, 2021: Changes in the closing date, results framework, and disbursement arrangements.
        October 4, 2021: Changes in the closing date, results framework, and disbursement arrangements.
        May 19, 2022: Cancellation of US$7 million, changes in component costs, and reallocations
         between disbursement categories.

The two cancellations of project funds listed above aggregated at US$37.2 million. Closing date extensions
aggregated at a total of 10 months. The project closed on June 30, 2022. The actual cost was US$262.1
million for IDA and US$112.2 million for MP, both aggregating at a total actual cost of US$374.3 million.




                                                                                                 Page 3 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MP Higher Education Quality Improvement (P150394)



3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The project was responsive to higher education challenges faced by the state of MP. Main issues were
identified and articulated in a 2012 World Bank report titled “Madhya Pradesh Higher Education Reforms:
Policy Options” (PAD, p. 2). Three core challenges in access, equity, and low quality constituted
fundamental concerns. Only about half of an incoming cohort of students graduated at the end of three
years. Transition rates of students from one year to the next, especially those from disadvantaged
backgrounds, were low. The drop-out rate was highest between the first and the second years of study. The
tendency to open colleges without a careful analysis of costs and benefits meant that institutions were small
in size, with average enrollment at 609 students (all-India average was 707 students). These issues were
relevant to quality improvement since most institutions did not have a critical mass of students (and
therefore budget) or qualified faculty to offer quality education and to carry out research.

Systemic issues were intertwined. First, limited autonomy constrained responsiveness, motivation, and
innovation in view of the requirement to seek permission from a higher entity at every stage of the work
cycle. Second, the higher education system suffered from inadequate financial and human resources and
inefficiencies. Government colleges in MP had high faculty vacancy rates, and much of the administrative
work was assigned to teaching staff who were already over-burdened. Third, poor governance, leadership,
and accountability created further specific issues. The affiliation system reduced the relationship between
universities and affiliating colleges to a minimalistic administrative one. A single university with a hundred
colleges or more affiliated to it imposed the same curriculum and examinations on all. Hence, individual
colleges could not adapt curricula to the needs and interests of their students. There was little coordination
between different higher education state entities and DHE. Quality assurance procedures were either weak
or non-existent, and fewer than five percent of colleges in MP were accredited by NAAC. The higher
education system was also characterized by politicization, with appointments of vice-chancellors, faculty,
and other staff open to political influences (PAD, p. 3).

At entry, the objectives were consistent with the India Country Partnership Strategy 2013-17, specifically for
engagement areas related to integration, inclusion, and better qualified workers. They were consistent with
India’s 12th Five Year Plan that supported faster, sustainable, and inclusive growth that highlighted the
need to increase the supply of highly skilled workers. The objectives were also consistent with "Vision
2018" and the State Higher Education Plan 2014, focusing on quality aspects of education services,
expanding equity and access, and strengthening sectoral and institutional governance and financing (PAD,
p. 4).

At project closing, the objectives continued to be relevant to the Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for
the period FY18-FY22. The CPF emphasized the message that inclusion through more and better jobs and
investment in human capital was critical to sustaining India’s positive development trajectory. The
objectives were fully aligned with the CPF’s Focus Area 3 (Investing in Human Capital) that called for added
attention to tertiary education levels and to aligning education systems to prepare youth for future jobs. The
intervention logic for CPF Objective 3.2 (to improve the quality of education in schools and colleges) was
that better quality education is an important investment in a more prosperous India over the long term, and
that a better educated population is integral to creating the human capital needed to reduce poverty and
sustain growth, particularly as India was moving toward a more diverse economy typical of a middle-income
country. The CPF envisioned efforts to improve the quality of education, including activities that focused on
strengthening teacher performance through professional development and accountability systems, building

                                                                                                    Page 4 of 18
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      MP Higher Education Quality Improvement (P150394)



               institutions and systems to identify ways to improve learning outcomes, and improving governance and
               quality assurance within schools and colleges, all while promoting greater equity by focusing on
               disadvantaged groups. These endeavors were supported by the project. In addition, the project’s
               concentration on a disadvantaged focus state like MP responded to the CPF’s emphasis on supporting low-
               income states.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Improve student outcomes, especially for disadvantaged groups in selected higher education institutions

                             Rationale
                             The theory of change held that:

                                        providing Strategic Plan Grants to HEIs for identified priorities, including infrastructure, equipment,
                                         materials, human resources and skills development, would contribute to improved transition rates of
                                         undergraduate students;
                                        establishing Centers of Excellence would promote best-practice teaching, learning, and research; and
                                        upgrading the qualifications and skills of new and existing faculty would lead to a better trained faculty
                                         ...

                             ... would plausibly contribute to the improvement of on-time graduation rates of undergraduates in project
                             supported HEIs and to increased numbers of undergraduate and postgraduate students. (Explanatory note:
                             On-time graduation rate reflects the percentage of those who complete their undergraduate studies in three
                             years, which is the duration of a typical undergraduate program in the Arts, Sciences, and Commerce
                             streams, ICR, p. 37).

                             Concurrently, the provision of scholarships based on need to disadvantaged groups (Scheduled Castes [SC],
                             Scheduled Tribes [ST], and females) would promote financial support to disadvantaged and meritorious
                             students; and the introduction of remedial learning programs for academically weak students and those
                             belonging to disadvantaged social groups to facilitate their retention and on-time graduation would plausibly
                             contribute to increased numbers of ST, SC, females and disadvantaged students in HEIs while also
                             improving on-time graduation rates of these groups in supported HEIs.

                             Intended project outcomes were related to student learning outcomes and were to be measured by on-time
                             graduation and increased numbers of beneficiaries.



                                                                                                                                      Page 5 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   MP Higher Education Quality Improvement (P150394)




Outputs and intermediate results

The undergraduate enrollment in HEIs for the first year increased from a baseline of 293,000 students in 2015
to 430,909 students in 2022, exceeding the target of 353,000 undergraduate enrollments in HEIs for the first
year.

The post-graduate enrollment in the first year in HEIs increased from a baseline of 64,250 students in 2015 to
129,060 students in 2022, exceeding the target of 77,250 students.

Financial support to disadvantaged students was carried out through the provision of 6,000 scholarships
issued under DHE schemes. The ICR (p. 14) also noted that, according to the Borrower, more than 78
percent of students receiving financial assistance were from low-income families with an annual per capita
income of less than US$850 equivalent (the average annual per capita income in MP in 2022 was around
US$1,300 equivalent).

The transition rate of undergraduate students from first to second year in supported HEIs increased from a
baseline of 27 percent in 2015 to 97.4 percent in 2022, exceeding both the original target of 60 percent and
the revised target of 75 percent. Disaggregated data showed favorable patterns of transition rates for all
groups: Males: 96 percent; Females: 97.9 percent; SC: 96 percent; and ST: 96 percent.

Capacity utilization in HEIs slightly increased from a baseline of 73 percent in 2015 to 75 percent in 2022,
short of the target of 90 percent. Capacity utilization was defined as the percentage of sanctioned seats
offered to first year students filled by newly admitted students (PAD, p. 25). The Project Team clarified on
April 18, 2023 that the lockdowns caused by the COVID-19 pandemic during the last two years of
implementation were the main reason for these capacity utilization results.

The project supported infrastructure upgradations in 247 HEIs (including construction of new buildings,
establishing or strengthening libraries and laboratories, and upgrading information technology infrastructure).

Within its scope and mandate, the project took several steps to contribute to improving female student
learning outcomes in higher education. These included reformed scholarship support for female students,
remedial classes, improvement in HEIs through strategic grant plans (e.g., purchase and installation of
sanitary napkin vending machines), and expanding construction in rural and remote areas to encourage
female participation from disadvantaged groups by reducing the distance to teaching institutions.

Although the project intended to promote post-graduate education and high-value academic research by
supporting Centers of Excellence in University Departments, the ICR reported that project support was slow
in this area, and only 15 University Departments received funds toward their Centers of Excellence Plans
against a target of 50 Centers of Excellence.

Starting with a baseline of 57 percent, the project was able to fulfil only 67 percent of regular faculty in
sanctioned positions against a target of 85 percent, though it met the revised target of 67 percent.
Nevertheless, the ICR (p. 9) noted that the approval of an additional 2,700 permanent faculty positions was
an important achievement for the state. The shortfall in permanent faculty was made up by filling such
positions with contract faculty and guest faculty.


                                                                                                  Page 6 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   MP Higher Education Quality Improvement (P150394)



The project supported HEI faculty training in relevant areas. A total of 7,406 faculty were trained by June
2022, short of the original target of 44,000 faculty, but exceeding the revised target of 1,500 faculty. The
original faculty training target was not appropriately set and was based on the availability of faculty in HEIs
and the ability of HEIs to release them. The ICR noted that it was assumed that the state would be able to
complete recruitment quickly and to carry out at least one round of training for all the faculty annually. This
was not feasible in view of the time required to recruit faculty, and colleges with only one or two faculty who
were in position were unable to release them for training.



Outcomes

On-time graduation rates of undergraduate students at supported institutions that received strategic grants
increased from a baseline of 31 percent in 2015 to 88 percent in 2022, exceeding the target of 50 percent.
For SC, the rate increased from a baseline of 18 to 84 percent during the same period, exceeding the target
of 40 percent; for ST, the rate increased from a baseline of 19 to 86 percent, exceeding the target of 35
percent.

The number of direct project beneficiaries was 4,461,302 beneficiaries in 2022 (of whom 48.2 percent were
females) as compared with a baseline of 1,545,301 beneficiaries in 2015 (of whom 41 percent were females),
exceeding the target of 3.6 million beneficiaries (including a target of 48 percent for females).

The above results were largely driven by project interventions, including grants to HEIs, upgrading of the
teaching environment and skills, and financial support to disadvantaged groups. Beyond the intended
outcomes of the project, the ICR (p. 14) also reported that there was an improvement in labor market
outcomes for graduates in the state, and that this was reflected in higher employment rates and higher
average wages for all groups of graduates, males, females, SCs, and STs.




Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Increase the effectiveness of the higher education system in Madhya Pradesh

Rationale
The theory of change held that providing technical assistance:

      to support HEIs' NAAC accreditation and strategic planning; and
      to help institutions strengthen governance structures, fiduciary aspects, and capacity building,
       including for implementation ...



                                                                                                    Page 7 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   MP Higher Education Quality Improvement (P150394)



... would plausibly contribute to an increased number of accredited HEIs, improved documentation and
publication of annual reports, improved implementation capacity of core agencies (DHE, SHEC, the Project
Directorate, and HEIs), improved governance and management, improved availability of information on
student outcomes at the HEI level, and increased satisfaction of students and faculty in supported HEIs, all
plausibly reflecting important contributions to increased effectiveness of the higher education system in MP.

Intended outcomes were to be measured by progress in accreditation, documentation and reporting, and
satisfaction rates. This ICR Review notes that system effectiveness extends beyond qualitative aspects, as it
also encompasses the system’s ability to perform the functions necessary to achieve a set of mission
requirements and objectives.



Outputs and intermediate results

The project undertook governance benchmarking for 158 HEIs and disseminated the findings, exceeding the
target of 150 HEIs. According to the ICR (p. 11), benchmarking was carried out in key areas of institutional
governance, including: (i) overall context, mission, and goals; (ii) management orientation; (iii) autonomy; (iv)
accountability; and (v) participation. Using the Higher Education Governance Screening Card, the
benchmarking allowed the identification of strengths, weaknesses, and trends by type of institution. This also
contributed to generating interest and peer pressure to identify and improve governance aspects.

The number of government institutions providing complete "All India Survey on Higher Education" (AISHE)
data increased from a baseline of 270 institutions in 2015 to 322 institutions in 2022, short of the target of 400
institutions. This annual indicator showed a steady improvement, reaching 387 institutions in 2019-2020. The
ICR noted that the timely uploading of related data by HEIs was disrupted in 2020-2021 due to HEI closures
caused by the COVID-19 pandemic.

The project promoted the upgrading of financial management systems in 200 Government HEIs. The
upgrading allowed the use of a uniform Chart of Accounts and financial rules, and was considered a part of
overall governance improvements.

The project institutionalized Academic & Administrative Audits as a process for HEIs to identify their strengths
and weaknesses and to help them in NAAC accreditation. The evaluations encompassed six areas: (i)
curriculum aspects, teaching, learning, and evaluation; (ii) research activities and community services; (iii)
student support and progression; (iv) governance; (v) leadership and management; and (vi) best practices
and institutional values.

Through improvements in information technology that were brought by the project, all HEIs in MP were able,
by project closing, to connect with 1,633 colleges through the National Knowledge Network, and with the
National Information and Library Network (ICR, p. 9).

DHE contracted through competitive bidding a private sector management firm to act as Project Management
Consultant, and also contracted a senior financial management capacity building consultant to further expand
the capacities of the Project Directorate (ICR, p. 17).




                                                                                                    Page 8 of 18
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               MP Higher Education Quality Improvement (P150394)



                            The hiring of additional accountant positions on a full-time basis was dropped, as the process of obtaining
                            approval by the Civil Service Commission required an inordinate amount of time. Instead, HEIs hired
                            accounting staff on a contract basis.



                            Outcomes

                            Starting from a baseline of 37 accredited HEIs in 2015, a total of 290 Government HEIs were NAAC-
                            accredited by 2022, exceeding the original target of 200 HEIs and essentially meeting the upward revised
                            target of 300 HEIs.

                            The number of Government HEIs publishing an annual report in the prescribed format reached 380 HEIs in
                            2022, exceeding the target of 300 HEIs. The ICR (p. 11) reported that the number increased to 450 HEIs by
                            the time of the ICR.

                            Based on a final survey in 2021-22, 92.4 percent of students and 89.2 percent of faculty reported being
                            satisfied with HEIs supported by the project, exceeding both the original and revised targets of 80 percent and
                            60 percent respectively.

                            Taking into consideration notable achievements, but with moderate shortcomings that were cross-cutting to
                            both objectives, Objective 2 is assessed as almost fully achieved.




                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Both project objectives, to improve student outcomes, especially for disadvantaged groups in selected higher
                            education institutions, and to increase the effectiveness of the higher education system in Madhya Pradesh,
                            were almost fully achieved, indicative of a substantial rating for overall efficacy.




                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



                                                                                                                             Page 9 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      MP Higher Education Quality Improvement (P150394)



 5. Efficiency
Both the PAD and ICR carried out a cost-benefit analysis using the same methodology. The economic analysis
quantified expected gains from the additional number of graduates employed and higher average annual wages.
The analysis used a discount rate of 12 percent. At appraisal, using project costs of US$430 million, the analysis
estimated an internal rate of return at 23 percent (PAD, p. 82). The ex-post analysis used the actual project
costs of US$375 million, and estimated an internal rate of return between 37 percent and 41 percent under two
different scenarios of discounted values of future incomes (10 percent and 7 percent respectively, ICR, p. 12).
The ICR noted that this was a lower-bound estimate, as only undergraduate students and their expected labor
market outcomes were considered in the cost-benefit analysis.

There were moderate shortcomings in implementation aspects that reduced project efficiency. The ICR (p. 16)
reported that implementation was off to a slow start, following an eight-month delay in project signing, and that
there were substantial delays in initiating project activities, due mostly to the need to complete preparatory
activities. The criteria for selection of HEIs, the draft Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) to be signed
between HEIs and DHE, and the terms of reference for an agency to coordinate HEIs' Institutional Development
Plans were still under preparation. Also, there were frequent staff changes and slow decision-making, including
for contracting decisions. Implementation aspects progressively improved, but were subsequently affected by
the COVID-19 pandemic during the final stage of implementation.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?              Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      100.00
 Appraisal                                                 23.00
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      100.00
 ICR Estimate                                              37.00
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of objectives is rated high in view of full alignment with CPF FY18-FY22 at project closing and with
country and state plans. Efficacy is rated substantial as objectives were almost fully achieved. Efficiency is rated
substantial in view of sizable expected returns estimated by the cost-benefit analysis, but with aspects of
implementation that moderately reduced efficiency. The aggregation of these findings is consistent with a
satisfactory outcome rating, reflecting only minor shortcomings in the project's preparation, implementation, and
achievement.



                                                                                                     Page 10 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      MP Higher Education Quality Improvement (P150394)



a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The risk that development outcomes would not be maintained appears to be low in view of several federal
and state considerations. Important project initiatives such as NAAC accreditation, Academic and
Administrative Audits, and remedial classes are likely to be carried forward, as they are needed to implement
the National Education Policy (2020). All colleges in India are required to produce AISHE data as required by
the Federal Ministry of Education. Institutional Development Plans by HEIs are likely to be carried forward by
the state, as the latter has administrative approval to do so for 18 months beyond the project period (ICR, p.
23). The project promoted the hiring of regular faculty who are likely to remain in position. Annual reporting
by HEIs would continue to foster accountability.

The project generated important institutional strengthening. By allowing HEIs to define their own priorities
and development plans, the project introduced elements of autonomy within a highly centralized higher
education regulatory system (ICR, p. 13). Similarly, the efforts in governance benchmarking allowed decision
makers in HEIs to objectively reflect on their institution-level policies and practices and to identify areas of
improvement under their control within the regulatory framework of the state. The project also supported
improvements in financial management practices at HEIs. The ICR reported that the project provided DHE
with a platform for reaching out to youth in the state, and for helping HEIs achieve nationally recognized
accreditation. Funding under the federal RUSA scheme that seeks to promote the development of higher
education in the country is also expected to be sustained.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The overall project design was sound, and its approach was consistent with "Vision 2018" of the State
  Government and with the State Higher Education Plan. Preparation built on analytical findings identified
  by “Madhya Pradesh Higher Education Reforms: Policy Options to help improve higher education quality
  in addition to access and equity." Project design also benefitted from the experience of previous IDA-
  assisted higher education operations in India, especially the first two phases of the Technical Engineering
  Quality Improvement Project, as well as projects in other countries that have used an RBF modality. The
  importance of ownership and extending support to traditionally disadvantaged groups were among the
  lessons that were considered during preparation (PAD, p. 7).

  The main implementing agency was the Project Directorate that served as the executive arm of the
  Madhya Pradesh State Higher Education Council. The Directorate was also responsible for managing the
  RUSA funds provided by the federal government to promote the development of higher education. The
  Project Directorate was established in October 2014 and had 18 sanctioned posts. The Directorate was
  headed by a Commissioner as its Project Director, supported by an Additional Project Director and a
  team of professionals. The State Higher Education Council had overall responsibility for policy making in
  higher education in the state. The Council was headed by the State Minister for Higher and Technical

                                                                                                     Page 11 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MP Higher Education Quality Improvement (P150394)



  Education. The Council was to act as the Steering Committee for the project. The majority of activities
  were to be implemented by colleges and universities that would receive funds from the Project
  Directorate. Technical assistance would be used to provide targeted capacity building for both
  participating HEIs and the Project Directorate (PAD, p. 8).

  The preparation phase had several shortcomings in readiness and in completing the requirements for
  implementation (ICR, p. 17 and p. 23). The ICR also reported that some challenges related to the lack of
  experience with innovative processes in the client’s institutional capacity were underestimated. The ICR
  stated that a key lesson from similar projects that require selection of institutions from a larger pool of
  institutions was that the process should be started early, ideally during the preparation phase. The
  subsequent two-year delay was associated with the selection of HEIs, Institutional Development Plans,
  and signing of MOUs. The design sought to respond to gaps in human resources, but this required
  actions that went beyond the responsibility of DHE, as the approval of new positions was the
  responsibility of the Public Service Commission and not DHE.




  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Implementation support by the Bank's Task Team was reportedly very proactive and effective, including in
 overcoming initial shortcomings in readiness. The Task Team supported DHE in facilitating its operations
 and explored ways of keeping implementation on track, including through weekly and monthly monitoring
 efforts, continuous technical support, and fast decision-making (ICR, p. 23). The ICR described
 implementation support as intensive, timely, and hands-on. Quality reporting was timely and focused on
 results.

 The Task Team’s intensive support, which included the facilitation of seven project restructurings, reflected
 the extent to which the Bank proactively identified threats to the achievement of intended outcomes and
 pursued efforts to resolve them, including under the challenging circumstances created by the COVID-19
 pandemic that contributed to a partial funding cancellation. The role of the Bank's Task Team was
 acknowledged by the Borrower, whose ICR noted that the World Bank played an important role in driving
 the project forward and in bringing consciousness about quality, and that the Bank was a mentor, monitor,
 and provider of technical support and funds (ICR, p. 23).



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Highly Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


                                                                                                   Page 12 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MP Higher Education Quality Improvement (P150394)



9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The project's objectives were reasonably clear, although student outcomes could have been qualified as
 student learning outcomes. Selected indicators sufficiently reflected the stated objectives. Monitoring
 arrangements were adequately prepared. The Project Directorate was responsible for overall M&E,
 including for monitoring progress, disseminating findings, and reporting on DLI achievement. The results
 framework was concise, and baselines were available. AISHE data were used as a reference for baselines.
 Excluding the initial training targets for HEI faculty, realistic targets were set. Individual HEIs were
 responsible for reporting on progress in accordance with their Strategic Plans. Third-party verification was
 planned for selected DLIs that required independent verification (ICR, p. 19).

 DLIs were organized in six broad categories for access, equity, excellence, employability, governance
 practices, and fiduciary aspects. Each category had specific sub-objectives as follows:

      i.   increasing enrollment of full-time first year undergraduate students in degree programs in HEIs;
     ii.   improving equity in higher education;
    iii.   excellence and quality assurance;
    iv.    improving employability of higher education students;
     v.    strengthening sector governance; and
    vi.    fiduciary strengthening of government HEIs.

 The six broad DLIs were subdivided into 12 DLIs aligned with the project’s results framework. The DLI
 matrix specified associated values, protocols, and results to be achieved every year.



b. M&E Implementation
  M&E implementation progressed adequately, although the results framework and DLI matrix required
  adjustments to account for the early project implementation delays. M&E implementation was also
  associated with overall M&E strengthening through a comprehensive Management Information System,
  building upon the existing website of DHE. The project provided training and technical support to HEIs
  and to the Project Directorate to improve monitoring capabilities. An Independent Verification Agency
  verified specific DLIs. HEIs reported on progress toward targets per their Institutional Development Plans.
  The Project Directorate consolidated the data. As implementation progressed, adjustments to the results
  framework and DLI matrix were made as needed. The Project Directorate created several dashboards to
  help track detailed project activities in real time. When the COVID-19 pandemic started, the terms of
  reference of the Independent Verification Agency were modified to allow virtual means of verification. The
  project also carried out surveys, including on student and faculty satisfaction, tracking of graduate
  students, and digital preparedness.




c. M&E Utilization


                                                                                                    Page 13 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MP Higher Education Quality Improvement (P150394)



  M&E findings were used for regular project monitoring and decision-making. The ICR reported that the
  quality and quantity of data improved over the project’s lifetime, and that, at project completion, a
  dedicated web-based portal for project monitoring was being regularly updated with data from HEIs.
  M&E findings helped in adjusting implementation plans when required, linking financing to results, and
  assessing the achievement of stated objectives.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project triggered Safeguard Policy OP/BP 4.01 on Environmental Assessment in view of risks related to
   construction work. It also triggered Safeguard Policies on Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) and
   Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10), as some of the project districts were inhabited by tribal communities. A
   limited environmental assessment was carried out during preparation, and an Environmental Management
   Framework (EMF) was prepared to design and integrate environmental aspects into preparation and
   implementation. The State Government also carried out a Social Systems Assessment (SSA) and prepared
   a Social Management Framework (SMF) that included a Tribal Development Plan and "Gender Equity and
   Social Inclusion Guidelines." The SMF provided for carrying out mandatory social screenings for all
   activities involving civil works, with clearance from the Project Directorate, to ensure that no civil works
   involving involuntary resettlement would be supported by the project. The SSA recommended support
   schemes and remedial classes to help poor and socially disadvantaged student groups (ICR, p. 20). The
   SMF provided special provisions for enhancing outreach to SC, ST, women, physically challenged, and
   vulnerable persons. The "Gender Equity and Social Inclusion Guidelines" and the Tribal Development Plan
   had provisions to support these groups, including for continuing and enhancing available support schemes,
   promoting greater participation in managing campus environments, and conducting periodic consultations
   about the project.

   Individual HEIs were responsible for implementation aspects and were provided with training on safeguards
   requirements as part of their training for the preparation of Institutional Development Plans. HEIs were
   supported by additional specialized staff hired by the Project Directorate. Compliance with Environmental
   and Social Management Frameworks was included in the MOUs signed between the Project Directorate
   and individual HEIs.

   The Mid-Term Review carried out a detailed review of compliance and visited a sample of HEIs where civil
   works were implemented. All lands identified for the construction of buildings for HEIs belonged to the
   government, and there were not squatter or resettlement issues. Civil works were approved within the
   framework of the EMF and SMF. During most of the early project years, implementation of environmental
   safeguards was rated moderately satisfactory.

   At project completion, the overall safeguards rating was satisfactory, as was also recorded in the
   Operations Portal. New HEI buildings were designed with consideration for environmental health and safety
   aspects, “green building” elements, life and fire safety measures, provisions to facilitate universal access,
   ergonomics and work environment, improved laboratory safety, and adoption of a uniform hand-over

                                                                                                  Page 14 of 18
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       MP Higher Education Quality Improvement (P150394)



  mechanism for buildings. The project had a well-established grievance redress mechanism that was
  accessible on the DHE website. The ICR reported that only two instances of grievance were received during
  implementation, and that both were resolved.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  During preparation, a financial assessment was carried out for DHE and a sample of HEIs. The
  assessment found that project arrangements provided for regular checks and balances on receipts and
  expenditures, but that there were weaknesses in financial planning and some areas of financial
  management; these issues were addressed through mitigation measures. The financial management
  manual included requirements and procedures for quarterly internal audits and annual external audits.
  Disbursement under Components 1 and 2 were made against an EEP for pre-identified budget lines, and
  the World Bank’s procurement guidelines for goods and services applied only to expenditures under
  Component 3. A procurement assessment identified risks related to the lack of experience with Bank
  procedures, lack of procurement planning, inadequate record keeping, insufficient staff capacity, and
  inconsistencies in bidding processes. To mitigate these risks, a Procurement Manual was prepared for use
  by HEIs, and procurement training was delivered to all HEIs.

  Initially, both financial management and procurement encountered delays that were intertwined with delays
  in contracting specialized staff and in the approval of project manuals. The Project Directorate hired the
  services of a Chartered Accountant until such time as trained financial management staff were in place.
  Performance improved by mid-2018 with the approval of manuals and contracting of staff. Efforts to
  strengthen financial management of HEIs progressed adequately with customized accounting and financial
  management software. However, some variable delays in procurement and Interim Financial Reports were
  observed throughout most of the implementation period.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  The ICR (p. 14) highlighted the project’s role in redressing inequalities and in increasing the focus on
  quality assurance beyond project targets as positive unintended outcomes. This ICR Review considered
  such aspects as intended developments within the general thrust of the project and the stated elements on
  its relevance in line with the CPF.




d. Other
  --




                                                                                               Page 15 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MP Higher Education Quality Improvement (P150394)



11. Ratings
                                                                              Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                   IEG
                                                                              Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                        Satisfactory         Satisfactory
                                                                              There is no disagreement on the
                                                                              sub-ratings of the two
                                                                              dimensions of Bank
                                                                              Performance. Both the ICR and
                                                                              this ICR Review rated the
                                                                              Quality at Entry as Moderately
                                                                              Satisfactory in view of
                                                                              shortcomings in project
                                                                              preparation and implementation
                                                                              readiness, and both rated the
                                                                              Quality of Supervision as Highly
                                                                              Satisfactory in view of the extent
Bank Performance               Satisfactory         Moderately Satisfactory
                                                                              to which the Bank proactively
                                                                              identified and resolved threats to
                                                                              the achievement of intended
                                                                              outcomes. The aggregation of
                                                                              the two sub-ratings is consistent
                                                                              with a Moderately Satisfactory
                                                                              rating for Bank Performance. If
                                                                              the ICR had correctly applied the
                                                                              guidelines, the Bank
                                                                              Performance rating in the ICR
                                                                              would also have been
                                                                              Moderately Satisfactory.
Quality of M&E                 Substantial          Substantial

Quality of ICR                 ---                  High


12. Lessons

The ICR (pp. 24-25) offered several lessons and recommendations, including the following lessons,
slightly re-stated by IEG's Review:

Implementation of a reform agenda requires the cooperation of multiple stakeholders and an
adequate level of human resources and expertise. Under the project, management capabilities
were built throughout the system to implement reforms that have multiple stakeholders and that
require a wide set of expertise. Also, the Department of Higher Education expanded its capacities by
hiring a professional organization to act as a Project Management Consultant and by hiring other
consultants with special expertise.




                                                                                                Page 16 of 18
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       MP Higher Education Quality Improvement (P150394)



Adequate sequencing of context-specific activities facilitates timely implementation. Prior
steps and adequate sequencing, supported by buy-in efforts, were needed to promote governance
and HEI autonomy aspects. The project lost valuable time in 2015 and 2016 in the selection process
for HEIs, and starting this process during preparation would have reduced delays in related activities
at the level of HEIs.

Careful design can avoid holding implementing agencies accountable for tasks and results
beyond their control. Under the project, DHE committed to increasing the number of faculty
according to Government HEI norms. The approval of new positions was the responsibility of the
Public Service Commission and not DHE. The shortfall in faculty holding regular positions was
alleviated by hiring contract faculty and guest faculty.

A strong M&E system is an integral part of the backbone for a successful reform agenda. The
project provided due attention to M&E and strengthened related capacities while converting manual
processes to online operations that allowed the Department of Higher Education to carry out
effective planning and to exercise due diligence in reporting.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provided a thorough and systematic account of project performance. It was results-oriented. Its
narrative was very candid, accurate, and aligned to development objectives. The ICR had a well-established
theory of change with logical links between activities and intended outcomes. The evidence provided was
adequate. The ICR’s analysis was focused and well organized. It offered lessons that were directly derived from
project experience. The ICR was reasonably concise, internally consistent, and followed guidelines. Apart from
minor lapses in clarity, the overall quality of the ICR was high.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       High




                                                                                                  Page 17 of 18
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
MP Higher Education Quality Improvement (P150394)




                                                                                 Page 18 of 18
