     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BF Livestock Sector Development Project (P159476)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0023499

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P159476                                    BF Livestock Sector Development Project

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Burkina Faso                               Agriculture and Food


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-61150                                  20-Jul-2022                                          63,572,721.55

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 20-Jul-2017                                20-Oct-2022

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           60,000,000.00                                                0.00

 Revised Commitment                            60,000,000.00                                                0.00

 Actual                                        63,572,721.55                                                0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Hassan Wally                Avjeet Singh                 Avjeet Singh                   IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) of the Livestock Sector Development Support Project (PADEL-B)
   as articulated in the Financing Agreement (FA, page 5) was identical to the one stated in the Project Appraisal
   Document (PAD, paragraph 15) and aimed to:

   "enhance productivity and commercialization of non-pastoral animal production in selected value
   chains, and strengthen the country’s capacity to respond to severe crises affecting the livestock


                                                                                                   Page 1 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BF Livestock Sector Development Project (P159476)



   sector, and to provide immediate and effective response in the event of an eligible crisis or
   emergency."

   Parsing the PDO. The PDO will be parsed based on the following four objectives:

   1. To enhance productivity of non-pastoral animal production in selected value chains.

   2. To enhance commercialization of non-pastoral animal production in selected value chains.

   3. To strengthen the country’s capacity to respond to severe crises affecting the livestock sector.

   4. To provide immediate and effective response in the event of an eligible crisis or emergency.




b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The PDO was supported by the following three components:

   1. Improved Access to Services and Inputs (appraisal cost: US$24.00 million, actual cost: US$29.59
   million). This component aimed to enhance livestock productivity in selected value chains through
   improved access of producers to animal health services and inputs and institutional strengthening of
   MRAH’s operational capacity to carry out its core responsibilities efficiently. It comprised three sub-
   components:

   1.1. Improving livestock producers’ access to animal health services. This sub-component would build
   on the results from the World Organization for Animal Health (OIE) evaluation of the Performance of
   Veterinary Services (PVS) to enhance the long-term capacity of the country to sustainably reduce livestock
   mortality and other losses caused by animal diseases, thereby contributing to increased livestock
   productivity.

   1.2. Improving livestock producers’ access to quality inputs to raise better livestock. This sub-
   component aimed to improve the productivity of targeted sedentary livestock value chains by increasing the
   availability of and access to high-quality inputs to benefit producers.

   1.3. Institutional strengthening. This sub-component aimed to contribute to (a) building the immediate
   and long-term human, technical, organizational, and institutional capacity of the Ministry of Animal and
   Fisheries Resources (MRAH) to allow this ministry to carry out effectively its core responsibilities of sector

                                                                                                      Page 2 of 20
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    BF Livestock Sector Development Project (P159476)



  and policy analysis, monitoring and evaluation (M&E), and coordination; and (b) support the implementation
  of the national extension strategy.

  2. Livestock Value Chain Development (appraisal cost: US$41.90 million, actual cost: US$40.04
  million). The component aimed to strengthen the efficiency and competitiveness of selected livestock value
  chains (beef, small ruminants, milk, poultry, and pig, as well as honey and aquaculture) to enhance
  production and meet the demand of national and regional markets while generating higher incomes for
  value chains actors and creating employment opportunities. It comprised two sub-components:

  2.1. Enhancing the investment climate in the livestock sector. This sub-component aimed to create an
  enabling environment where stakeholders and investors (producers, buyers, input suppliers, transporters,
  processors, and financial institutions) in targeted value chains can build efficient and sustainable business
  relationships through their professional organizations. It would finance studies, workshops, training,
  technical assistance, and consulting services.

  2.2. Support to investment sub-projects. This sub-component aimed to provide financial resources to
  support private investors in the livestock sectors for both (i) large investment initiatives in partnership
  between different business partners bringing together Producer Organizations (POs) and other partners
  upstream and downstream of production; the number of individual partners in a Productive Alliance (PA)
  would be typically about 20 individuals; and (ii) small investment initiatives, typically in support of a single
  individual investor each. The sub-component would support two main groups of activities: (i) selection,
  preparation, appraisal, and Monitoring &Evaluation (M&E) of investment sub-projects (SPs) and (ii) co-
  financing of investment SPs.

  3. Crisis Management and Project Coordination (appraisal cost: US$13.00 million, actual cost:
  US$14.45 million). This component aimed to strengthen mechanisms for preventing and responding to
  severe crises and emergencies in the livestock sector and strengthen coordination capacities within the
  MRAH. It included two sub-components:

  3.1. Crisis management. This sub-component aimed to support (i) the operationalization of the Permanent
  Secretariat in charge of Crises and Vulnerabilities Management (SP/CVEL) and (ii) the development of
  crisis management tools.

  3.2. Project coordination. This sub-component focused on all aspects related to project management and
  coordination activities, essentially the operations of the Project Coordinating Unit (PCU) set-up to be
  established as a sharing arrangement with the Regional Project for Support to Pastoralism in the Sahel for
  Burkina Faso (PRAPS-BF). It also supported the steering committee meetings.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost. The total cost of the project was estimated at US$78.90 million. According to the ICR Data
  Sheet (page 2), the actual cost was US$84.07 million.

  Financing. The project was financed through an IDA credit in the amount of US$60.00 million. The actual
  amount disbursed was US$63.57 million (ICR Data Sheet, page 2).




                                                                                                       Page 3 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BF Livestock Sector Development Project (P159476)



   Borrower Contribution. The Borrower was expected to provide US$18.90 million as counterpart funds
   from the Government (US$3.00 million), Partner Financial Institutions (PFIs, U$8.90 million), and
   beneficiaries (US$7.00 million). The actual amount of counterpart funds provided was US$20.50 million,
   including US$3.00 million from the Government, US$9.42 million from PFIs, and US$6.80 million from
   beneficiaries (ICR Data Sheet, page 2).

   Dates. The project was approved on July 20, 2017, and became effective three months later on October 25,
   2017. The Mid-Term Review (MTR) was conducted on October 28, 2020. The MTR was conducted in line
   with the timing reported in the PAD "no later than three years after the first disbursement (paragraph 51)."
   The project closed on October 20, 2022, three months later than the original closing date on July 20, 2022.
   The project was restructured twice (level 2 restructuring) as follows:

   1. On May 31, 2021, the amount disbursed was US$31.90 million to revise the Results Framework and
   reallocate funds between disbursement categories.

   2. On July 13, 2022, the amount disbursed was US$63.57 million to extend the loan closing date from July
   20, 2022, to October 20, 2022. This extension came on the heels of political developments in January 2022,
   where the elected President resigned under military pressure and a new Government established itself. As
   a result, the Bank invoked its policy for dealing with de facto governments (OP/BP 7.30), including
   undertaking the requisite assessments (ICR, paragraph 19). This resulted in pausing disbursements. As the
   situation was resolved and the Bank reengaged in May 2022, the Government requested a 3-month
   extension of the project’s closing date to complete the remaining project activities (ICR, paragraph 19).

   The intermediate indicators on the ‘prevalence of two priority diseases’ were dropped due to attribution
   concerns and replaced with more measurable and attributable indicators on the number of animals
   vaccinated. While the outcome target for the livestock productivity indicator was revised down from 20% to
   10%, a split rating will not be applied because the original livestock productivity target was not realistic given
   the fragile context as well as the 'time required for genetic herd improvement when a country is starting from
   a very low infrastructural, logistical, and human resource base' (ICR, paragraph 22).




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Context at Appraisal. Agriculture contributed 32.6% to the Gross Domestic Product (GDP) in 2016, where
80% of the population derived their livelihood from agriculture. Livestock represented 35% of the
agricultural GDP (2013), acting as the primary source of cash income (39%) for rural households. The
livestock sector remained constrained by multiple factors, including (i) weak support services, (ii)
persistence of preventable animal diseases, (iii) limited access to inputs, (iv) low genetic potential of local
breeds, (v) weak organization of value chain actors; (vi) insufficient livestock infrastructure; (vii) lack of
access to financial resources; and (viii) absence or weakness of national mechanisms for preventing and
managing climate-induced and other types of crises.

Previous Bank Experience. The Bank has had a rich experience in supporting livestock development
projects. It financed several projects in Burkina Faso and in other countries, namely, the IDA-financed
Burkina Faso Agro-sylvo-pastoral Value Chains Support Project (PAFASP, P081567), which supported

                                                                                                       Page 4 of 20
                       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                       BF Livestock Sector Development Project (P159476)



value chains, in particular, the development of the cattle and poultry value chains; the IDA-financed
Regional Project for Support to Pastoralism in the Sahel for Burkina Faso (PRAPS-BF, P147674) which
focused on mobile herding systems; the West Africa Agriculture Productivity Project for Burkina Faso
(WAAPP-BF, P117148); the Cameroon Livestock Sector Development Project (PADEL, P154908);
and the Colombia Productive Alliance Project.

Consistency with Bank Strategies. At appraisal, the PDO was in line with the Bank’s Country Partnership
Strategy (CPS, FY13-16), which proposed an integrated World Bank Group (WBG) program of partnership
activities that selectively supported Burkina's National Policy for Sustainable Livestock
Development (PNDEL), with the twin goals of reducing poverty and increasing shared prosperity. The
project was expected to contribute to the Bank's strategic goals of ending poverty and boosting shared
prosperity in a sustainable manner.

At completion, the PDO continued to align with the Bank's Country Partnership Framework (CPF, FY18 -
FY23). Specifically, the project was aligned with and cited in the CPF as one of the key contributors to the
CPF’s attainment of its objectives in Focus Area 1 (Accelerating sustainable private sector led growth for
job creation), especially Objective 1.1: Improving agriculture productivity and agribusiness value chains in
targeted areas.

Consistency with Government Strategies/Priorities. At appraisal, the PDO aligned with the National
Policy for Sustainable Livestock Development (PNDEL, 2010-2025) and the Action Plan and Investment
Program for the Livestock Sector (PAPISE, 2010-2015). The overall objective of PNDEL was to enhance
the contribution of the livestock sector to national economic growth, as well as to food and nutrition security,
and, in doing so, improve the living conditions of the Burkinabe population.

At completion, the PDO continued to be in line with PNDEL (2010-2025), which emphasized improved
competitiveness and resilience of the livestock sector, and with the National Program for Economic and
Social Development (PNDES II, 2021-2025), which emphasized livestock as a key driver of economic
growth.

Summary of Relevance of Objectives Assessment. While the PDO statement was lengthy, reflecting
four objectives, it was clearly articulated and pitched at an adequate level of ambition. At completion, the
PDO continued to align with the Bank strategy for Burkina Faso and with the Government's priorities for the
livestock sector, as discussed above. The livestock sector continues to be a primary source of livelihood for
many Burkinabè families and a central component of their food and nutrition security (ICR, paragraph 21).
Finally, a follow-up Bank-financed project - the Livestock Resilience and Competitiveness Support Project
(PRECEL), was approved in May 2023, which points to the continued importance of the livestock sector.
Therefore, the Relevance of Objectives is rated High.


Rating Relevance TBL




Rating
High


4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)



                                                                                                         Page 5 of 20
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  BF Livestock Sector Development Project (P159476)


EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               To enhance productivity of non-pastoral animal production in selected value chains.

               Rationale
               Theory of Change (ToC). To achieve the stated objective, the project would support building the capacity of
               relevant agencies, including upgrading laboratories, establishing vaccination infrastructure, developing
               disease control strategies to boost service delivery, conducting animal vaccination campaigns to improve
               animal health, and supporting the adoption of improved technologies through demonstrations and distribution
               to improve productivity. The expected outputs would be improved capacity of relevant institutions, an
               increase in the number of vaccinated animals, and an increase in smallholders adopting improved
               livestock feeding and management practices. The expected outcome would be improved productivity of
               targeted livestock value chains (cattle, sheep, and poultry). Anticipated long-term impacts included improved
               food and nutritional security, economic growth, and poverty reduction.

               The achievement of the PDO was underpinned by the following critical assumptions: (i) farmers’ willingness to
               adopt the recommended technologies; (ii) the livestock sector actors’ willingness to embrace new
               collaborative concepts (such as Productive Alliances); (iii) financial institutions’ willingness to engage with a
               sector whose perceived risk profile is generally viewed with trepidation; and (iv) regional conflicts not
               escalating and disrupting project implementation.

               The ToC clearly described the connection between activities, outputs, and expected outcomes in a plausible
               causal chain. The critical assumptions were comprehensive and logical.

               Outputs/Intermediate Results

                     5,679,752 cattle were vaccinated against Contagious Bovine Pleuropneumonia (CBPP), exceeding
                        the target of 4,500,000.
                       8,174,405 sheep were vaccinated against the Small Ruminant Plague (PPR), exceeding the target of
                        8,000,000.
                       6,559,420 poultry were vaccinated against fowl pox, exceeding the target of 5,150,000.
                       100,000 peri-urban dairy animals were vaccinated against foot-and-mouth (FMD) disease (no target
                        provided).
                       110 vaccination parks for large and small ruminants were constructed, and their management was
                        established across the country (no target provided).
                       500 voluntary village vaccinators were trained and deployed in all 13 regions of Burkina Faso to
                        strengthen and expand the network of local vaccinators (no target provided).
                       35,770 farmers adopted various productivity enhancing technologies, against a target of 40,000
                        farmers (89.4% adoption rate).
                       477 tons of improved pasture seeds were distributed to 18,118 beneficiaries.

               Outcome

                     The project contributed to increasing the productivity of selected value chains by improving veterinary
                        services, conducting vaccination campaigns, supporting productivity-enhancing technologies, and

                                                                                                                  Page 6 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BF Livestock Sector Development Project (P159476)



       supporting microprojects and productive alliances. The beneficiary satisfaction rate with services
       provided by the project for the livestock sector reached 72%, exceeding the target of 65%.
      By project completion, targeted beneficiaries among selected value chains achieved a total yield
       increase of 8.4% compared to a revised target of 10% and an original target of 20%. Yield increase for
       cattle, sheep, and egg production reached 6.76%, 11.93%, and 6.50%, respectively, compared to a
       revised target of 10%. In a further communication, the project team explained that: "baselines were
       assessed at appraisal and updated after the mid-term review. Average daily growth rates for cattle
       and sheep under traditional systems prevailing among the beneficiaries were used as baselines: 74
       grams/day for cattle, 92 grams/day for sheep, and 260 eggs/chicken/year. Changes from these
       baselines were converted into percentages. For example, an average daily weight gain of 81.4
       grams/day for cattle would correspond to a 10 percent increase over baseline. Sample animals were
       weighted (or eggs counted) periodically."
      The ICR (paragraph 29) cited several reasons for the variations in productivity. In the case of sheep,
       the target was exceeded since sheep were mainly supported under the micro projects (established
       earlier in the implementation period) rather than productive alliances. Also, sheep had a shorter
       gestation period and were typically more resilient than cattle because of their more comprehensive
       dietary range. On the other hand, cattle productivity fell short of achieving its target due to unfavorable
       factors, including the late establishment of the project-supported productive alliances that oversaw
       beef fattening operations, an upsurge in insecurity in predominantly pastoral communities, which led
       beef fattening operators to resort to less suitable animals with lower productivity potential. In addition,
       the disruption of cross-border trade due to COVID-19 undermined the economics and incentives of
       fattening operations, and a 9.8% drop in precipitation in 2021 disrupted fodder availability. Finally,
       poultry productivity was also undermined by logistical challenges, drought conditions, higher
       commodity prices due to the Ukraine-Russia war, the late start of poultry productive alliances, and the
       outbreak of avian influenza in December 2021, which impacted several project-supported farms.
      A notable achievement of the project was the collaboration with the National Bio-digester Program,
       which supported the installation of 1,038 bio-digesters. This granted beneficiaries access to about
       65.38 tons of gas annually for cooking and lighting, thus improving their livelihoods. Also, the resulting
       organic fertilizers (estimated at 41,520 tons annually) could fertilize 4,000 – 8,000 ha, thus increasing
       agricultural productivity. In addition, there was a total of 8,078 jobs created, of which 4,241 were
       permanent jobs (ICR, paragraph 42).

Summary of Efficacy Assessment. While the project fell short of achieving its main outcome indicator, the
ICR cited plausible reasons for the under achievement. In addition, the project met or exceeded most of its
intermediate results indicators and contributed to improvements in veterinary services and fodder production.
It is plausible to assume that the project-supported activities will positively impact livestock productivity after
completion. Therefore, the efficacy with which this objective was achieved is rated Substantial but with minor
shortcomings.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective

                                                                                                      Page 7 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BF Livestock Sector Development Project (P159476)



To enhance commercialization of non-pastoral animal production in selected value chains.

Rationale
Theory of Change (ToC). To achieve the stated objective, the project would support enhancing the livestock
sector investment climate, including promoting access to financial services. The project would also fund
investment sub-projects through matching grants to support micro projects and productive alliances. The
expected outputs would be an increased volume of loans granted by partner financial institutions, funding
microprojects, and establishing and funding productive alliances. The expected outcome would be increased
commercialization of targeted livestock value chains. Anticipated long-term impacts included improved food
and nutritional security, economic growth, and poverty reduction.

The achievement of the PDO was underpinned by the following four critical assumptions: (i) farmers’
willingness to adopt the recommended technologies; (ii) the livestock sector actors’ willingness to embrace
new collaborative concepts (such as Productive Alliances); (iii) financial institutions’ willingness to engage
with a sector whose perceived risk profile is generally viewed with trepidation; and (iv) regional conflicts not
escalating and disrupting project implementation.

The ToC described the connection between activities, outputs, and expected outcomes in a plausible causal
chain. The critical assumptions were comprehensive and logical.

Outputs/Intermediate Results

      1,653 micro projects were funded, exceeding the original target of 1,200 and the revised target of
         1,500.
      54 productive alliances were established, exceeding the revised target of 40 but below the original
         target of 80.
        1,598,726 liters of milk were processed, slightly below the target of 1,700,000 (94% achievement).
        511 tons of pork were processed, exceeding the target of 460 tons.
        367 tons of honey were processed, exceeding the target of 255 tons.
        561 tons of fish were processed, which was below the target of 650 tons (86% achievement).

Outcome

      By project completion, sales increased by 45% above baseline values (provided as $0.00 by the ICR
       Annex 1) exceeding the target of a 30% increase above baseline.
      These sales are related to activities under microprojects and productive alliances. The 2021 sales for
       micro projects were US$ 5.44 million equivalent and US$ 39.02 million equivalent for productive
       alliances. The leading value chains among micro-projects were fish, poultry, and meat, whereas the
       leading value chains in productive alliances were poultry and milk.
      Finally, the volume of loans granted by partner financial institutions reached US$5.02 million,
       exceeding the original target of US$4.38 million.

Summary of Efficacy Assessment. The project exceeded its outcome target on sales increase and the
volume of loans granted. In addition, the project met or exceeded most of its targets on its intermediate
results indicators. Overall, the evidence provided points to the success of the project in enhancing the



                                                                                                     Page 8 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BF Livestock Sector Development Project (P159476)



commercialization of non-pastoral animal production in selected value chains. Therefore, the efficacy with
which this objective was achieved is rated Substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
To strengthen the country’s capacity to respond to severe crises affecting the livestock sector.

Rationale
Theory of Change (ToC). To achieve the stated objective, the project would provide institutional support to
strengthen the permanent secretariat for crisis and vulnerability management (SP/CVEL), including staffing
and developing crisis management tools. The expected outputs would be SP/CVEL established, staff trained,
and the development of crisis management tools. The expected outcome from the supported activities would
be an increased capacity to respond to livestock crises. Anticipated long-term impacts included improved
food and nutritional security, economic growth, and poverty reduction.

The achievement of the PDO was underpinned by the following four critical assumptions: (i) farmers’
willingness to adopt the recommended technologies; (ii) the livestock sector actors’ willingness to embrace
new collaborative concepts (such as Productive Alliances); (iii) financial institutions’ willingness to engage
with a sector whose perceived risk profile is generally viewed with trepidation; and (iv) regional conflicts not
escalating and disrupting project implementation.

The ToC clearly described the connection between activities, outputs, and expected outcomes in a plausible
causal chain. The critical assumptions were comprehensive and logical.

Outputs/Intermediate Results

      The project supported capacity building, including training 352 livestock actors in crisis management
       and 127 livestock agents in the Livestock Emergency Guidelines and Standards (LEGS).
      An Emergency Operations Manual was developed, and an environmental plan for responses to crises
       and emergency situations was prepared (target achieved).

Outcome

      The effectiveness of the project-supported capacity building efforts was tested when the COVID-19
       pandemic broke out (ICR, paragraph 31). The time between the government's request to make funds
       available to respond to an eligible crisis was reduced from 52 weeks to 8 weeks, exceeding the
       target of 12 weeks.
      Also, the time to reach, with services and funds, 50% of the targeted beneficiaries, as foreseen in the
       inclusive crisis intervention plan in the livestock sector, was reduced from 52 weeks to 27 weeks,
       exceeding the target of 35 weeks.



                                                                                                     Page 9 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BF Livestock Sector Development Project (P159476)



Summary of Efficacy Assessment. The evidence provided in the ICR points to the project's success
in strengthening the country’s capacity to respond to severe crises (COVID-19) that indirectly affected the
livestock sector. The project exceeded its outcome targets for both indicators of this objective. Therefore, the
efficacy with which this objective was achieved is rated Substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 4
Objective
To provide immediate and effective response in the event of an eligible crisis or emergency.

Rationale
Theory of Change (ToC). The same theory of change under objective 3 applies.

Outputs/Intermediate Results

The same as under objective 3.

Outcome

      The "immediate" and "effectiveness" of the project-supported capacity building efforts was tested
       when the COVID-19 pandemic broke out (ICR, paragraph 31). As noted in Objective 3, the time
       between the government's request to make funds available to respond to an eligible crisis was
       reduced from 52 weeks to 8 weeks, exceeding the target of 12 weeks.
      Also, the time to reach, with services and funds, 50% of the targeted beneficiaries, as foreseen in the
       inclusive crisis intervention plan in the livestock sector, was reduced from 52 weeks to 27 weeks,
       exceeding the target of 35 weeks.
      The effectiveness of the response was demonstrated through the activation of the Contingency
       Emergency Response Component (CERC) as part of the financing of the COVID-19 response plan.
       The CERC was activated on May 26, 2021, and carried out through a protocol signed with the FAO on
       September 7, 2021. As a result, livelihoods were restored for 3,240 persons (including internally
       displaced people), substantially achieving the target of 3,450 (direct communication with the project
       team about 94% achievement rate) whose businesses were harmed by COVID-19’s economic
       impact.

Summary of Efficacy Assessment. It is clear from the evidence under objective 3 that the response times
improved significantly compared to the situation before the project. As noted above, the project also activated
the CERC and achieved 94% of its target. Therefore, the efficacy with which this objective was achieved is
rated Substantial.



Rating

                                                                                                  Page 10 of 20
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                BF Livestock Sector Development Project (P159476)



                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Overall Efficacy is rated Substantial. The project met or exceeded its commercialization targets. The project
                            also established a foundation for an immediate and effective response to emergencies in general. These
                            emergency response mechanisms were successfully tested during the Covid-19 crisis. While the productivity
                            outcome targets for cattle and poultry fell slighlty short of their final targets, a strong foundation was laid for
                            future yield growth. Therefore, overall efficacy is rated Substantial.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



   5. Efficiency
   Economic and Financial Analysis (EFA)

   ex-ante

                               The project was estimated to yield an Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR) of 17% and a Net
                                Present Value (NPV) of US$32 million (at a 6% discount rate) over 25 years. The
                                analysis excluded component 1 and sub-component 3.1 (crisis response) costs for which benefits were
                                difficult to quantify, taking into account half of the project coordination costs.
                               The economic benefits considered in the analysis were the tangible benefits derived from implementing
                                project-funded sub-projects that could be quantified in monetary terms. Benefits derived from activities,
                                such as capacity-building activities and improved animal health services, were difficult to quantify in
                                economic terms and were not taken into account
                               The sensitivity analysis showed that the EIRR would still yield 13% if benefits were reduced by 30% or
                                lagged by two years, indicating that the project was robust.

   ex-post

                               To ensure consistency and comparability, the ex-post economic and financial analysis followed the
                                appraisal methodology while accounting for the restructuring done at mid-term and actual project benefits
                                and costs. The project was estimated to yield an Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR) of 18% with a
                                Net Present Value (NPV) of US$ 59.34 million (at a 6% discount rate) over 20 years in constant 2021
                                prices.
                               Quantified economic benefits considered in the analysis were those derived from economic benefit
                                streams from the vaccination campaigns and the implementation of funded productive alliance sub-
                                projects and micro-projects.

                                                                                                                                 Page 11 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      BF Livestock Sector Development Project (P159476)



      When environmental benefits (carbon sequestered because of the 1,038 bio-digesters, improved feed,
       and additional productivity and benefits associated with the livestock vaccination campaigns) were
       considered, the EIRR was estimated at 21.58% at the low estimate range of carbon with an NPV of US$
       76.6 million and 25.35% at high estimate range with an NPV of US$ 93.8 million.
      The sensitivity analysis showed that the project would still yield an EIRR of 17.8% if operating costs
       increased by 20% and an EIRR of 14.1% if benefits were reduced by 20%.

Implementation Efficiency. The project closed on October 20, 2022, three months later than the original
closing date on July 20, 2022. After the project’s effectiveness, there was a delay of 6 months in setting up the
PCU, which contributed to delays in initiating some activities such as productive alliances (ICR, paragraph 46).
The project also experienced some procurement-related delays in the early stages of implementation due to a
lack of capacity in some technical departments (ICR, paragraph 45). Disbursements were suspended twice for
at least six months due to political instability, which delayed project activities (ICR, paragraph 48). Finally, there
were delays in establishing the Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM), which was finally fully established in July
2020 (ICR, paragraph 56). Despite the delays, the project was only extended by three months.

Summary of Efficiency Assessment. The ex-post EIRR at 18% slightly exceeded the appraisal estimate at
17%. When factoring in the project's environmental benefits, the ex-post EIRR ranged from 21.58% to 25.35%,
depending on the estimated range of carbon. While the project had some shortcomings in its implementation
efficiency, it still generated considerable economic benefits. The ex-post EFA was robust and included enough
details to justify the project investments. Therefore, Efficiency is rated Substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?              Point value (%)            *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                        0
 Appraisal                                                   17.00
                                                                                         Not Applicable
                                                                                        0
 ICR Estimate                                                18.00
                                                                                         Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of Objectives was rated High. Overall Efficacy was rated Substantial with minor shortcomings. The
project met or exceeded its commercialization targets. The project also established a foundation for the
provision of an immediate and effective response to emergencies. Emergency response mechanisms were
successfully tested during the Covid-19 crisis. While the productivity outcome targets for cattle and poultry fell
slightly short of their final targets, a strong foundation was laid for future yield growth. Efficiency was rated

                                                                                                       Page 12 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      BF Livestock Sector Development Project (P159476)



Substantial. The ex-post EIRR at 18% slightly exceeded the appraisal estimate at 17%, and when factoring in
the project's environmental benefits, the ex-post EIRR ranged from 21.58% to 25.35%.

Based on the assigned ratings for the three outcome criteria, Outcome is rated Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The ICR discussed the following risks that could potentially impact the development outcome:

1. Technical Risk. The vaccination parks constructed with the project support are low-maintenance
structures that could be easily maintained. Other public infrastructure (such as the laboratories) will be under
the auspices of the responsible ministry. Micro projects and Productive Alliances were largely organized
around businesses that the promoters were already familiar with.

2. Economic Risk. While high demand for livestock products (eggs, meat, milk) will continue to grow, high
commodity prices will negatively impact the poultry industry.

3. Political Risk. Burkina Faso’s political climate remains uncertain. However, since the project’s
development outcomes are not policy-heavy, political uncertainties might only moderately spill over into
livestock commercial operations. The country is also prone to security challenges in certain regions, which
could undermine livestock production and fattening operations.

4. Environmental Risk. This mainly relates to climate change impacts where unreliable rainfall patterns are
highly likely to continue to constrain livestock production.

5. Social Risk. For example, tension or conflicts between pastoral communities over over grazing rights
could disrupt livestock production activities.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
        Strategic relevance and approach. The project was strategically relevant and aligned with Bank
          strategies and Borrower priorities for the livestock sector (see section 3 for more details). The
          project was structured as an Investment Project Financing (IPF), combining IDA credit and
          counterpart contributions. Over five years, the project supported sedentary livestock value chains
          (cattle, small ruminants, poultry, and milk, and value chains such as hogs, fish farming, and
          beekeeping/honey production) that can promote diversification.

                                                                                                     Page 13 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BF Livestock Sector Development Project (P159476)



      Technical, financial, and economic aspects. The project was designed to support livestock
         development activities all along the selected value chains (noted above) from production to
         market, as these activities were recognized to offer the potential to provide significant beneficial
         spillover effects for Burkina Faso’s population in general. The project was built on existing
         experience from ongoing projects such as the Agro-sylvo-pastoral Value Chain Project (PAFASP)
         and the Agriculture Productivity Support Project (PAPSA) and closely worked with the
         stakeholders in the selected value chains. The project also complemented PRAPS-BF by focusing
         on sedentary livestock systems instead of mobile ruminant herding. The PAD included a robust
         economic and financial analysis that justified the project investments.
        Poverty, gender, and social development aspects. The project supported mainly smallholder
         farmers who were generally poor and to whom livestock services brought significant savings and
         income or spared them from possible loss of assets. The project aimed to mainstream support for
         activities geared towards women since they represented 52% of the active population in Burkina
         Faso’s agricultural sector. Women were more engaged in small livestock (poultry, sheep, and
         goats), while men mainly operated in the cattle sub-sector. Also, supporting sedentary livestock
         development was expected to provide a basis for promoting sound nutritional practices among
         rural beneficiaries, particularly women and children.
        Environmental aspects. The project design included appropriate environmental and social risk
         assessments with adequate mitigation strategies.
        Implementation arrangements. The project implementation, including management of
         environmental and social risks, was under the Ministry of Animal and Fisheries Resources
         (MRAH). The project implementation mechanism comprised a Project Coordination Unit (PCU)
         based in the capital, Ouagadougou, and field correspondents based in MRAH’s regional
         directorates. While implementation arrangements were adequate, the implementation time (five
         years) was short to realize cattle breeding improvements. Also, the time and effort needed to set
         up productive alliances were underestimated. There was a delay of 6 months in setting up the
         PCU, which contributed to delays in initiating some activities, such as productive alliances (ICR,
         paragraph 46).
        Risk assessment. Nine risks were identified at the appraisal stage with an overall
         Moderate rating. The identified substantial risks related to three main areas: macro-economic
         environment, institutional capacity, and fiduciary-related risks. Overall, the risk assessment was
         thorough and realistic and included relevant mitigation measures such as capacity building where
         necessary. However, the environmental risk related to climate change and rainfall was
         underestimated.
        M&E arrangements. The PCU was responsible for M&E activities and compliance with the
         agreed reporting requirements. M&E design had shortcomings in indicators' measurability and
         attribution features (see section 9a). Also, the target (20%) for growth in livestock productivity was
         overly ambitious (ICR, paragraph 49). Most M&E shortcomings were rectified during
         implementation.

Summary of QAE Assessment. The project was strategically relevant with a clear PDO. The design
featured relevant activities supporting livestock development activities along the selected value chains
from production to market. The design reflected adequate environmental and fiduciary aspects.
Implementation arrangements were adequate, but setting up the PCU was delayed. Also, the
implementation timeframe was short to realize some project benefits. There were some shortcomings in
M&E at design. Overall, Quality at Entry is rated Satisfactory.



                                                                                                    Page 14 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BF Livestock Sector Development Project (P159476)




  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
       The project implementation faced a challenging political and security situation. The Bank conducted
        eleven supervision missions over the implementation period, with an average of two formal
        implementation support missions per year. The project implementation support team relied
        on virtual missions during the COVID restrictions.
       The Bank teams included an adequate skills mix that reflected the wide range of the requisite
        expertise (ICR, paragraph 60). The project implementation also benefitted from the support the
        Bank Office staff provided in Ouagadougou. The project implementation benefited from the local
        Bank team as implementation issues were promptly resolved. The project experienced three
        changes in the Task team leadership (TTL) over the implementation period. TTL transitions were
        handled with extended overlaps to lessen possible negative impacts on continuity.
       The Bank teams proactively addressed the project’s critical issues, including restructuring the
        project to strengthen attribution and adapting to the evolving security situation.
       Synergy between the Agriculture and Food team (AgGP) and the Macroeconomics, Trade and
        Investment (MTI) team under the Third Fiscal Management, Sustainable Growth, and Service
        Delivery Development Policy Financing (DPF3), was instrumental in introducing a policy measure
        on PPR vaccination subsidy mechanism and modalities for the organization of annual mass PPR
        vaccination campaigns.

 Summary of Quality of Supervision Assessment. The Bank team successfully navigated several
 challenges and guided the project implementation towards a successful outcome. The team proactively
 addressed implementation issues and used the synergy within the Bank to introduce the PPR vaccination
 policy. However, the Bank team could have addressed M&E design issues at an earlier implementation
 stage. Overall, the Bank supervision is rated Satisfactory.

 Based on the assigned ratings to QAE and Bank Supervision, the overall Bank Performance is
 rated Satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization




                                                                                                Page 15 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BF Livestock Sector Development Project (P159476)



a. M&E Design
      The PAD did not include a Theory of Change (ToC), which the Bank did not require at the time of
        appraisal. Nonetheless, the ICR included a ToC constructed based on the project activities, outputs,
        and outcomes described in the PAD. The ToC also included the underlying assumptions
        underpinning the achievement of the PDO.
       The PDO was measured through five PDO outcome indicators: (a) Percentage increase of the
        yields produced by targeted beneficiaries among selected value chains; (b) Incremental sales in
        targeted value chains (aggregated over all the targeted value chains); (c) Time (weeks) to reach
        50% of the targeted beneficiaries as foreseen in the inclusive crisis intervention plans; (d) Farmers
        reached with assets and services (of which 30% women and 20% youth); and (e) Beneficiary
        satisfaction rate for services provided by the project for the livestock sector (including female
        beneficiaries). These indicators were directly linked to the PDO, measurable, and had reasonable
        targets, except for indicator (a), which had a target that was unrealistic in the fragile context and
        was revised to 10% during implementation.
       The Results Framework included eight intermediate results indicators (IRIs) to track the project's
        progress and measure achievements of different activities. Overall, the IRIs were measurable and
        directly connected to the supported activities; most had baseline data. The RF lacked indicators to
        track project activities supporting the milk, pork, honey, and fish value chains. Also, the indicator
        measuring herd prevalence of CBPP and post-vaccinal seroprevalence of PPR had measurability
        and attribution concerns.
       Overall, the M&E design had some shortcomings related to some indicators' measurability and
        attribution features. The RF also lacked indicators to measure some project-supported activities, as
        noted above.



b. M&E Implementation
       The project's PCU was responsible for M&E implementation. RECiVEL was responsible for
         monitoring citizen engagement and the corresponding PDO level results indicator (conducting
         satisfaction surveys). According to the ICR (paragraph 50), the PCU was staffed with qualified
         M&E specialists at the national and decentralized project coordination levels.
        Data collection of value chain beneficiaries was greatly facilitated using the Kobo Toolbox
         tool. Project monitoring also benefited from using the Geo-Enabling for Monitoring and
         Supervision (GEMS) tool, as several maps with GPS coordinates of the location of project
         activities were prepared (ICR, paragraph 50). However, data collection from microprojects
         became challenging as their numbers increased.
        An impact assessment and a detailed project review were carried out, which, according to the ICR
         (paragraph 50), were of "good quality." Monitoring and evaluation activities were generally well
         carried out, with good monitoring of project inputs, outputs, and performance indicators, except for
         areas affected by insecurity.
        After the Mid-Term Review (MTR), specific indicators were reformulated, targets revised, and new
         intermediate indicators were introduced.



c. M&E Utilization

                                                                                                  Page 16 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BF Livestock Sector Development Project (P159476)



        To ensure complete dissemination of the lessons learned, 13 dissemination workshops were
         organized in all 13 regions of Burkina Faso to report to local authorities, stakeholders in the
         livestock sector, and development partners on the project achievements and lessons learned
         (ICR, paragraph 52).
        The ICR (paragraph 53) reported that the project’s M&E system was used to validate the
         reference situation for foot-and-mouth disease. This allowed the establishment of the prevalence
         rate and different animal age groups, which helped calibrate a containment strategy.
        The M&E data was also used in day-to-day monitoring of the performance of the various project
         activities to redeploy resources as needed and give focused attention. This was particularly
         helpful in expediting the establishment of Productive Alliances, which had started late.
         Understanding where help was needed through M&E helped render timely support.

  Summary of M&E Quality Assessment. M&E design suffered from moderate shortcomings.
  Implementation was effective, and enough data was generated to assess the project outcomes and test
  the links in the results chain. Also, several design shortcomings were rectified during
  implementation. Utilization benefited from the data generated, which informed management decisions
  and the final project evaluation. Overall, the Quality of M&E is rated Substantial with moderate
  shortcomings.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as an environmental Category B. It triggered two environmental safeguard
   policies: Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) and Pest Management (OP4.09), and one social
   safeguards policy, Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12). The project's physical activities would be site-
   specific, and their potentially adverse environmental impact was expected to be moderate and reversible
   under appropriate mitigation measures. The project activities would cover several agroecological areas as
   part of its nationwide coverage of sedentary livestock activities. Specific environmental mitigation measures,
   based on the most appropriate environmental management practices tailored to local circumstances,
   would therefore be required. An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and a
   Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) were prepared. The ESMF and the RPF were approved and
   disclosed respectively on February 20, 2017, and March 1, 2017.

   Compliance with Environmental Safeguards. According to the ICR (paragraph 55), "the ESMF was duly
   implemented." No significant environmental incidents were recorded throughout implementation, including
   during the construction of infrastructures, implementation of microprojects, and business plans of productive
   alliances.

   Compliance with Social Safeguards. According to the ICR (paragraph 56), "the social safeguards were
   closely monitored and strictly observed." During the construction of a veterinary post, an affected person
   was housed and compensated based on the RPF’s guidance outlines (ICR, paragraph 56). Also, 12
   individuals whose land was used or affected by public infrastructure (vaccination parks) provided their full

                                                                                                    Page 17 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BF Livestock Sector Development Project (P159476)



   agreement, and due compensation was provided. A Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) was established
   but with delays. The project registered 13 complaints in implementing its activities, and according to the
   ICR (paragraph 56), "all of which were satisfactorily resolved." The ICR (paragraph 56) also reported that
   "no suspected or actual acts of gender-based violence (GBV) or Sexual Exploitation and Abuse/Sexual
   Harassment (SEA/HS) were recorded in the implementation of project activities."




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management (FM). Overall, FM performance was satisfactory (ICR, paragraph 57). The
   project’s disbursement rate was 100%, and its financial accounts were up to date. The quality of reporting
   was satisfactory, and audits were supplied within the timeframe under the Financing Agreement. The final
   audit report should be submitted to the Bank no later than June 30, 2023. The financing for the 20
   veterinary students who are still completing their studies has been taken over by the sister project
   (PRAPS-BF), which is also funded by the World Bank (ICR, paragraph 57).

   Procurement. Overall procurement performance was satisfactory (ICR, paragraph 58). The project
   experienced initial procurement delays due to a lack of capacity in some technical departments (ICR,
   paragraph 45). There were no cases of mis-procurement (ICR, paragraph 58).




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None.



d. Other
   The project supported installing and operating bio-digesters to improve livestock waste management. The
   use of the resulting gas instead of firewood was estimated to save 343 ha of forest land per year and
   sequester about 4,152 tons of carbon dioxide equivalent annually, for an aggregate of up to 20,760 tons
   equivalent over the course of the project’s implementation period (ICR, paragraph 43).



11. Ratings
                                                                               Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                       IEG
                                                                               Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                        Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Bank Performance               Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                 Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                 ---                   Substantial

                                                                                                 Page 18 of 20
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       BF Livestock Sector Development Project (P159476)




12. Lessons

The ICR included six lessons. The following three are emphasized with some adaptation of
language:

1. When defining indicators for livestock herd improvement programs, it is important to
critically account for all the elements along the entire chain to adequately calibrate the time
needed for successful implementation. Herd improvement programs, especially when starting
from a very low infrastructural and human capacity base, require a lot of pre-requisites, including
establishing the appropriate physical and logistical infrastructure (adequately equipping
multiplication centers and decentralized handling facilities, acquiring high performance breeding
stock and appropriate climate-controlled transportation mechanisms, etc.), and training staff at all
levels. The gestation period of animals needs to be fully accounted for as well. All this helps set
realistic expectations of the productivity levels achievable during the project’s implementation period.

2. Establishing a flexible M&E system that allows the revision of outcome indicators is
important to sharpen attribution and set realistic expectations. Recalibrating aspects of the
project as soon as the need for corrective measures is detected is more effective than waiting for the
mid-term review to take action. This can create missed opportunities for timely intervention.

3. To ensure a successful outcome for projects in fragile environments, it is important to
work with local stakeholders, rely on digital technology, enhance multi-sectoral
collaboration, and intensify implementation support. In a fragile environment, working with local
stakeholders, including local administration and civil society, is vital in project implementation. The
project worked with the Citizen’s Livestock Monitoring Network (RECiVEL) for situational and activity
monitoring within a constant feedback loop. RECiVEL's sustained presence on the ground and
ability to undertake a rapid return when calm is restored allowed the project to exploit windows of
opportunity whenever such windows open up, thus facilitating a rapid rebound when the situation
allows it to do so safely. Also, harnessing digital technology facilitated real-time monitoring, thus
aiding in quick decision-making in a rapidly changing environment. Enhancing multi-sectoral
collaboration created incentives and facilitated the introduction of a policy measure on the Small
Ruminant Plague (PPR) vaccination subsidy mechanisms and modalities for organizing annual
mass PPR vaccination campaigns. Finally, the Bank’s project implementation support team was in
constant touch with their government counterparts with a high degree of informality, facilitating rapid
decision-making.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR




                                                                                                    Page 19 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      BF Livestock Sector Development Project (P159476)



Quality of Evidence. The ICR benefited from the data collected by the M&E system, which enabled tracking the
progress of activities and assessing the achievement of the PDO. Overall, the quality of the evidence was
acceptable.

Quality of Analysis. The ICR provided clear links between evidence and findings and used the evidence base to
serve the arguments under the different sections, particularly the discussion on outcomes.

Lessons. Lessons reflected the project experience and were based on evidence and analysis.

Results Orientation. The ICR included a comprehensive discussion on the achievement of the PDO. The
outcome discussion was well balanced between what the project achieved on the ground and the achievement
of outcome indicators.

Consistency with guidelines. The ICR used the available data to justify most of the assigned ratings.

Conciseness. The ICR provided comprehensive coverage of project activities and candidly reported on
shortcomings. Reporting on safeguard compliance was thorough but lacked an explicit statement on
compliance with the Bank's safeguard policies. The ICR lacked details on the project support for milk, fish,
honey, and pig value chains.

Summary of the Quality of ICR Assessment. The ICR was well written and benefited from the evidence base
generated through the project's M&E system. It included an explicit discussion on achieving outcomes and
reflected relevant lessons. The ICR provided a comprehensive assessment of M&E. Overall, the Quality of the
ICR is rated Substantial with minor shortcomings.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                   Page 20 of 20
