      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Pub. Exp. and Fiscal Risk Mgmt DPL-DDO (P154981)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0022923

1. Operation Information



 Operation ID                               Operation Name
 P154981                                    Pub. Exp. and Fiscal Risk Mgmt DPL-DDO

 Country                                    Practice Area (Lead)
 Peru                                       Governance



 Non-Programmatic DPF

 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                   Total Financing (USD)
 IBRD-85850                                 18-Feb-2019                                       1,250,000,000.00

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 11-Feb-2016                                30-Sep-2020

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                               Co-financing (USD)

 Original Commitment                         1,250,000,000.00                                                0.00

 Revised Commitment                          1,250,000,000.00                                                0.00

 Actual                                      1,250,000,000.00                                                0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Judyth L. Twigg             Jennifer L. Keller           Gabriela Chamartin Escobar      IEGEC




2. Program Objectives and Pillars/Policy Areas
DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives

The program development objectives (PDOs) for the Public Expenditure and Fiscal Risk Management
Development Policy Financing (DPF) with a Deferred Drawdown Option (DDO), as set out in the Program
Document (PD, p. 1), were "to support the Government of Peru’s efforts to improve (i) the management and
reporting of public expenditures in sub-national governments (SNGs), and (ii) the government’s legal and
institutional framework for public-private partnerships (PPPs)." The Letter of Development Policy (PD, p. 50)

                                                                                                    Page 1 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Pub. Exp. and Fiscal Risk Mgmt DPL-DDO (P154981)



specified essentially the same objectives with expanded wording: "(i) improved management and
accountability of public spending by SNGs, and (ii) improvement of the government's legal and institutional
framework to evaluate fiscal risks in PPPs and accelerate their implementation."

For the purpose of this evaluation, the operation will be assessed on the basis of its two objectives as stated
in the Letter of Development Policy, as this wording provides more specificity:

      Improve the management and accountability of public spending by SNGs
      Improve the government's legal and institutional framework to evaluate fiscal risks in PPPs and
       accelerate their implementation


b. Pillars/Policy Areas
The operation's two pillars corresponded to the PDOs:

Pillar 1: Improving management and reporting of public expenditures in SNGs supported reforms aimed
at promoting fiscal responsibility among SNGs and at providing the tools for improving the administration of
SNGs.

Pillar 2: Improving the government’s legal and institutional framework for PPPs sought to make PPP
project evaluation more rigorous, minimize fiscal risks, and facilitate PPP project implementation.


c. Comments on Program Cost, Financing and Dates

Program cost. The operation was a US$1.25 billion stand-alone DPF with a DDO.

Financing. The DPF was fully financed by the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development.

Dates. The loan was approved on February 11, 2016, and became effective on April 28, 2016, with an original
closing date of February 18, 2019. The full US$1.25 billion was disbursed in a single tranche on August 20,
2020. The Implementation Status and Results Report dated November 21, 2019, shows that the closing date had
been extended to February 18, 2022, but no project documents confirm the exact date of that extension. The ICR
reports a closing date of September 30, 2020.


3. Relevance of Design

a. Relevance of Objectives

 The operation's objectives were highly responsive to country context, including constraints identified
 in the 2017 Systematic Country Diagnostic. Improving the public management and reporting framework for
 subnational levels and the evaluation of fiscal risk coming from PPP projects were two key areas in need of
 improvement for Peru's otherwise robust economic management framework. Following a constitutional reform
 in 2001, Peru launched a decentralization process that sought to improve public service delivery and promote
 regional development. This process accelerated in 2006 with the transfer of most sectoral functions and
 associated financial resources to 26 regional governments (RGs) and more than 1,800 local governments

                                                                                                     Page 2 of 17
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Pub. Exp. and Fiscal Risk Mgmt DPL-DDO (P154981)



(LGs). By 2014, SNGs accounted for about 60 percent of public investment spending and 38 percent of total
spending in the non-financial public sector. However, many SNGs experienced challenges with setting and
monitoring spending and debt targets related to these new responsibilities due to a variety of factors: poor
enforcement of the regulatory regime, weak oversight capacity, and a low level of professionalization of staff
and managers. The operation's first objective directly addressed these development constraints.

In parallel with the decentralization process, PPPs expanded rapidly in Peru, with contracts for 70 projects
signed between 2006 and 2014 amounting to US$30 billion, and US$14 billion signed in 2014 alone. PPPs
were either self-sustaining (requiring minimal or no guarantees from the government) or were co-financed. The
latter required budget resources that represented either spending commitments or explicit contingent liabilities
that are formalized in legal instruments. The Ministry of Economy and Finance (MEF) estimated that, by the
end of 2014, the net present value of all firm and contingent liabilities embedded in PPP contracts, net of
income that might be collected from the projects, amounted to 4.2 percent of gross domestic product (PD, p.
20). The expansion of PPPs heightened fiscal risks and represented an increasing demand on the budget that
required continuous monitoring. The framework for managing PPP projects was appropriate but needed
additional steps to fully integrate PPPs into the public investment system and to deploy a proper decision
process for the assumed fiscal risks. The operation's second objective responded to this context.

The objectives also supported both government and World Bank strategies, though the linkages with
the current Bank strategy are more oblique than direct. They supported two of the six axes of the
government's Bicentennial Plan (2018-2022): State and Governability, which focused on reforms
to improve the management capacity of SNGs and to support citizen participation through transparency of
public information and accountability; and Regional Development and Infrastructure, which highlighted the
promotion of PPPs in support of decentralized investment in productive and basic services infrastructure. The
operation was also tightly aligned with the government's rolling three-Multiannual Macroeconomic Framework
(Marco Macroeconómico Multiannual, MMM) for 2016-2018, which highlighted tools the government was
deploying to improve the management of SNGs and PPP projects. The objectives were tightly aligned with the
Bank's Country Partnership Strategy at appraisal (FY2012-16), which contained an objective to improve public
investment execution in SNGs. The Country Partnership Framework at closing (CPF, FY2017-21) stated that
"engagement focused at the sub-national level to address regional disparities should continue to be
encouraged, given the decentralized setting of the country." Though there were no pillars or objectives in this
CPF directly supporting SNGs or PPPs, the operation broadly contributed to the CPF pillar on services for
citizens across the territory and its objective to enhance the environment for sustainable private sector
investments.

The objectives, instrument, and reform areas were suitable for World Bank involvement. The authorities
valued the Bank's technical support embedded in the operation's design, preparation, and supervision (PD, p.
2). With elections upcoming in 2016, the DDO -- a contingent credit line that allows the borrower to rapidly
meet its financing requirements following a shortfall due to adverse economic events -- was an appropriate
instrument. It left some contingent financing for the next government, and its hedging feature was valuable in a
situation of potentially volatile financial markets and could buffer shocks, were they to appear. A parallel DPF-
DDO supported other government reform efforts to enhance the education policy framework, facilitate the
entry/exit and operation of firms, and reduce transaction costs in trade.


b. Relevance of Prior Actions

Rationale

                                                                                                   Page 3 of 17
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Pub. Exp. and Fiscal Risk Mgmt DPL-DDO (P154981)




The operation contained eight prior actions (PAs), with four PAs under each objective.

Table 1: Objectives and Prior Actions for the Peru Public Expenditure and Fiscal Risk Management
DPF-DDO

Objective 1: Improve the management and accountability of public spending by SNGs
PA1: The government has issued regulations to strengthen the management and reporting
framework for fiscal responsibility in SNGs, including the procedures for determining the fiscal
targets-setting methodology, reporting and disclosure requirements, and sanctions for non-
compliance with the fiscal rules established by Law 30099 and its amendments.
PA2: The government has granted authority to the General Directorate of Macroeconomic Policy
and Fiscal Decentralization (Dirección General de Politica Macroeconómica y Decentralización
Fiscal, DGPMACDF) within the Ministry of Economy and Finance (MEF), to monitor SNGs' fiscal
and financial management performance according to Law 30099 and its amendments, and
provide technical assistance to SNGs.
PA3: The government has issued regulations to implement the new Strengthening Fiscal
Responsibility and Transparency Law (Law 30099), which created an independent Fiscal Council
(Consejo Fiscal) whose functions are to: (evaluate ex-post compliance and changes of fiscal
rules; (ii) evaluate the macro fiscal forecasts considered in the Multiyear Macroeconomic
Framework; and (iii) evaluate short- and medium-term fiscal policy in terms of stance and
sustainability.
PA4: The government has issued regulations to implement the professionalization of managers in
the civil service, creating a new category of public managers for both national and SNGs, the
Public Directors (Directivos Público), subject to merit-based recruitment and regular performance
evaluations.
Objective 2: Improve the government's legal and institutional framework to evaluate fiscal
risks in PPPs and accelerate their implementation
PA5: The government has enacted a new public-private partnership (PPP) framework to: (i)
incorporate PPPs into the budget process, and ensure spending units (PPP promoters) prioritize
their budget allocations for PPP in a way that is consistent with their existing fiscal framework; (ii)
ensure that only projects with a strong business case as reflected in the evaluation report (Inform
de Evaluación) that adhere to the principles of value-for-money and adequate risk-sharing are
selected; and (iii) require MEF's favorable binding opinion to the business case reflected in the
evaluation report (Inform de Evaluación) and to the final draft of the corresponding PPP
agreement prior to the entering into any PPP contract.
PA6: The government has appointed the MEF as the guiding entity (ente Rector) of the National
Private Investment Promotion System for the development of PPPs, acting through the recently
created General Directorate for Private Investment Promotion Policy, which enables MEF to play
its role as the highest normative authority for the interpretation of PPP legislation, as well as to
enact and improve guidelines and methodologies for the development of PPPs.
PA7: The government has revised: (i) the procedures for receiving and processing co-financed
unsolicited PPP proposals, including the roles and responsibilities of key government agencies
(soliciting agency, Proinversión, and MEF) and the requirement at the national level of a Supreme
Decree listing the specific interventions and the amount of budgetary support that the soliciting
agency (e.g., ministries) will need to allocate to said co-financed unsolicited PPP proposals; and

                                                                                                      Page 4 of 17
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Pub. Exp. and Fiscal Risk Mgmt DPL-DDO (P154981)



(ii) the dispute resolution mechanisms in PPP contracts, which include arbitration, a dispute
settlement body (Junta de Resolución de Disputas), and the use of an alternative mechanism
through the intervention of a neutral third party (Amigable Componedor).
PA8: The government has set up the National Private Investment Promotion System to guide
PPPs under a clear, streamlined, and traceable process with roles and responsibilities to provide
greater predictability to private investors while further enhancing the channels to evaluate the
overall fiscal impact.



Objective 1: Improve the management and accountability of public spending by SNGs

The PAs supporting the first objective (PAs 1 through 4) promoted fiscal responsibility among SNGs and
provided them with tools to improve administration and transparency at the SNG level. PAs 1 through 3
introduced improvements to the reporting and fiscal responsibility framework for the public sector as a whole
and particularly for SNGs, covering rules, accountability, monitoring, and transparency. PA4 enhanced SNG
effectiveness by increasing professional management capacity. Overall, there was a clear causal link with
plausible attribution between the PAs and the objective.

PA1 (issuing regulations on management and reporting framework for SNGs): A framework for
subnational fiscal rules and transparency was established in the 2000 Fiscal Responsibility and Transparency
Law and associated bylaws. However, most SNGs experienced challenges with compliance due the complexity
of the fiscal responsibility framework and large number of fiscal rules. In 2012, only one-third of RGs and almost
no LGs were in compliance. An updated 2013 Fiscal Responsibility and Transparency Law (Law 30099)
modernized the principles and institutions to promote fiscal responsibility among SNGs and streamlined the
number of subnational fiscal rules from seven to two (a limit on the annual growth in total [non-financial] public
expenditure to the average of revenue growth of the last four years, and a cap on the overall stock of debt that
an SNG can take to less than their own revenue, measured as an average over the last four years). PA1
spelled out the key implementation details for Law 30099, defining (i) the types of revenues and debt to be
included in the calculation of fiscal rules; (ii) the specifics of SNGs' reporting obligations through multi-year fiscal
management reports (MYFMR) submitted to MEF; and (iii) the procedures for application of corrective
measures in cases of repeated non-compliance (establishment of convergence plans with annual targets, with
sustained non-compliance resulting in withdrawal of permission to contract or issue debt of any kind and
withdrawal of access to central government co-financing programs). The MYFMRs provide the information
basis for MEF to plan future transfers (which represent the bulk of SNGs' revenue) and guide SNGs through
analysis of potential ways to bring their finances into alignment with the rules. As such, they are designed to be
tools both for building subnational fiscal management capacity and for making SNGs accountable. PA1
included a ministerial resolution specifying the sequenced rollout of the reporting requirement for LGs from
2015 through 2020, starting with the largest (and presumably highest capacity) LGs and then moving to the
smallest (which would likely require more intensive capacity building and support). These measures
represented substantial contributions to the objective of improving the management of SNGs' public spending,
providing tools for compliance with fiscal rules and sanctions for non-compliance. Relevance of PA1:
Satisfactory.

PA2 (monitoring of SNG fiscal and financial management and technical assistance to SNGs): Much of
SNGs' inability to comply with fiscal rules and reporting requirements in the past had been driven by lack of
technical capacity to understand or implement them, especially given the complexity of the previous fiscal
responsibility framework. The central government's efforts to provide support were not formally organized or

                                                                                                        Page 5 of 17
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Pub. Exp. and Fiscal Risk Mgmt DPL-DDO (P154981)



commissioned to a specialized unit. PA2 designated DGPMACDF, specifically its Directorate of Fiscal
Decentralization Policy and Subnational Finances, as the institutional home within MEF for subnational capacity
building, implementation support, monitoring, and compliance mechanisms. Concretely, the Directorate was
assigned responsibility for formulating and managing technical assistance to SNGs, preparing tools and
materials SNGs need to project their expenditure and debt limits, and analyzing and validating submitted
MYFMRs. This measure was a key complement to PA1 and an important contribution toward achievement of
the objective. Relevance of PA2: Satisfactory.

PA3 (creation of an independent Fiscal Council): Prior to the operation, MEF was both (i) establishing the
assumptions and preparing the macroeconomic projections to be included in the multiannual macroeconomic
framework (MMM), which determined the spending paths for both the national government and each SNG, and
(ii) following up on compliance with the fiscal rules by itself and by the SNGs. This represented a conflict of
interest. While local think tanks, academics, and the Central Bank of Peru issued independent views on the
country's fiscal policies, none had established a clear methodology or periodicity for review. Furthermore,
broader accountability of SNGs to their constituencies and stakeholders was not feasible, as MEF's annual
reports on their compliance with fiscal rules were not published. PA3 established, for the first time, a Fiscal
Council to provide technical, independent, and non-binding opinions on (i) the fulfillment of fiscal rules by the
national government and SNGs, (ii) the macroeconomic and fiscal projections used for formulation of the MMM,
(iii) the short- and medium-term evolution of public finances, and (iv) the methodology used to calculate fiscal
accounts in structural terms. The measure also established the Council's access to information from the
MEF; its composition, staff, and budget; key milestones for its implementation and issuance of reports; and the
requirement that its reports be made available to the public. In tandem with the sanctions specified in PA1,
the Fiscal Council's oversight role and reporting functions would be expected to provide an incentive to MEF
and SNGs to improve the quality of fiscal projections and budget execution. Taken together with PA1 and PA2,
PA3 would plausibly improve management of public spending. Publication of the Council's reports was
reasonably expected to contribute to improved accountability of public spending. Relevance of PA3:
Satisfactory.

PA4 (creation of Public Directors): Historically, SNGs' public management, execution of spending, and
compliance with fiscal rules were hindered by the low level of professionalization of its staff and managers. The
National Civil Service Authority had estimated that the recruitment or promotion of over 70 percent of key
management positions in SNGs depended on political affiliation rather than professional ability or merit.
Turnover was high when administrations changed. In 2013, the government approved a broad civil service
reform program that consolidated the previously fragmented public service system into a single regime. Under
this reform, PA4 created a new group of civil servants in management positions, Public Directors, whose terms
in office are insulated from election cycles. It established a gradual, mandatory designation of Public Directors
at the subnational level through the implementation of merit-based recruitment and performance-based
evaluation procedures intended to raise professional standards at the management level. The process was to
start with recruitment in RGs, to be followed by LGs. This capacity-building measure, by focusing on
professionalization as a key contributor to improved management and expenditure reporting and, most
importantly, separating managers' terms of office from election cycles, represented a substantial contribution to
the objective of improving the management of SNGs' public spending. Relevance of PA4: Satisfactory.

Objective 2: Improve the government's legal and institutional framework to evaluate fiscal risks in PPPs
and accelerate their implementation

The PAs supporting the second objective (PAs 5 through 8) brought discipline, transparency, and predictability
to PPP preparation, implementation, and completion by enhancing the regulatory environment to keep pace

                                                                                                   Page 6 of 17
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Pub. Exp. and Fiscal Risk Mgmt DPL-DDO (P154981)



with the expansion of PPPs. PA5 introduced new rigor and harmonization to PPP evaluation processes,
subjected PPPs to the budget process, and required MEF's approval before entering into any PPP contract.
PA6 established MEF's legal authority to manage the PPP program. PA7 improved the handling and
transparency of unsolicited proposals and disputes. PA 8 supported private investors. Overall, there was a clear
causal link with plausible attribution between the PAs and the objective.

PA5 (enacting of a new PPP framework for incorporating PPPs into the budget process and evaluating
PPPs): Following the rapid expansion of PPPs in the previous decade, additional steps were needed to fully
integrate PPPs into the public investment system and deploy a proper decision-making process for the
assumed fiscal risks. PA5 amended the PPP framework law to include rules and criteria for government support
for PPP projects, including a binding requirement that MEF issue a favorable opinion on the "business case" for
a project in its evaluation report, and to establish instruments for project preparation and selection. The revised
rules and procedures were to be completely harmonized with those for a typical public investment project,
including a clear-cut processing calendar aligned with the overall budget calendar, so that budget allocations for
investment projects under PPPs would be consistent with the country's approved budget framework. PA5
included a requirement for Investment Committees in ministries, regional governments, and local governments
involved in PPP projects to prepare multiannual reports each February on PPP investment, covering planning
and programming of projects and commitments, to ensure that each entity takes a global view of the PPP
portfolio. These measures represented substantial improvements in the government's institutional and legal
framework to evaluate fiscal risks in PPPs. Relevance of PA5: Satisfactory.

PA6 (appointing MEF as the highest regulatory authority for PPPs): Prior to the operation, a singular
authority on when and what types of fiscal support could be provided to PPP projects existed only at the final
stage of a project's approval, and according to the PD (p. 22), this authority was easily circumvented. MEF's
institutional capacity to engage in such analysis was weak. In addition, data on PPP projects was dispersed
across the country, including at subnational levels, making it difficult to achieve a comprehensive view of all
projects. PA6 designated MEF as the lead authority to manage the approval process, with decision-making
authority on when and what types of fiscal support can be provided to PPP projects. Under PA6, the DGPPIP
within MEF was staffed with about 30 qualified personnel, with a mandate to define instruments, guidelines,
good practices, and a standard contract guidance document for the structuring and tendering of PPPs. The
DGPPIP was also expected to work closely with Proinversión, the private investment promotion agency, at the
proposal and design stage, to involve MEF early in the process. Finally, the DGPIP was expected to establish
and maintain a comprehensive registry of PPP projects and contracts to allow for better accounting and
managing of medium- and long-term fiscal commitments and fiscal risks, and to allow MEF to improve its
reporting on fiscal contingencies. These measures gave MEF the authority and tools to manage fiscal risk
emanating from PPP projects, contributing substantially to achievement of the objective. Relevance of PA6:
Satisfactory.

PA7 (revising procedures for processing unsolicited PPP proposals and dispute resolution
mechanisms in PPP contracts): Prior to the operation, processes for reviewing unsolicited PPP proposals
lacked definition and transparency. Acceptance of unsolicited submissions across the entire calendar year
drained staff resources and reduced the ability to compare proposals or realize potential value-added from
synergies across projects. Furthermore, over 60 percent of PPP contracts were renegotiated, often soon after
awarding the project, with the same contract often renegotiated several times. Improved conflict resolution
instruments were needed to reduce renegotiation occurrences (beyond the reduction likely to occur because of
MEF's enhanced regulatory authority) and the costs associated with disputes. PA7 required unsolicited
proposals to follow the government's Public Investment System (Sistema Nacional de Inversión Pública, SNIP)
that processes all public investment projects. This system sets an annual window for receiving unsolicited

                                                                                                    Page 7 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Pub. Exp. and Fiscal Risk Mgmt DPL-DDO (P154981)



 proposals and establishes criteria for project selection, government support (guarantees and subsidies), and
 roles and responsibilities for clearances, regulating all stages of the PPP cycle for unsolicited proposals. PA7
 also introduced a framework for alternative settlement of PPP project-related disputes, including independent
 (non-binding) opinions by neutral third parties. These measures reduced the risk that unsolicited PPP proposals
 would drain public sector resources, reduced the scope for corruption, improved handling of disputes, and, in
 principle, improved the quality of approved PPPs. They contributed substantially to achievement of the
 objectives of improving fiscal risk assessment and accelerating implementation of PPPs. Relevance of PA7:
 Satisfactory.

 PA8 (setting up the National Private Investment Promotion System): Prior to the operation, the path to
 track processes related to private participation in PPPs at the national and subnational levels was not clear,
 given the multiple pieces of legislation and unwritten processes that existed to handle PPPs within the SNIP.
 There was a need to provide more transparency to the investment process, in particular at the subnational
 level, and to provide more predictability to investors. PA8 established a single entry point to manage private
 investments, creating a clear, streamlined, traceable process with well-defined roles and responsibilities for
 each stakeholder, including the requirement that MEF review and clear all contracts before initiating
 procurement. This provided greater predictability for private investors while further enhancing channels to
 evaluate projects' overall fiscal impact. Relevance of PA8: Satisfactory.



Rating

Satisfactory


4. Relevance of Results Indicators

Rationale

Table 2: Results Indicators by Objective and PAs; Baseline and Target Values; Status and
Achievement

                                                   Actual at
                                                               Actual as
    Results                                       Target Date                 RI
             Associated     RI                                    % of
   indicator                      Baseline Target                        Achievement
                PAs     Relevance                               targeted
      (RI)                                           (most                  rating
                                                                 change
                                                    recent)
 Objective 1: Improve the management and accountability of public spending by SNGs
 RI1: % of                         50% of 65% of
 RGs and        PA1                 RGs     RGs 73% of RGs        RGs:
 LGs in                                                           153%
 compliance     PA2        MS      59% of 70% of 93% of LGs                  High
 with fiscal                        LGs     LGs                   LGs:
 rules for      PA3                                 (2019)        722%
 SNGs                              (2014) (2017)
 RI2 (SNG
 submission

                                                                                                    Page 8 of 17
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Pub. Exp. and Fiscal Risk Mgmt DPL-DDO (P154981)



of
multiannual
reports in
compliance
with
reporting
obligations)
was
dropped.


RI3: % of
managerial
positions                                0     77%       14%
covered by       PA4        MS                                     18%      Negligible
Public                               (2014) (2017)     (2019)
Directors in
RGs
Objective 2: Improve the government's legal and institutional framework to evaluate
fiscal risks in PPPs and accelerate their implementation
RI4: % of
PPP
promoters
                 PA5                     0    100%      100%
that issue
                            MU                                    100%        [High]
yearly
                 PA6                 (2014) (2017)     (2017)
reports on
PPP
investments
RI5:
Number of
unsolicited                            147      88        32
proposals        PA7        MU                                    195%        [High]
presented                            (2015) (2017)     (2019)
for
evaluation
RI6:             PA8         U          17       0         0      100%        [High]
Number of
PPP                                  (2014) (2017)     (2019)
contracts
without
favorable
MEF
opinion prior
to the
tender
process at



                                                                                            Page 9 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Pub. Exp. and Fiscal Risk Mgmt DPL-DDO (P154981)



all levels of
government

Note: RI achievement ratings note achievement of the targeted change for the RI. Ri achievement ratings
in brackets reflect ratings that may have been adjusted based on weak relevance of the results indicator
(discussed in efficacy section).



Objective 1: Improve the management and accountability of public spending by SNGs

RI1 (SNG compliance with fiscal rules) captured improved management of fiscal risks by SNGs by
measuring their compliance with either the expenditure and debt limit rules or their convergence targets.
This compliance was directly aligned with the objective to improve management of public expenditures.
RI1 tracked the combined impacts of PAs 1-3 in strengthening the fiscal responsibility framework,
enhancing oversight, and increasing the management capacity of SNGs. The definition and measurement
were clear and credible; PA1 facilitated measurement of the indicator by requiring improvements in SNG
reporting on fiscal targets. However, the indicator captured considerably more than what the PAs alone
could achieve, as additional fiscal policy actions by SNGs were required that were not supported by the
operation. Relevance of RI1: Moderately Satisfactory.

RI3 (RG managerial positions covered by Public Directors) directly measured the implementation of
PA4 in addressing staffing as a constraint to effective management in SNGs. Given the phased rollout of
the Public Director position first to RGs and then to LGs, measurement only of RGs was reasonable in
capturing the initial phases of this personnel reform. The indicator measured the share of formally
qualified managers, and presumably, the required performance reviews monitored and helped adjust the
skills level of managers in the system. The definition and measurement were clear and credible.
Although the indicator was at the output level and did not capture the extent to which more highly qualified
mangers actually improved management of public spending, it did measure the share of positions that
were insulated from the political cycle. Relevance of RI3: Moderately Satisfactory.



Objective 2: Improve the government's legal and institutional framework to evaluate fiscal risks in
PPPs and accelerate their implementation

RI4 (issuing of yearly reports on PPP investments) was intended to capture the complementary
contributions of PA5 and PA6 (improved budget formulation practices and enhanced MEF approval and
oversight authority for all projects implemented under a PPP arrangement) on improving the binding
nature of budget ceilings given to spending units and enhancing decisions on expenditure allocations
across sectors. The definition and measurement were clear and credible. However, the indicator was an
output, measuring only the issuing of reports by spending units, not capturing the quality of these reports
or the extent to which they reflected improved evaluation of fiscal risks. Relevance of RI4: Moderately
Unsatisfactory.

RI5 (reduction in unsolicited PPP proposals presented for evaluation) was intended to measure the
impact of PA7's implementation of screening procedures for unsolicited PPPs before they go to
Proinversión. The definition and measurement were clear and credible. Although the indicator captured


                                                                                                   Page 10 of 17
                   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                   Pub. Exp. and Fiscal Risk Mgmt DPL-DDO (P154981)



               that fewer unsolicited proposals were submitted, measuring the reduction in burden from unsolicited
               proposals, it did not measure whether the proposals that were accepted were of higher quality (and
               therefore reduced fiscal risks). Furthermore, a reduction in the number of unsolicited proposals could have
               been affected by many factors outside the control of the operation, including COVID-19 restrictions.
               Relevance of RI5: Moderately Unsatisfactory.

               RI6 (PPP contracts without favorable MEF opinion) measured the elimination of PPPs that had not
               received MEF approval. It captured the implementation of PA5 and PA8, both of which specified that a
               favorable MEF opinion would be required in the final draft of any PPP agreement before entering into a
               contract. The definition and measurement were clear and credible. However, this was an output, not
               measuring the extent to which the requirement for MEF approval catalyzed progress toward the objective
               of improved assessment of fiscal risk or acceleration of implementation. Relevance of RI6:
               Unsatisfactory.




   Rating

   Moderately Unsatisfactory

   5. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
EFFICACY_TBL




                OBJECTIVE 1
                Objective
                Improve the management and accountability of public spending by SNGs

                Rationale
                One RI was highly achieved, and the other was negligibly achieved. The actions therefore contributed to
                moderately satisfactory achievement of the objective to improve management and accountability of public
                spending by SNGs.

                The introduction of new regulations on the management and reporting framework for SNGs, together with
                capacity building provided by MEF and the granting to MEF of full authority to monitor SNGs' fiscal and
                financial management performance, helped SNGs comply with the newly simplified fiscal rules. The new
                Fiscal Council's independent, credible analysis and oversight has helped MEF and SNGs improve the quality
                of their fiscal projections and planning practices. These measures contributed to an increase in the
                percentage of SNGs in compliance with expenditure and debt limit rules, or convergence targets, from a
                baseline of 50 percent to 73 percent for RGs, exceeding the target of 65 percent, and from a baseline of 59
                percent to 93 percent for LGs, exceeding the target of 70 percent (achievement of RI1: High). While this result
                was likely affected by factors outside the scope of the operation, the prior actions made a plausibly strong
                contribution to the achievement. The ICR (p. 11) notes that, of the RGs and LGs not in compliance, 100
                percent of RGs and 95 percent of LGs presented Fiscal Adjustment Commitments in 2019, as required. (The
                operation's RI2 on SNGs submission of MYFMRs was dropped, as those reports are now generated
                automatically by the financial management system). Although there were no RIs that directly measured the



                                                                                                                Page 11 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Pub. Exp. and Fiscal Risk Mgmt DPL-DDO (P154981)



accountability element of the objective, PA3's requirement that the Fiscal Council's reports be published on its
website contributed to transparency and accountability.

The reform measure to create new Public Director posts was not implemented as envisioned. The
expectation was that the new designation would simplify the recruitment of managers and make hiring and
promotion more transparent and merit-based, translating into improved management capacity and therefore
better public expenditure execution and compliance with fiscal rules. However, there were implementation
delays and resistance to the reform, which proved to be overly ambitious and not adequately supported by
analytical work (see Section 8a). Of 800 managerial positions expected to be covered by professional public
managers by 2017, only 150 public directors were in place in 2019 (achievement of RI3: Negligible).




Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Improve the government's legal and institutional framework to evaluate fiscal risks in PPPs and accelerate
their implementation

Rationale
There was full achievement of all three RIs, but each RI had significant shortcomings, and there were no RIs
to measure the part of the objective on accelerated implementation of PPPs. The actions therefore
contributed to moderately satisfactory achievement of the objective to improve the government's legal and
institutional framework to evaluate fiscal risks in PPPs and accelerate their implementation.

Harmonization of the evaluation process for all PPP projects with that for a typical public investment project,
requiring that spending units prepare multiannual reports each year on PPP investments, and giving MEF full
authority to manage the PPP approval process aimed to make the PPP evaluation process more rigorous,
minimizing fiscal risks and facilitating PPP project implementation. As a result, the number of spending units
issuing multiannual reports on a yearly basis increased from a baseline of zero in 2015 to 100 percent in
2017, achieving the target, but there was no measure of the extent to which this reporting resulted in
improved evaluation of fiscal risk and acceleration of PPP implementation. Achievement of RI4 therefore does
not constitute strong evidence of progress toward the objective.

Revising the procedures for receiving and processing unsolicited PPP proposals addressed an important
shortcoming in the legal framework for PPPs. The number of unsolicited proposals submitted for evaluation
decreased from a baseline of 147 in 2015 to 32 in 2019, exceeding the target of 88 by 2017. However, the
mechanisms by which the newly rigorous and transparent procedures would have reduced the submission
(as opposed to approval) of unsolicited proposals were not clear. Achievement of RI5 therefore does not
constitute strong evidence of progress toward the objective.

Requiring that MEF approve the final draft of all PPP agreements led to a reduction in the number of PPP
contracts without MEF's favorable opinion prior to the tender process at all levels of government from a

                                                                                                 Page 12 of 17
                         Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                         Pub. Exp. and Fiscal Risk Mgmt DPL-DDO (P154981)



                      baseline of 17 in 2014 to zero in 2017, achieving the target. However, this result measured only
                      implementation of the prior actions and did not demonstrate whether MEF approval led to better-quality
                      proposals representing improved evaluation of fiscal risks or accelerated implementation. Achievement of
                      RI6 therefore does not constitute strong evidence of progress toward the objective.



                      Rating

                      Moderately Satisfactory


OVERALL EFF TBL OLD




Overall Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
Rationale

With achievement of both objectives rated moderately satisfactory, overall efficacy is rated moderately
satisfactory.



Overall Efficacy Rating
Moderately Satisfactory


      6. Outcome

      Rationale

      Satisfactory relevance of the prior actions and moderately satisfactory efficacy produces an Outcome rating of
      moderately satisfactory. Though the prior actions contributed strongly and plausibly to achievement of both
      objectives, and most results indicator targets were fully achieved or overachieved, there was negligible progress
      in improving the professionalization of management in subnational governments, most results indicators had
      limited relevance, and there was no results indicator to measure accelerated implementation of public-private
      partnerships. Additional evidence would be required to establish that the objectives had been achieved as a
      result of the PAs.


      a. Rating

      Moderately Satisfactory

      7. Risk to Development Outcome

      Achievement of increased SNG compliance with fiscal rules is subject to moderate political and
      governance risks. Political risk is a function of electoral politics and the longer-term priority given to improving


                                                                                                                    Page 13 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Pub. Exp. and Fiscal Risk Mgmt DPL-DDO (P154981)



the performance of sub-national level entities. That risk is mitigated by the longer-term nature of the DDO,
with reversal of a PA or unsatisfactory implementation of the reform program resulting in the Bank holding
any drawdown request. These provisions allow reforms to become established and less vulnerable to
reversal. Political and governance risk is also mitigated by joint multi-year technical and analytical work with
the Bank that is expected to continue at both the SNG level and in the PPP area.

The limited achievement in strengthening management capacity at the subnational level remains at
risk due to continued delays in implementing the new civil service regime, as that reform continues to face
institutional resistance due to vested interests, its cost, and a challenging recruitment process.

The ICR notes that there are minimal risks to the achieved PPP reforms, despite their having
"weathered early attempts to be reversed by a new government" (ICR, p. 16), but it does not provide
additional information on those risks or on the nature of the earlier challenges to the reforms.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Bank Performance – Design

Rationale


Consultations with stakeholders: Project design was based on an effective country dialogue at both
national and sub-national levels that was able to shape the project to emerging needs. Bank staff, together
with officials from the MEF, held consultations on the priorities and concerns expressed by key
stakeholders, including financial institutions, construction companies, SNGs, private investors, and the
broader community of non-governmental organizations. Some of these stakeholders expressed concerns
about the potential for the reforms to raise the overall financial costs of new PPPs, which the Bank and
MEF addressed by collaborating to develop insurance products for key PPP risks.

Risk assessment: Risk assessment was thorough (PD, pp. 33-34), with moderate risks and mitigation
measures identified in the areas of political and governance risks (which the PD stated were mitigated "as
policy continuity is very likely, partly because it is entrenched in a technically sound middle-level
management in the public sector"), macroeconomic risks (mitigated through Peru's saving of commodities
windfalls, leaving itself with significant resources to afford needed investments and strong macroeconomic
buffers), institutional capacity risks (partly mitigated through the operation's focus on only a few key policy
areas), and stakeholder risks related to SNGs and potential PPP private sector partners (mitigated through
planned communication and training associated with the actions supported by the operation). However, the
risk of limited capacity and institutional resistance related to the civil service reform, specifically the Public
Directors regime, was underestimated. "Additional technical analysis and studies should have been carried
out to fully understand the organizational and financial implications of such a large and politically sensitive
reform ... the responsibilities for fiscal management needed more time to be established before this new
cadre of directors could be widely rolled out ... the slow uptake of professional directors may be attributed




                                                                                                        Page 14 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Pub. Exp. and Fiscal Risk Mgmt DPL-DDO (P154981)



to the fact that SNGs incur a cost in hiring these staff and because SNGs may not have fully mastered the
new and somewhat more challenging recruitment process" (ICR, p. 12).

Analytical underpinnings: Design drew on the experience of other Bank operations -- including the
parallel Boosting Human Capital and Productivity DPF-DDO (2016-2020, US$1.25 billion) and the Lima
Metro Project (2016-2020, US$300 million) -- and extensive analytical work on topics covering SNGs,
public management, and PPPs. The PD (pp. 26-28) provides a list of timely relevant background work for
each of the PAs, covering policy and technical notes, reports, working papers, and peer-reviewed
academic articles, dated 2010 through 2014. As a consequence, the assumptions underlying the results
chain connecting the PAs to the objectives were based on sound analysis that was relevant to the country
context. However, most of the results indicators were not adequate measures of the PAs' contributions to
achievement of the objectives.



Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

b. Bank Performance – Implementation

Rationale

Monitoring and reporting: The monitoring framework was based on existing statistics and reports regularly
published by MEF. The DGPMACDF and DGPPIP provided progress reports on the operation's two pillars.

Stakeholder and donor coordination: Collaboration with MEF, the Inter-American Development Bank, and
the German Kreditanstalt für Wiederaufbau helped mitigate stakeholder concerns about the upgraded SNG
responsibilities and new PPP approaches.



Rating

Satisfactory

c. Overall Bank Performance

Rationale

The design and implementation of the operation were moderately satisfactory in the aggregate, based on the
strong country dialogue and extensive analytical work underpinning design, effective consultations with
relevant stakeholders at national and sub-national levels and with other development partners, solid risk
assessment and implementation of mitigation measures, and the integrity of the results chain linking the PAs
to the objectives. There were some shortcomings, however, in risk assessment related to the civil service
reform, and significant shortcomings in the majority of the results indicators.


                                                                                                 Page 15 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Pub. Exp. and Fiscal Risk Mgmt DPL-DDO (P154981)




Overall Bank Performance Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

9. Other Impacts

a. Social and Poverty

No evidence was provided on achieved social or poverty impacts.



b. Environmental

No evidence was provided on environmental impacts.



c. Gender

No evidence was provided on gender impacts.



d. Other

---

10. Quality of ICR

Rationale

The ICR provides a coherent narrative and analysis of the operation's context, rationale, design, and results. It
provides enough evidence to allow a comprehensive and evidence-based review, situating the operation in the
context of the country's development needs and Bank and government strategies. The ICR is consistent with
guidelines and well written. It insightfully interrogates the integrity of the operation's results chain, including the
relevance of the prior actions and some of the results indicators, though the inadequacy of other indicators to
measure the corresponding actions' achievement of the objectives is not identified and addressed. The ICR
provides information outside the operation's results framework to compensate for the dropping of the second
results indicator.



a. Rating

                                                                                                         Page 16 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Pub. Exp. and Fiscal Risk Mgmt DPL-DDO (P154981)




Substantial

11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                  Disagreement/Comments
                                                                                  Insufficient evidence on
                                                                                  achievement of part of the
Outcome                         Satisfactory          Moderately Satisfactory     second objective, partly due to
                                                                                  weak relevance of most of the
                                                                                  results indicators.
                                                                                  Shortcomings in the formulation
Bank Performance                Satisfactory          Moderately Satisfactory     of the majority of the results
                                                                                  indicators.
Relevance of Results                                  Moderately
                                ---
Indicators                                            Unsatisfactory
Quality of ICR                  ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

A DDO can help reduce the potential for backtracking on reforms over a longer time frame than
traditional DPFs. In this case, attempts to reverse the public-private partnership reforms did not proceed partly
because of the risk of loss of the buffer to shocks afforded by the operation. This safeguard may be particularly
relevant in a context of political volatility in which commitment to some reforms may be reversed.

Civil service reforms can be politically challenging and require significant investments in change
management among key stakeholders. In this case, insufficient analytic work was conducted prior to the
operation to identify likely additional costs to subnational governments and sources of resistance.

A single results indicator can measure the contribution of more than one prior action to achievement of
an objective, but care must be taken not to situate such an indicator so far down the results chain that it
can also be significantly affected by factors outside the scope of an operation. In this case, the results
indicator on subnational governments' compliance with fiscal rules effectively captured the combined impact of
PAs 1-3, but it also went beyond what the PAs alone could achieve, complicating assessment of attribution.


13. Project Performance Assessment Report (PPAR) Recommended?

No




                                                                                                    Page 17 of 17
