     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Chad DPO (P163424)



                                                                       Report Number: ICRR0023424

1. Program Information



 Country                           Practice Area (Lead)
 Chad                              Macroeconomics, Trade and Investment

 Programmatic DPF

 Planned Operations                 Approved Operations
 0                                  0

 Operation ID                       Operation Name
 P163424                            Chad DPO




 L/C/TF Number(s)                  Closing Date (Original)                 Total Financing (USD)
 IDA-D3310                         30-Jun-2020                                        61,968,703.95

 Bank Approval Date                Closing Date (Actual)
 12-Sep-2018                       30-Jun-2020
                                   IBRD/IDA (USD)                             Co-financing (USD)

 Original Commitment                    65,000,000.00                                            0.00

 Revised Commitment                     65,000,000.00                                            0.00

 Actual                                 61,968,703.95                                            0.00




P168606_TBL
 Country                           Practice Area (Lead)
 Chad                              Macroeconomics, Trade and Investment

 Operation ID                      Operation Name
 P168606                           Chad Second ERR DPO ( P168606 )




                                                                                        Page 1 of 29
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Chad DPO (P163424)




  L/C/TF Number(s)                              Closing Date (Original)                   Total Financing (USD)
  IDA-D3310,IDA-D5510                           15-Jan-2021                                           100391319.58

  Bank Approval Date                            Closing Date (Actual)
  17-Jan-2020                                   15-Jan-2021

                                                IBRD/IDA (USD)                               Co-financing (USD)

  Original Commitment                              100,000,000.00                                               0.00

  Revised Commitment                               100,000,000.00                                               0.00

  Actual                                           100,391,319.58                                               0.00



 Prepared by                    Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Mees Daniel van der            Judyth L. Twigg               Jennifer L. Keller              IEGEC
 Werf



2. Program Objectives and Pillars/Policy Areas
EVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives

The Chad First Programmatic Economic Recovery and Resilience DPO (Development Policy Operation) and the
Chad Second Economic Recovery and Resilience (ERR) DPO formed a programmatic series of two development
policy operations. Its Project Development Objective (PDO) is stated in both Program Documents as “to (1)
enhance fiscal risk management; (2) improve oil revenue transparency and management; (3) promote resilience
and economic diversification in key real sectors; and (4) increase social protection for the poor and vulnerable.”
No formal PDO was stated in either the DPO1 (P163424) or DPO 2 (P168606) Financing Agreements.

For this Implementation Completion and Results Report Review (ICRR), the objectives of the series are taken to
be:

    1.   enhance fiscal risk management
    2.   improve oil revenue transparency and management
    3.   promote resilience and economic diversification in key real sectors
    4.   increase social protection for the poor and vulnerable


b. Pillars/Policy Areas
The series had four pillars in line with its four-part objective.




                                                                                                       Page 2 of 29
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Chad DPO (P163424)



Pillar I - Enhancing Fiscal Risk Management. The DPO series aimed to enhance fiscal risk management
through: (a) the improvement of debt management; (b) the rationalization of tax expenditures; (c) the reduction of
inefficiencies from the wage bill; and (d) the reduction of fiscal risks from state-owned enterprises (SOEs).

Pillar II - Improving Oil Revenue Transparency and Management. The DPO series aimed to improve the
contribution of the oil sector to fiscal sustainability and economic resilience by strengthening: (a) the oil revenue
management mechanism, (b) the transparency of petroleum contracts, and (c) control of oil production costs.

Pillar III - Promoting Resilience and Economic Diversification in Key Real Sectors. The DPO series aimed
to foster economic diversification and resilience of Chad’s population in the face of economic and climatic shocks
by promoting: (a) higher agricultural productivity and (b) greater access, coverage, and quality of information and
communication technologies (ICT) services.

Pillar IV- Increasing Social Protection for the Poor and Vulnerable. The DPO series aimed to strengthen
social protection for the poor and most vulnerable groups, including refugees, by developing an effective and
well-targeted social safety net (SSN) system as well as implementing a cash transfer mechanism.


c. Comments on Program Cost, Financing and Dates

The first operation, approved on September 12, 2018, was financed by an International Development
Association (IDA) grant of US$65 million (SDR 44.8 million). It became effective on November 20, 2018, and
closed on June 30, 2020. The amount disbursed was US$61,968,704. The second operation was also financed
by an IDA grant of US$100 million (SDR 72.9 million equivalent) and was approved on January 17, 2020. It
became effective on January 30, 2020, and closed on January 15, 2021. The amount disbursed was
US$100,391,320. Differences were due to exchange rate fluctuations between approval and disbursement
dates.


3. Relevance of Design

a. Relevance of Objectives

 At the time of the DPO1’s appraisal in mid-2018, the collapse of global oil prices, a persistently
 unstable regional security situation, and the high fiscal cost of ongoing humanitarian efforts, had
 strained Chad’s public finances.

 The export price for Chadian crude oil fell from an average of US$100 per barrel in 2013-2014 to US$34 in
 2016, putting an abrupt end to growth rates of around 6.3 percent per year in 2013-2014. Oil-related fiscal
 revenues dropped from 11.7 percent of non-oil gross domestic product (GDP) in 2014 to just 3.5 percent in
 2016. Continued regional insecurity constrained cross-border trade, limited foreign direct investment (FDI),
 and imposed additional costs through heightened expenditures for security and hosting refugees (each
 costing 2.8 percent of GDP in 2016). In the absence of adequate macro policy buffers and facing immediate
 financing needs, the government had no room to undertake counter-cyclical fiscal policy to effectively support
 economic recovery and protect social spending. Monetary policy options were also limited given Chad’s
 participation in a currency union and as the regional central bank worked to manage the fallout from the oil
 price shock across the Economic and Monetary Union of Central Africa (CEMAC). Therefore, the government


                                                                                                        Page 3 of 29
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Chad DPO (P163424)



responded with a proactive and severe fiscal adjustment, cutting public spending by 10.8 percent of non-oil
GDP between 2014 and 2016. Yet Chad’s fiscal situation remained challenging during 2017, with a financing
gap that led to domestic arrears accumulation. This fiscal consolidation led to a deep and extended recession
with high social costs. Dwindling fiscal resources had disrupted vital public services despite the government’s
efforts to protect priority social spending. Payments to community-based teachers and health workers,
funding for student scholarships, social program benefits, and the provision of agricultural inputs were either
delayed or halted altogether on various occasions, and all public investment projects were suspended. The
crisis also weighed heavily on the country’s ability to implement critical structural reforms for non-oil sector
recovery and social inclusion.

Following an emergency DPO in FY17, the ERR series aimed to shift toward medium-term structural
reforms. Chad had already received $130 million through the FY2016 Fiscal Consolidation Program DPO
and the FY2017 Emergency Fiscal Stabilization Operation (EFSO). This capital injection temporarily
alleviated the government’s fiscal crisis and prevented fiscal collapse but failed to achieve sustained
meaningful policy reform. This ERR DPO series was meant to shift World Bank support towards a structural
resilience and growth agenda. Despite the ongoing recession at the time of the DPO series preparation in
2017, WB Management expected Chad to quickly shift to recovery in the next year. Relative political stability
provided an opportunity for deep structural reforms. These factors justified the move from stand-alone DPOs
to a more medium-term policy strategy, supported by structural reforms through the DPO series. Although
neither program document extensively cited either the 2015 or 2022 Systemic Country Diagnostics (SCD) or
analytical work like the Financial Sector Assessment Program, Debt Management Performance Assessment,
Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability assessment, or Public Investment Management Assessment,
the series objectives were broadly relevant to Chad’s development constraints. They were especially relevant
to the constraints of weak productivity and exports, which reduced the return on agricultural and livestock
activities, and weak access to education and health care due to insufficient and inefficient public spending.

Relevance to the CPF and country development strategy

The series was closely aligned with Chad’s development strategy and the priorities set out in the
Country Partnership Framework. The DPO was aligned with the strategic objectives of the 2017-2021
National Development Plan and focused on three of the four strategic pillars of the government’s program,
including Pillar II, strengthening good governance and the rule of law, Pillar III, development of a robust and
competitive economy, and Pillar IV, improving the quality of life of the Chadian population. The DPO series
supported the three engagement themes of the CPF FY16-FY2020: (i) strengthening management of public
resources; (ii) improving returns to agriculture and building value chains; and (iii) building human capital and
reducing vulnerability.

The objectives were broadly consistent with the depth and scope of the reforms supported. The
exception was Objective III, promote resilience and economic diversification in key real sectors, where the
PAs were directed exclusively at the agriculture and ICT sectors and did not promote resilience within the ICT
sector or have a robust diversification focus. This objective could have been more narrowly and accurately
defined as "strengthening agricultural inputs supply chains and the ICT market." Similarly, Objective IV,
increase social protection for the poor and vulnerable, could have been more focused as "implementing cash
transfers based on a Unified Social Register (USR)."


b. Relevance of Prior Actions


                                                                                                     Page 4 of 29
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Chad DPO (P163424)



Rationale

The first DPO had a total of 11 Prior Actions (PA) across the four pillars totaling 25 sub-actions. The second
DPO had 12 indicative triggers but was reduced to 9 prior actions totaling 12 subactions.

Out of the twelve indicative triggers for DPO2, three were dropped for DPO2. Under Pillar I on
enhancing fiscal risk management, DPO2’s prior actions for Trigger 3 and Trigger 4 were dropped. Trigger 3
called for the government to (i) implement through the Law of Finance (LOF) 2018 the measures needed to
address the remaining irregularities observed in the payroll audit, and (ii) publish an implementation
completion report of recommendations of the payroll audit. Trigger 4 called for the Ministry of Finance and
Budget to (i) allocate adequate financial resources in its Budget Law 2019 to the SOE Oversight Division and
(ii) complete the inventory of SOEs.

The triggers were dropped under guidance from Operations Policy and Country Services (OPCS), which
considered the underlying legal mechanism weak and advised strengthening the policy matrix by
consolidating the reform program around the 8 or 9 strongest PAs. This did impact the achievement of the
targets for the associated RIs, as the target for eliminating "ghost" workers was not met and there was
considerable delay in the publication of the audited financial statements. Another prospective PA was
dropped because its actions were already completed during DPO1.

Table 1: Objectives and Prior Actions

 Prior Actions
 Objective 1 – Enhance Fiscal Risk Management
 DPO 1                                           DPO 2
 Prior Action 1: (a) The Minister of Finance and
 Budget and the Minister of Economy and
 Development Planning have issued an inter-
 ministerial regulation Arrêté suspending the    Prior Action 2: To strengthen debt management, the
 use of non-concessional external debt           MFB has
 contracted or guaranteed by the Government (a) adopted through the 2019 Budget Law, a medium-
 and non–financial public enterprises, with a    term debt management strategy; and (b) strengthened
 maturity of more than one year (except for      the institutional capacity of the debt management unit
 short-term commercial loans and re-scheduling through appointing relevant staff pursuant to
 of debt contracted before June 30, 2017)        Decisions number 86, 76, 69 and 150.
 (Arrete No. 62/PR/PM/MEPD/MFB/2017); and MFB/SE/DGM/DGSTCP/DHM/2019 of the Director
 (b) the Ministry of Finance and Budget (MFB) General of Treasury Services and Public Accounting.
 has published a report on the public and
 publicly-guaranteed (PPG) debt situation at
 end-2016
 PA 3: The Government has
 (a) completed and validated a review of its     PA 4: To rationalize tax expenditure, the MFB has: (a)
 known tax exoneration agreements                established a technical committee in charge of
 (Conventions d’Etablissement) and a study of reviewing tax exemptions pursuant to Decree
 tax expenditures; and (b) issued and            1607/PR/MFB/2019; and (b) published an inventory of
 implemented regulations stating that all new    existing tax exemptions through the 2019 Budget
 tax exemptions require a prior written approval Law.
 by the MFB (Law of Finance 2018).

                                                                                                   Page 5 of 29
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Chad DPO (P163424)



PA 5: The Government has (a) eliminated
identified ghost and under-age workers from
the payroll; and (b) issued a “circular”
announcing measures planned to phase out all
payments to ineligible recipients as per the
audit.
PA 6: The Minister of Finance and Budget has
(a) identified an Oversight Body in its
organizational chart to oversee and monitor
SOEs and defined such body’s responsibilities
through the adoption of terms of reference and
(b) has published the most recent audited
(certified) financial statements of nine identified
SOEs on the Minister of Finance and Budget
website.
Objective 2 – Improve Oil Revenue Transparency and Management
PA 7: The Minister of Finance and Budget and
the Minister of Petroleum and Energy have (a)
established, by inter-ministerial decision
(Arrêté), a coordination body, with
representation from the MFB, the Ministry of
Petroleum, and the Chad National Oil
Company (SHT); and tasked such body with:
(i) forecasting and analyzing petroleum
revenues; (ii) assessing the effectiveness of
                                                    PA 8: To improve oil revenue management, the
the petroleum revenue management
                                                    Recipient has enacted Law 0040/PR/19 on the oil
mechanism provided under Law
                                                    revenue management incorporating a fiscal
002/PR/2014; (iii) designing a new mechanism
                                                    stabilization function.
for the management of petroleum revenue
aimed at supporting fiscal policy, the allocation
of resources to support priority programs, and
macro-fiscal policy, the allocation of resources
to support priority programs, and macro-fiscal
stability; and (iv) published, through the MFB,
quarterly petroleum sector updates for the last
two quarters of calendar year 2017 and the
first quarter of calendar year 2018.
PA 9: The Ministry of Petroleum, Energy, and PA 10: To improve governance in the petroleum
Mining (MPEM) has: (i) issued a communiqué sector, the MPEM has, through Decree
announcing its intention to develop and adopt 1838/PR/MPME/2019, put in place a disclosure policy
a policy on disclosure of contracts and licenses for petroleum contracts mandating their publication.
in the petroleum sector; and (ii) published such
communique on its website and that of the
Ministry of Finance and Budget; and (b)
published contracts and licenses (as such term
is defined under Extractive Industries
Transparency Initiative (EITI) Requirement 2.4


                                                                                                 Page 6 of 29
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Chad DPO (P163424)



of EITI Standard 2016) representing at least 50
percent of hydrocarbon production in 2015 on
the website of the MFB.
                                                PA 12: To improve cost control, the Chad National Oil
PA 11: The Chad National Oil Company (SHT)
                                                Company (SHT) has completed the audit of joint
has published certified/validated financial
                                                accounts of two operators and agreed on corrective
statements for the period 2017 on its website.
                                                measures with said operators.
Objective 3 -- Promote Resilience and Economic Diversification in Key Real Sectors
PA 13: The Government, through the Ministry
of Agriculture (MOA), has taken steps to
implement Law No. 016/PR/2016 through: (a)
the adoption and publication of the inter-
ministerial Arrete on seed production, control,
                                                PA 14: To improve efficiency of agricultural inputs, the
and certification regulations (Arrete
                                                MOA has:
No.81/PR/PM/MPIEA/MESRI/MDICPSP/17);
                                                (a) published the pricing system for seed certification
and (b) the adoption and publication of Arrete
                                                through Arrêté 32/PR/MPIEA/DGM/DSCP/2019, and
No.70/PR/PM/MPIEA/SE/SG/2017, on specific
                                                (b) registered the National Federation of Seed
technical regulations for seed production of
                                                Producers in the Official Gazette of September 30,
specific varieties of vegetables and cereals;
                                                2018.
and (c) the issuance of Arrete
No.86/PR/PM/MPIEA/SE/SG/DGEPAPS/2017,
setting up the establishment of the seed
control and certification function within the
MOA
PA 15: The Government has continued the
set-up of the open access wholesale public
                                                PA 16: To reduce the cost of international
private partnership (PPP) for the governmental
                                                connectivity, the Ministry of Post and New Information
fiber optic network with a communication
                                                Technology (MPNTI) has entered into and approved a
(“communique”) by the Ministry of Information
                                                concession agreement, incorporating international
and Communications Technology (MICT)
                                                best practices of open access principles, through
dated September 26, 2017, published on the
                                                Décret 457/PR/MPNTIC/2019.
MICT’s website, detailing the open access
wholesale principles for the PPP.
                                                PA 17: To modernize and enhance agricultural
                                                extension services to farmers, the Ministry of
                                                Agriculture (MOA) has adopted an agriculture
                                                extension strategy to pilot new performing agricultural
                                                technology packages in High Agriculture Potential
                                                Zones through Arrêté 143/PR/MPIEA/DGM/2019
PA 18: The Government has increased the
transparency of Universal Electronic
Communications Service Fund (FSUCE)
through: (a) the online publication by the
Information and Communication Technology
Development Agency (ADETIC) of its 2015
and 2016 financial statements; and (b) the
clarification by Decree of the percentage of

                                                                                                    Page 7 of 29
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Chad DPO (P163424)



FSUCE resources dedicated specifically to the
funding of the universal service/access to ICT
services (Universal Service).
Objective 4 -- Increase Social Protection for the Poor and Vulnerable
PA 19: The Ministry of Economy and
Development Planning has issued an Arrêté
                                                 PA 20: To enhance implementation of cash transfer
requesting all national and international
                                                 programs, the MEDP has established a unit in charge
stakeholders involved in the collection of data
                                                 of managing the USR under its institutional
on social protection to: (a) use a harmonized
                                                 supervision through Arrêté
questionnaire for data collection; and (b) make
                                                 0010/PR/MEPD/SE/DG/INSEED/2019
all data available to Government through the
Safety Nets Unit (CFS).

Objective 1 -- Enhance Fiscal Risk Management

Strengthening the management of public and publicly guaranteed debt: PAs 1 and 2

The reforms advanced by this DPO series aimed to help Chad return public debt to a sustainable
path. Chad’s risks of external and overall debt distress had been assessed as high since 2018 (Joint WB-IMF
Debt Sustainability Analysis). Non-concessional external debt weighed heavily on the sustainability of public
debt. Meanwhile, domestic public debt had also risen significantly, with the stock of Treasury bills and bonds
topping 7.9 percent of GDP in 2016. Significant weaknesses in debt management contributed to the problem.
First, several agencies were involved in signing external debt contracts; second, debt management was
divided between the ministries of Planning and Finance, with little coordination between them; third, there
was no comprehensive database of debt contracts, leading to delays in servicing debt; and finally, poor cash
management compounded the debt management problem. Under Prior Action 1, the Ministry of Finance and
Budget (MFB) and the Ministry of Economy and Development Planning (MEDP) suspended the use of all
non-concessional external debt, contracted or guaranteed by the government and non-financial public
enterprises, with a maturity of more than one year, and the MEDP would publish a report on public and
publicly guaranteed debt at end-2016. The MFB would, through the 2019 Budget Law, adopt a medium-term
debt strategy and strengthen the institutional capacity of the debt management unit by appointing its staff (PA
2). The suspension of non-concessional borrowing and improvement in debt management were expected to
ease liquidity pressures and diminish the nominal stock of external commercial debt. Supporting the debt unit
with adequate resources was expected to help improve the debt recording system, allowing the government
to publish a comprehensive debt statistical bulletin semi-annually. PA 1 was informed by the 2016 IMF
assessment “Chad – Third and fourth reviews under the ECF” and the then-draft, Joint WBG IMF (LIC) Debt
Sustainability Analysis (DSA) (published June 2019). The IMF assessment pointed to the urgent need for
improved debt management, and the joint WBG IMF DSA concluded that Chad was at high risk of debt
distress, and identified the reforms under the PA as necessary to reduce the risk of debt distress from actual
distress to a high-risk rating. There is a strong results chain linking PA 1 and 2 to the achievement of PDO 1
Enhancing fiscal risk management to which they are likely to make a major contribution. PAs 1 and 2 are
therefore both rated satisfactory.

Rationalizing tax expenditures: PAs 3 and 4

The reforms supported aimed to rationalize tax expenditures. Tax expenditures, estimated to amount to
50 percent of non-oil revenues or 4.7 percent of non-oil GDP in 2014, narrowed Chad’s already tight fiscal
space. The decisions on tax exemptions were not centralized at the MFB level, which significantly

                                                                                                   Page 8 of 29
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Chad DPO (P163424)



undermined controls over related fiscal implications, costs, and benefits, as well as their compliance with
Economic and Monetary Community of Central Africa (CEMAC) regulations. Under PA 3, the government
would complete and validate a review of existing tax exoneration agreements and a study of tax
expenditures, and issue and implement a regulation requiring the approval by the MFB of all new tax
exemptions. This prior action would halt the uncontrolled accumulation of tax exemptions and afford the MFB
time to regain control over the system. Under PA 4, the government would establish a technical committee to
review tax exemptions and publish an inventory of existing tax exemptions in the 2019 Budget Law. This PA
was intended to help rationalize expenditures based on an informed assessment of costs and benefits and
tighter governance of the granting of future exemptions. The PAs were informed by a 2016 IMF report
Réforme de la fiscalité intérieure dans un contexte de choc and a 2017 EU report Orientations Après l’Atelier
National sur l’évaluation des dépenses fiscales et la réforme de l’IRPP on the proliferation of tax exemptions.
There is a strong results chain linking PA 3 and 4 to the achievement of Objective I to which they are likely to
make a major contribution. PAs 3 and 4 are therefore both rated satisfactory.

Improving the efficiency of the public wage bill: PA 5

Resolving anomalies in the payroll system and trimming the public wage bill would help address
fiscal risks. The payroll of the government was oversized, posing fiscal risks. The number of civil servants
doubled between 2007 and 2015, while total public administration wages and salaries tripled, reaching 7.5
percent of GDP by 2016. In 2015, the government conducted a biometric census of civil servants
that generated savings estimated at over 17 billion CFAF per year. It identified 10,220 “ghost workers,”
accounting for 12 percent of the total workforce. That census, however, did not cover payroll components
such as retirees, scholarships, family allowances, and other allowances. The remaining irregularities were
estimated at 7.6 percent of total salaries paid by the government and equivalent to 0.8 percent of non-oil
GDP in 2016. To continue the reform, the government hired an international firm to conduct an audit of the
payroll system aimed at identifying ghost workers among the newly hired and verifying salaries, salary
increases, and allowances. This operation supported the next steps in the reform process. The government
would eliminate identified ghost and under-age workers from the payroll and issue a circular announcing the
measures planned to phase out all payments to ineligible payroll recipients following the audit. This PA was
informed by a 2017 Ernst and Young report, Rapport provisoire de l’audit comptable et organisationnel de la
solde du personnel civil de l’Etat du Tchad. There is a strong results chain linking PA 5 to the achievement of
Objective I to which it is likely to make a major contribution. PA 5 is therefore rated satisfactory.

Improving SOE transparency and oversight: PA 6

Chad’s SOE sector lacked transparency and constituted a substantial fiscal risk. There were estimated
to be 30 entities in which the government had an equity stake, although there was significant uncertainty
about the exact number. Several SOEs relied entirely on direct subsidies from the government, with SOE
subsidies rising from 3.4 percent of non-oil GDP in 2011 to 4.8 percent in 2014. Beyond traditional subsidy
recipients (i.e., water, electricity, and the cotton parastatal), they included new companies such as the
cement plant, the oil refinery, the tractor assembly plant, and the fruit juice company, which were all
monopolies yet sold their products below cost . Even with subsidies, SOEs incurred losses and were unable
to meet their salary and tax obligations, creating significant fiduciary risk. Furthermore, some SOEs received
unbudgeted financial support from the central government, without adequate recording or transparency. To
begin to tackle the fiscal sustainability issues posed by SOEs, the government started to conduct an audit of
some SOEs. Still, the authorities lacked a comprehensive inventory of SOEs and their financial information.
The reform supported by PA 6 would begin to address this problem. The government would identify an
oversight body to oversee and monitor SOEs, identify the body’s responsibilities, and publish the most recent

                                                                                                    Page 9 of 29
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Chad DPO (P163424)



audited financial statements of nine SOEs that consistently incurred losses on the MFB website. This PA was
informed by a 2017 KPMG report.

This was likely to make a moderate contribution to the achievement of Objective I, as it left much uncertain
about the capacity and effectiveness of the oversight body and, at this stage, would not directly impact the
fiscal risks posed by the subsidies. PA 6 is therefore rated moderately satisfactory.

Objective 2 -- Improve Oil Revenue Transparency and Management

Improving the transparency and efficiency of the oil revenue management mechanism: PAs 7 and 8

A clear oil revenue management policy is critical for fiscal sustainability and economic resilience.
Chad’s oil revenue management law of 1999 was designed to ensure that the country’s oil revenues would
help to finance development and poverty reduction programs for current and future generations. Subsequent
amendments to the oil revenue management law undermined its role as a countercyclical tool. By 2014, no
stabilization or saving function was in place, and the revenue management mechanism had become a budget
earmarking tool channeling oil revenue to priority projects and general government expenditure. In an
economy where oil accounted for 20 percent of GDP, 56 percent of revenues, and 75 percent of exports, the
adoption of a new oil revenue management mechanism that supported counter-cyclical policies in the face of
oil price and crude production volatility was crucial for fiscal sustainability and economic resilience. Under PA
7, the MFB would establish a coordination body to forecast and analyze petroleum revenues, assess the
effectiveness of the current petroleum revenue management mechanism (Law 002/PR/2014), and design a
new mechanism for the management of petroleum revenues aimed at supporting the conduct of fiscal policy,
the allocation of resources for priority programs, and the pursuit of macro-fiscal stability. Through PA 8, the
government would enact a law on oil revenue management incorporating a fiscal stabilization function. The
new mechanism would enable the government to reduce the impact of crude production volume and price
volatility on public finances and deploy extractive revenues for the development of a resilient non-oil
economy, thus supporting fiscal sustainability and economic resilience. These PAs as well as the other PAs
under Pillar II were informed by seven WB and IMF reports from 2011 to 2019 on oil revenue transparency
and management. There is a strong results chain linking PA 7 and 8 to the achievement of Objective II
improving oil revenue transparency and management to which they are likely to make a major contribution,
PA 7 and 8 are therefore both rated satisfactory.

Improving transparency and oversight in the oil sector: PAs 9, 10, 11, and 12

Transparency issues also posed a challenge in the management of oil revenues. A self-assessment
conducted by Chad’s National Permanent Secretariat for Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative (EITI)
identified several implementation shortcomings vis-à-vis the 2016 EITI Standard. One was the absence of an
explicit government policy on the disclosure of contracts and licenses that govern the exploration and
exploitation of oil, gas, and minerals. In response, through PA 9, the MPEM would announce its intention to
develop and adopt a policy on the disclosure of contracts and licenses, publish the communique on the MFB
website, and publish, on the MFB website, contracts and licenses representing at least 50 percent of
petroleum production in 2015. Under PA 10, the MPEM would adopt a disclosure policy requiring the
publication of all petroleum contracts. This would advance the transparency of contracts and licenses. There
is a credible results chain linking PA 9 and 10 to the achievement of Objective II. However, they are likely to
make only a moderate contribution, as the PAs leave some uncertainty as to their actual impact. The issuing
of the communique under PA 9 is an announcement of future action, leaving uncertainty as to the actual
adoption of the disclosure policy. PA 10 is more robust but gives only limited guarantee that petroleum


                                                                                                   Page 10 of 29
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Chad DPO (P163424)



contracts will be published according to the policy. PA 9 and 10 are therefore both rated moderately
satisfactory.

PAs 11 and 12 addressed the issue of financial disclosure and cost audits at the Chad National Oil
Company (SHT) to promote increased transparency and efficiency in oil operations. Oil companies
active in Chad operate in an environment of weak oversight, weak authorization, and insufficient coordination
among government institutions, which increase the risk of malpractice or non-compliance. Weak oversight
results in information asymmetry between government and companies and lack of knowledge among
relevant government entities, which results in their inability to strategically oversee the development of the
sector and take actions to foster sustainability. The government has legal and contractual rights to carry out
financial audits of companies on a routine basis, yet this is not common practice. Currently, the efficiency of
oil production activities varies widely across operators, raising questions on the underlying reasons beyond
obvious factors such as scale, technology, and reservoir complexity. Under PA 12, the SHT would complete
the audit of the joint accounts of two major operators, Glencore and OPIC, and agree on corrective actions
with the operators which would increase the government’s understanding and control of production costs
across operators. There is an explicit results chain linking PA 12 to the achievement of Objective II, but while
there is a lot of potential for impact, it remains uncertain how much of a contribution PA 12 will make. PA 12
is therefore rated moderately satisfactory.

Since its creation in 2006, the SHT directly participates in oil extraction, owns 40 percent of a refinery
operated by China National Petroleum Corporation International (CNPCI), and is tasked with the
commercialization of the government’s royalty-in-kind in addition to its own share of production from its
participating interests. Despite its critical position in Chad’s oil sector, until 2017 the SHT did not publish a
report on its activities or its financial statements. Under PA 11, the SHT would publish its certified financial
statements for 2017 on its website. This would increase understanding of SHT’s operations, shed light on
SHT’s financial performance, and set the stage for benchmarking and public oversight. There is a credible
results chain linking PA 11 to the achievement of Objective II. However, while it set the stage for future
benchmarking and public oversight, its immediate impact on oversight was only moderate. PA 11 is therefore
rated moderately satisfactory.

Objective 3 -- Promote Resilience and Economic Diversification in Key Real Sectors

Improving the efficiency of agricultural inputs supply chains (seeds): PAs 13 and 14

Enhancing dissemination and adoption of agricultural technologies and good practices: PA 17

Although a largely agricultural country, Chad’s agricultural productivity remains low. Agriculture
accounts for 80 percent of employment but remains perennially mired in low productivity because of low
utilization of technology, weak extension services, and limited research capacity, which hindered the testing,
dissemination, and adaptation of agricultural innovations. The SCD of 2015 identified the need to boost
agricultural productivity as a key theme for reducing poverty and promoting growth. It also identified the need
for more intensive use of agricultural inputs such as seeds and fertilizers and the importance of improved
governance of input supply systems such as fertilizer and seeds. Although high-yielding and locally adapted
seed varieties have been developed, Chadian farmers do not use them. Effective scaling-up of seed
production, marketing, and quality control is constrained by a weak institutional framework for extension
services to farmers, including missing regulations. Under PA 13, the MOA would adopt and publish three
inter-ministerial orders to implement the Seed Law of 2016: 1) an order on the technical regulation of seed
production, control, and certification; 2) an order on specific technical regulations of seed production for


                                                                                                    Page 11 of 29
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Chad DPO (P163424)



various species of cereals and vegetables; and 3) an order setting up the implementation of the seed control
and certification function within the MOA (PA 13). Additionally, the MOA would publish the pricing system for
seed certification (PA 14). The reforms were intended to increase private sector involvement in and improve
seed production, marketing and distribution. The reforms also aimed to develop the seed market in Chad and
ultimately to increase agriculture productivity for all crops. The agricultural productivity PAs were informed by
the 2015 SCD and the 2017 Agriculture Sector Review, a European Commission-funded study carried out
with technical assistance (TA) from the Food and Agriculture Organization.

However, a lack of investment in irrigation makes investment in improved seeds perilous and less
attractive. Less than 14 percent of Chad’s cultivated land is under irrigation; the remainder is rain-fed.
Without irrigation, Chad’s unpredictable weather, made more erratic by the climate crisis, makes bad
harvests a significant threat that can wipe out the investment of fertilizers and improved seed varieties.
Indeed, the 2015 SCD, cited as a source for this PA in project documents, identified the lack of insurance
against a bad harvest as a key reason not to use such inputs. The SCD advised that the use of improved
water and land management techniques alone could raise yields by approximately 80 percent. The project
documents offer no insight into how this barrier to using improved seeds would be overcome. Without
improved water and land management, it is uncertain whether greater access to improved seeds would make
a significant contribution to increasing agricultural resilience. PAs 13 and 14 are therefore rated moderately
unsatisfactory.

To modernize agricultural extension services, the MOA would adopt an agricultural extension
strategy that pilots new agricultural technology packages in the high-potential agriculture zones in the
provinces of Mandoul, Moyen-Chari, and Salamat (PA 17). This PA would complement two other measures
that were previously implemented by the government to modernize agricultural extension: the adoption of a
five-year action plan for ANADER, the newly-created agency for rural development, and the signing of a
performance contract between the government and ANADER. PA 17 is therefore rated satisfactory.

Lowering the cost of international connectivity: PAs 15 and 16

Fostering a transparent and efficient enabling environment for the provision of ICT services: PA 18

Chad’s ICT sector ranks among the weakest in Sub-Saharan Africa (SSA), with at least 15 percent of the
population not covered by any mobile signal, 80 percent not covered by mobile broadband, and a stagnant
mobile penetration rate of 50 percent of the population. The series aimed to address two key constraints to
the ICT sector. First, international connectivity was limited, with only one operational fiber-optic network,
dominated by the Chadian and Cameroonian SOE monopolies, linking Chad to the SAT-3 submarine cable
via Cameroon. Second, there was a weak enabling environment for ICT services, with high regulatory fees
and a lack of financial transparency among industry regulators. Prices therefore remained high while service
quality was poor, especially for mobile broadband services.

Prior actions aimed at boosting ICT services followed a dual strategy aimed at increasing
international wholesale capacity and redundancy and enhancing the transparency of regulators. To
implement this strategy, the Ministry of Information and Communications Technology issued and published a
communique detailing the principles for wholesale open access connectivity for the PPP (with Chadian
telecom operators) for the government fiber optic network (PA 15). The international best practice of “open
access” management of fiber connections allows wholesale, transparent, non-discriminatory, fair and
reasonable, and effective access to the infrastructure for all market players. When applied to the fiber link
with Sudan this reduced wholesale prices of international connectivity by 87 percent. The wholesale open


                                                                                                    Page 12 of 29
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Chad DPO (P163424)



 access principles would apply to the current fiber cable linking N’Djamena to Cameroon as well as to the
 second connection between N’Djamena and Sudan, which had yet to start operations, and to a planned third
 link connecting N’Djamena to Niger, to be jointly financed by the African Development Bank (AfDB) and the
 European Union (EU). The effective implementation of the PPP along with the deployment of the third fiber to
 Niger was expected to contribute to a decline in international wholesale tariffs. Additionally, the Ministry of
 Post and New Information Technology approved a concession agreement incorporating the international best
 practices of open access principles to reduce the cost of international connectivity (PA 16). PA 18 was
 designed to increase transparency in FSUCE and one of the two main sector regulators, ADETIC. The ICT
 PAs were informed by the 2016 World Development Report on Digital Dividends and the 2017 AFCW3
 Economic Update on Enabling the Digital Revolution in SSA. Together, PAs 15, 16, and 18 present a clear
 and convincing results chain that is likely to have a robust impact on the ICT sector and a more indirect and
 likely modest impact on the achievement of PDO 3 Promoting resilience and economic diversification in key
 real sectors. PA 15, 16, and 18 are therefore all rated satisfactory.



 Objective 4 -- Increase Social Protection for the Poor and Vulnerable

 Implementing cash transfers based on a Unified Social Register (USR): PAs 19 and 20

 The safety net system in place to help poor households out of chronic poverty was very limited and
 unable to reduce poverty. At 0.8 percent of GDP, Chad’s social protection spending was below the Sub-
 Saharan average, and only a quarter of it is paid for by the state with the remainder funded by development
 partners. Support is mostly in-kind and targeted at vulnerable households who experience transient shocks.
 Safety nets for the chronically poor constitute only about 20 percent of total safety net spending. The
 unpredictability of the interventions and their humanitarian and short-term nature constrains a long-term and
 sustainable approach to reducing vulnerabilities. Recognizing this, the government adopted a National Social
 Protection Strategy in 2015 to create a structured approach to social protection, focused on direct support
 through cash transfers and training. Following the adoption of the Social Protection Strategy, the government
 created the CFS and organized a Steering Committee in 2016 to implement a pilot project aligned with the
 new strategy (the Chad Safety Nets Project (P156479), funded by the World Bank and the U.K. Department
 for International Development). Under PA 19, the MEDP requested all international and national stakeholders
 collecting data on social protection to use a harmonized questionnaire and make all data available to the
 government through the CFS. The government also created a Unified Social Register (USR) to collect data
 on the low-income population, including potential beneficiaries of the social protection program. The unified
 database was expected to minimize data collection costs and facilitate coordination among partners, faster
 scale-up during crises, and the monitoring and evaluation of the Social Protection Strategy. For this purpose,
 the MEDP established a unit to manage the USR under its supervision (PA 20). The social safety net PAs
 were informed by four WB reports on poverty reduction and social protection and a 2017 United Nations High
 Commissioner for Refugees’ socioeconomic profile of refugees. There is an explicit, comprehensive, and
 convincing results chain linking PA 19 and PA 20 to the achievement of PDO IV Increasing social protection
 for the poor and vulnerable. PA 19 and 20 are therefore both rated satisfactory.



Rating

Moderately Satisfactory


                                                                                                   Page 13 of 29
             Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
             Chad DPO (P163424)



      4. Relevance of Results Indicators

      Rationale

      Most of the 12 RIs were rated in the satisfactory range, with five rated satisfactory and two moderately
      satisfactory. Five indicators were rated moderately unsatisfactory. As such, most of the results indicators were
      adequate to measure the impact of the prior actions. However, in many cases, the indicators represented
      outputs of the prior actions. In a more robustly designed results framework, there would have been a stronger
      focus on the outcomes of the reform measures. For most of the results indicators, measurability (the definition,
      calculation, and data source of the indicator) was clear, although there were some weaknesses, particularly with
      results indicators for Pillar II. Most of the targets were appropriate and set at reasonable levels, but several were
      too ambitious in the context of high vulnerability to macro risks.

      Table 2: Results indicators by Objective and PAs; baseline and target values; status and achievement

                                                                                                       Actual
                                                                                                       Change
                                                                                                       in RI    RI
Results           Associated RI                                                     Actual Value as of
                                       Baseline                Target                                  Relative Achievemen
indicator (RI)    PAs        Relevance                                              Target Date
                                                                                                       to       Rating
                                                                                                       Targeted
                                                                                                       Change
Objective I: Enhancing Fiscal Risk Management
RI 1: No
increase in
nominal stock of                       US$ 1.4 billion   1.4 billion or less
                   1 and 2   S                                                      1.07 billion          100%       High
non-                                   (2017)            (20 21)
concessional
external debt
RI 2: Number of
conventions
associated with
                   3 and 4   MU        17 (2017)         0 (2021)                   N/A                   No data (Modest)
tax exemption
anomalies not
resolved
RI 3: Number of
government
workers on         5         MU        1,172 (2017)      0 (2021)                   N/A                   No data [Modest]
payroll ineligible
for salaries
RI 4: Number of
SOEs
audited/financial                                        More than 15
                   6         MS        9(2017)                                      22                    186%       High
statements                                               (2021)
published by an
Oversight Unit
Objective II: Improving Oil Revenue Transparency and Management

                                                                                                            Page 14 of 29
           Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
           Chad DPO (P163424)



RI 5: Balance of
the Stabilization                       0 XAF billion        20 XAF billion
                  7 and 8   MU                                                   0 XAF billion     0%        [High]
Fund (XAF                               (October 2017)       (2021)
billion)
RI 6: Number of
EITI reports
documenting
the government
disclosure policy
on petroleum
contacts and
licenses and      9 and 10 S            0 (2017)             1 (2021)            0                 0%        [Modest]
Chad’s contract
disclosure
practice as
compliant with
EITI
Requirement
2.4
RI 7:
Information on
the cost of oil
production
activities is
                                        No information
available to the 11 and 12 MU                                Yes (2021)          No                0%        Negligible
                                        available (2017)
MFB, the
Ministry of
Petroleum and
Energy and the
SHT
Objective III: Promoting Resilience and Economic Diversification in Key Real Sectors
RI 8:
Percentage                              2 percent of
increase in the 17, 13, and             cultivated land (per
                            MU                               5 percent (2021)    5.53 percent      118%      [Substantial]
cultivated land 14                      National Seeds
coverage with                           Policy 2014)
improved seed)
RI 9: Decrease
in wholesale
price of                                XAF                  XAF
                                                                                 XAF
international     15 and 16 MS          250,000/Mbps/month 60,000/Mbps/month                       115%      High
                                                                                 32,441/Mbps/month
connectivity                            (2017)               (2021)
(XAF per
Mbps/month)
RI 10: ARCEP 18             S           0 by ARCEP and       8 Financial         6 financial       50%       Modest
and ADETIC                              ADETIC (2018)        Statements by both statements by
fulfil their                                                 ARCEP and           ARCEP published

                                                                                                    Page 15 of 29
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            Chad DPO (P163424)



transparency                                                  ADETIC for the     between 2015 to
commitment by                                                 period 2015-2018   2020
publishing                                                    (4 each) (2021)
annually their
financial
statements
2015-2018
Objective IV: Increasing Social Protection for the Poor and Vulnerable
RI 11: Number
of agencies that
transmitted the
data collected
                 19 and 20 MS           0 (2017)              12 (mid 2020)      4                   33%        Modest
through the
harmonized
questionnaire to
the new USR
RI 12: Number
of households in
the USR
benefitting from
government       19 and 20 S            0 (2017)              12,000 (2021)      47,000              392%       High
SSNs (cash
transfers/cash-
for-work
programs)

      Note: Achievement ratings in table reflect level of achievement based on actual change relative to targeted
      change of RI. Where the achievement rating is shown in brackets, the RI is not deemed adequate for assessing
      achievement, and the rating may have been adjusted (noted in efficacy section).

      Objective I: Enhancing Fiscal Risk Management

      RI 1: No increase in nominal stock of non-concessional external debt: At the time of DPO2 approval, the target
      date was moved from mid-2020 to 2021 reflecting the timeline of each operation. PA 1 (suspending contracting
      non-concessional external debt with a maturity of more than one year) and PA 2 (adopting a medium-term debt
      strategy in the Budget Law of 2019 and strengthening the institutional capacity of the debt management unit)
      were both intended to reduce external debt and were thus adequately measured by RI 1. As a run-up in
      commercial external debt had been the main threat to public debt sustainability, a lower level of non-
      concessional external debt would reflect a reduction in debt-driven fiscal risks. Therefore RI 1 adequately
      measured the impact of the PAs on progress toward achievement of the targeted outcome, through reference to
      a clear and credible results chain. RI 1 is therefore rated satisfactory.

      RI 2: Number of conventions associated with tax exemption anomalies not resolved. DPO2 revised the RI’s
      language for clarity. It also lowered the baseline from 41 to 17 and the target from 31 to 0. PAs 3 (reviewing
      known tax exoneration agreements, conducting a study of tax expenditures, and requiring prior approval by the
      MFB of all new tax exemptions) and 2 (publishing an inventory of existing tax exemptions in the Budget Law of
      2019 and creating a technical committee to review tax exemptions) were both intended to reduce tax
      exemptions. Fewer conventions (tax exoneration agreements) associated with tax exemption anomalies would

                                                                                                       Page 16 of 29
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Chad DPO (P163424)



signal success in controlling tax expenditures and therefore enhancing fiscal risk management. RI 2 thus
adequately measured the impact of the PAs on progress toward achievement of the objective. However, the
sources of data to calculate the RI were vague, as is also apparent from the substantial recalculation of the
baseline. Indeed, no definitive list of exemptions was created despite significant efforts by an international
accounting firm. Consequently, at the time of the ICR, no data were available to assess achievement. RI 2 is
therefore rated moderately unsatisfactory.

RI 3: Number of government workers on payroll ineligible for salaries. DPO2 revised the RI’s language for
clarity. It also lowered the target from 750 to 0. RI 3 was adequate to measure the impact of PA 5, which
intended to identify “ghost” workers and under-aged workers and phase out payments to ineligible pay recipients
following an audit. Limiting ghost workers would have reduced expenses and therefore fiscal risk. Thus RI 3
adequately measured PA 5’s impact on the achievement of the objective. However, at the time of the ICR, no
data were available to assess achievement. RI 3 is therefore rated moderately unsatisfactory.

RI 4: Number of SOE audited/financial statements published by an Oversight Unit. DPO2 changed the target
year from mid-2020 to 2021 to align with the actual timeline of DPO2. At DPO1’s project design, two results
indicators were created to measure the impact of PA 6 (creating an SOE oversight division and publishing the
audited financial statements of SOEs). The first indicator captured having an SOE operational oversight division
in place and adequately staffed. This RI target was met in 2021 and dropped at the approval of DPO2. Even
without that RI, RI 4 was adequate to measure the impact of PA 6. At the design of PDO1, a second PA was
planned, focusing on the allocation of adequate financial resources in the Budget Law of 2019 for the SOE
oversight body. This PA was dropped to make DPO2 more focused, as it was achieved before DPO2 became
effective. With that PA, the link between the prior action and the indicator would have been tighter. RI 4 is
therefore rated moderately satisfactory.

Objective II: Improving Oil Revenue Transparency and Management

RI 5: Balance of the Stabilization Fund (XAF billion): The original indicator was “the government has adopted a
mechanism for the management of oil revenue that incorporates the stabilization of budget expenditure, in
compliance with CEMAC rules on financial savings.” DPO2 was revised to be more specific. RI 5 was intended
to measure the impact of designing a new oil revenue management mechanism (PA 7) and incorporating a fiscal
stabilization function in the new mechanism (PA 8). However, posting a certain balance in the Oil Stabilization
Fund at a certain date would provide little evidence that the Fund functioned effectively as a fiscal stabilization
mechanism. As also indicated in the ICR, an RI focusing on account balances, an accounting of deposits to the
fund during periods of high oil prices and revenues, and withdrawals from the fund during periods of economic
and financial difficulties would have been preferable. This would provide stronger evidence that the Fund
followed the savings rule and the spending rule defined at appraisal and hence effectively functioned as a fiscal
stabilization measure. Indeed, the operation failed to meet the target even though the fund was functional
because it fulfilled its counter-cyclical purpose. RI 5 is rated moderately unsatisfactory.

RI 6: Number of EITI reports documenting the government disclosure policy on petroleum contacts and licenses
and Chad’s contract disclosure practice as compliant with EITI Requirement. DPO2 changed the target year
from mid-2020 to 2021 and revised the target downward from 2 to 1. RI 6 was adequate to measure the impact
of PA 10 (to adopt a policy of disclosure of contracts and licenses) and PA 9 (to publish such contracts
representing at least 50 percent of hydrocarbon production in 2015). RI 6 is rated satisfactory.

RI 7: Information on the cost of oil production activities is available to the MFB, the Ministry of Petroleum and
Energy, and the SHT. DPO2 changed the target year from mid-2020 to 2021 and revised the wording to expand


                                                                                                    Page 17 of 29
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Chad DPO (P163424)



the range of organizations to which the information was to be available. The audit of petroleum operations and
cost benchmarking were to be supported by the Chad Digitalization of Revenue Administrations and COVID-19
Response Project (ProMoGri) (P164529). However, after delays, the ProMoGri was restructured, and these
components were dropped. As a result, the achievement of RI 7 could not be assessed since only the part of the
audit that was to inform the creation of a “cost database” was carried out. The Bank and the government were
unable to reach an agreement on an alternative way to assess RI 7. If “information on the cost of oil production
activities” had been more clearly defined and the required TA was given, RI 7 could have been adequate to
measure the impact of PAs 11 and 12 on the SHT. RI 7 is therefore rated moderately unsatisfactory.

Objective III: Promoting Resilience and Economic Diversification in Key Real Sectors

RI 8: Percentage increase in the cultivated land coverage with improved seed. DPO2 changed the target year
for RI 8 from mid-2020 to 2021. An RI from DPO1, “number of new (to Chad) seed varieties tested, approved,
and released” with a target of 10 and connected to PA 17, was dropped under the argument that this indicator
was covered by RI 8. RI 8 was intended also to measure the impact of PAs 13 and 14. The ICR accurately
states that an indicator that reflects the outcome of the regulatory, policy, and institutional measures to improve
the production, certification, and adoption of improved seeds under PA 13 and the adoption and piloting of an
agriculture extension strategy under PA 14 would have been stronger. Indeed, the area cultivated with improved
seed gives limited insight into whether the use of such seeds has helped to increase agricultural resilience. The
program document leaves significant uncertainty as to the sources of the data and how the RI was to be
calculated, which is especially unfortunate in the context of Chad’s data-poor environment. RI 8 is rated
moderately unsatisfactory.

RI 9: Decrease in wholesale price of international connectivity (XAF per Mbps/month). DPO2 changed the target
year from mid-2020 to 2021 and revised the RI to specify the unit of measurement (XAF per Mbps/month). RI 9
was designed to measure the impact of PA 15 (setting and detailing the wholesale open access principles for
the government fiber-optic network PPP) and PA 16 (contracting and approving a concession agreement
incorporating the international best practice of open access principles). The indicator was relevant to the prior
actions because the adoption of open market principles on all three parts of the government fiber-optic
backbone (N’Djamena-Cameroon, N’Djamena-Sudan, and N’Djamena-Niamey), coupled with the eventual
operationalization of all three, would contribute to a decline in international wholesale tariffs thus improving
Chad’s ICT services. However, various factors outside of the control of the WB operation, i.e. various demand or
supply changes in the international connectivity market, could also have impacted this RI. RI 9 is rated
moderately satisfactory.

RI 10: ARCEP and ADETIC fulfill their transparency commitment by publishing annually their financial
statements 2015-2018. DPO2 changed the target year from mid-2020 to 2021 and revised the target upward
from 4 to 8. It also revised the wording by specifying the period (2015-2018). RI 10 was adequate to measure
the impact of the prior action to increase the transparency of the FSUCE (PA 18) and is rated satisfactory.

Objective IV: Increasing Social Protection for the Poor and Vulnerable

RI 11: Number of agencies that transmitted the data collected through the harmonized questionnaire to the new
USR. DPO2 changed the target year from mid-2020 to 2021 and revised the wording from the more general
“number of institutions using the new USR platform.” RI 11 referenced a clear and credible results chain but did
not consider that the frequency of data transmittal from the USR to the CFS depended on the frequency of data
collection by the agencies. This contributed to the target not being met. RI 11 is rated moderately satisfactory.



                                                                                                    Page 18 of 29
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  Chad DPO (P163424)



  RI 12: Number of households in the USR benefitting from government SSNs (cash transfers/cash-for-work
  programs). DPO2 changed the target year from mid-2020 to 2021. RI 12 was adequate to measure the impact of
  the prior action establishing a body at the MEDP to manage the USR (PA 20). RI 12 complements RI 11 well, as
  it is more outcome-focused and better reflects progress toward the achievement of the objective to increase
  social protection for the poor. RI 12 could have been stronger still if it had captured the per-household size of the
  cash transfer to better understand how much finance was accessed and thus the transfer’s impact. RI 12 is
  therefore rated satisfactory.



  Rating

  Moderately Satisfactory

   5. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               Enhancing fiscal risk management
               [PAs 1 to 6, RIs 1 to 4]

               Rationale
               Two of the four targets were fully achieved. As all RI targets are rated modest or better the efficacy of
               Objective I is rated moderately satisfactory.

               RI 1: The nominal stock of non-concessional external debt, which stood at US$1.4 billion in 2017, was
               trimmed to US$1.07 billion at closing (2021), meeting the target that there not be any increase in the nominal
               stock. RI 1 achievement is rated high.

               RI 2: The number of conventions associated with tax exemption anomalies that have not been resolved was
               reduced from the baseline of 17 to the target of zero at project closing, according to the government, which
               did not provide robust supporting evidence. Despite the existence of a government body that reviews tax
               exemptions, no inventory of tax exemptions under the Budget Law has been published since 2019. A top-tier
               accounting firm could not confidently create a complete list of tax exemption anomalies. There was strong
               counterpart commitment to achieving this goal, and among the project team there exists a strong sense that
               robust progress was made. However, in the absence of verifiable evidence, the target is deemed not to
               have been achieved. RI 2 achievement is rated modest.

               RI 3: The target had been to reduce the number of persons ineligible to receive salaries from 1,172 in the
               baseline to 750 or less at closing, DPO 2 raised the target to 0. However, the government ceased reporting
               on this indicator after the civil service census in 2021. Similar to RI 2, there was a strong sense among the
               project team that counterpart commitment was robust and progress significant. In end-2021, some 95,531
               civil servants were enrolled and 4,397 were not enrolled in the new digitalized payroll platform. The ICR
               contends that it could be argued that the 95,531 who were enrolled were all eligible to receive salaries but
               clarifies that the public payroll data is imperfect, with data on new hires, promotions, and retirements being

                                                                                                                  Page 19 of 29
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Chad DPO (P163424)



recorded after a considerable time lag. Therefore, in the absence of more concrete information, the target is
deemed not to have been achieved. RI 3 achievement is therefore rated modest.

RI 4: The number of SOE audited financial statements published by the SOE Operational Oversight Division
increased from 9 at baseline to 22 at closing, exceeding the target of 15. There was considerable delay in the
publication of the audited financial statements however. RI 4 achievement is rated high.



Rating
Moderately Satisfactory



OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Improving oil revenue transparency and management
[PAs 7 to 10, RIs 5 to 7]

Rationale
The program fell short of the three results targets that were originally defined for the objective to improve oil
revenue transparency and management. In recognition of the achievement of the establishment of the Oil
Stabilization Fund, the efficacy of Objective II is rated moderately unsatisfactory.

RI 5: The balance of the Oil Stabilization Fund stood at XAF 0 billion at closing, failing to meet the target of
XAF 20 billion. From the moment the Fund was approved in October 2019 to end-December 2020, when oil
prices were relatively high, its balance rose to XAF 75 billion. But in 2021, the pandemic-induced economic
downturn and dropping oil prices reduced fiscal revenues from 20.7 percent of GDP in 2020 to 16.3 percent in
2021. The government subsequently drew on the Fund until it was empty at project close, therefore not
meeting the target. Despite this, the creation of the Oil Stabilization Fund could be deemed a success.
Deposits were posted in 2020 when fiscal revenue was high, and resources were withdrawn in 2021 when
fiscal revenue dropped. Thus, the Fund effectively supported counter-cyclical policies boosting fiscal
sustainability and economic resilience. In recognition of this achievement, especially within Chad’s fragility,
conflict, and violence (FCV) context, RI 5’s achievement is rated high.

RI 6: No EITI Report documenting the government’s disclosure policy on petroleum contracts and licenses
and compliance with EITI Requirement 2.4 was available at project closing. The EITI Report for 2018 was
published in December 2020, but its compliance with EITI Requirement 2.4 was not validated until April 2022,
leaving the target unmet. Moreover, an alternative certification of compliance requested from the government
was delayed during the COVID-19 period and had not been produced at closing. RI 6 achievement is rated
modest.

RI 7: No information on the cost of oil production activities was available to the MFB, MPEM, and SHT at
project closing. The audit of petroleum operations and cost benchmarking was to be supported by the
ProMoGri project. There were significant delays in the procurement of consulting services for the tax audits
that would have produced the information. The supporting components of the ProMoGri project were then
dropped in a restructuring.

                                                                                                    Page 20 of 29
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Chad DPO (P163424)




An alternative way to assess RI 7 was possible, involving finding agreement on ways in which cost data that
are individually available to the SHT, the MPEM, and the MFB were de facto shared across the three
institutions. However, the Bank and the government were unable to reach an agreement, and alternative
evidence was not available at closing. The project team was able to establish that an inter-ministerial
committee was established to work on oil revenue forecasts. While this implies that cost data and other
information were shared across the three organizations, it is not evidence of a formal cost databank.
Consequently, RI 7 achievement is rated negligible.



Rating
Moderately Unsatisfactory



OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
Promoting resilience and economic diversification in key real sectors
[PAs 13 to 18, RIs 8 to 10]

Rationale
As two-thirds of the RI targets are rated substantial or better, and none are rated negligible, the efficacy of
Objective III is rated satisfactory.

RI 8: The proportion of cultivated land covered by improved seeds rose from 2.0 percent to 5.53 percent at
closing, surpassing the target of 5.0 percent. Yet, in light of the MU Relevance rating of RI, this is not
considered adequate evidence of having met the objectives. RI 8 achievement is therefore rated substantial
rather than high.

RI 9: The wholesale price of international connectivity was cut from XAF 250,000 per megabit per second
(Mbps) per month in 2017 to XAF 32,441 per Mbps per month in 2021, exceeding the target. RI 9
achievement is rated high.

RI 10: The series partially achieved the target for the ARCEP, the ICT sector regulator, and the ADETIC,
another ITC agency, to fulfill their transparency requirements by publishing annual financial statements for
2015-2018. ARCEP published six annual financial statements between 2015-2020, while ADETIC has not
published any annual financial statements since 2017. The latter institution remains compromised by poor
leadership. As only ARCEP published the targeted 4 reports per organization, while ADETIC published none,
RI 10 achievement is rated modest.



Rating
Satisfactory


                                                                                                    Page 21 of 29
                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                      Chad DPO (P163424)




                  OBJECTIVE 4
                  Objective
                  Increasing social protection for the poor and vulnerable
                  [PAs 19 and 20, RIs 11 and 12]

                  Rationale
                  With all RI achievements rated modest or better, and none rated negligible, the efficacy of Objective IV is
                  rated moderately satisfactory.

                  RI 11: The number of agencies that transmitted data collected through the harmonized questionnaire to the
                  new USR platform increased from zero at baseline to four at closing, versus a target of 12. While all twelve
                  agencies signed the USR protocol, the target was missed because the agencies did not collect data
                  frequently enough, leading to limited use of the registry. RI 11’s achievement is rated modest.

                  RI 12: The number of households in the USR that benefit from SSNs (cash transfer or cash-for-work
                  programs) increased from zero at baseline to 47,000 by closing, exceeding the target of 12,2000. RI 12’s
                  achievement is rated high.



                  Rating
                  Moderately Satisfactory




OVERALL EFF TBL OLD




Overall Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
Rationale

Objective I is rated moderately satisfactory, Objective II is rated moderately unsatisfactory, Objective III is rated
satisfactory, and Objective IV is rated moderately satisfactory. Taking the average of all four ratings, overall
efficacy is rated as moderately satisfactory.



Overall Efficacy Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

6. Outcome

Rationale

                                                                                                                   Page 22 of 29
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Chad DPO (P163424)




The series has achieved significant success but had substantial shortcomings. The PAs were generally
relevant and well-informed by analytics. The exceptions were PA 13 and 14, which focused on promulgating
improved seed varieties without support for actions that would protect farmers' costly investment in improved
seeds. The main strengths of the series were the satisfactory achievement of the objective to promote resilience
and economic diversification and the moderately satisfactory achievement of the objective to increase social
protection. The Oil Stabilization Fund functioned as intended despite a poorly designed Results Indicator.
Weaknesses lay in the failure to meet the oil revenue transparency targets and the absence of credible
evidence on resolving the tax exemption anomalies and the ghost workers.

With the Relevance of Prior Actions rated moderately satisfactory and the Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
rated moderately satisfactory, the overall outcome is rated moderately satisfactory.


a. Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

7. Risk to Development Outcome

Macroeconomic risks to the development outcomes are high. Uncertainty regarding future oil prices and oil
production as well as the volatile security situation represent major sources of macroeconomic risks that
jeopardize the progress of structural reforms. Any decline in oil prices or production shortfalls would put
additional strain on fiscal accounts, compromising the government’s ability to maintain a tight fiscal stance and
commit to structural fiscal risk attenuation and improved oil revenue management. Furthermore, unpredictable
security costs and potential economic disruptions could divert resources away from priority social programs,
including those supported under Objective IV, structural reforms (including in agriculture and ICT telecom), and
required institutional capacity-building. Chad remains engaged in an IMF program. In December 2022, the
country was able to achieve a debt restructuring agreement with its commercial creditors, including Glencore,
allowing new IMF disbursements worth US$149.3 million and unlocking additional funds from the World Bank
and bilateral lenders. Although the deal will provide relief in 2024, it did not reduce overall debt. As a result of the
COVID-19 pandemic and oil price drops, Chad is now again at high risk of debt distress.

Stakeholder risks are also high. Vested interests that benefited from the past distribution of public resources
could impede the sustainability of reforms supported by the DPO series. This is especially the case for the
measures on tax exemptions and the public payroll, the oversight and proposed financial transparency of SOEs,
the liberalization of input markets in agriculture, the definition of the open access PPP model for governmental
fiber optics, and enhanced transparency in funds used by the ICT sector agencies ADETIC and ARCEP. The
operation did include measures intended to facilitate public scrutiny and institutional oversight (i.e., publication of
tax exemptions, SOE financial statements, and ICT sector financial statements and updated market monitoring).
These should have served to secure transparency gains, but their success was mixed. The ICR believes that
market forces and public transparency will eventually lead to efficiency and sustainability in achieving
development objectives, but this currently remains an uncertain prospect.

Political and FCV risks are higher than at approval. On April 19, 2021, shortly after DPO2 closed, President
Idriss Déby was killed by rebels on the battlefield in northern Chad. His son, General Mahamat Idriss Déby,
dissolved parliament and took control as head of a transitional military council. After an initial 18-month political
transition, Chad entered a second consecutive period of political transition of 24 months, following the

                                                                                                        Page 23 of 29
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Chad DPO (P163424)



conclusion of a national dialogue in October 2022. This has delayed presidential elections planned for end-2022
to 2024. The main political opposition has not agreed to participate in the national dialogue. This, together with
increasing conflict and terrorism across the Sahel, creates a challenging environment for sustaining structural
reforms.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Bank Performance – Design

Rationale

The Bank identified and drew from four major lessons learned from past operations and extensive
analytics. The first lesson, from the EFSO standalone DPO, was related to the inherent limitations of
emergency operations and the need for proper complementarity and sequencing with a medium-term growth
agenda. This requires a direct line of sight from immediate emergency responses to more ambitious growth-
enhancing reforms which target a sustainable solution to the crisis. The second lesson concerned the country’s
modest reform track record, which pointed to the need to be realistic about what can be achieved in two years.
The third lesson identified the institutional capacity of the government as a major factor in determining the
breadth of the policy reform agenda, which required accompanying technical capacity support to implement
reforms. Finally, from Chad’s DPO in 2004-2005, the team learned the need for fiscal stabilization to be
complemented by social mitigation, particularly social safety nets. The series’ PAs and RIs were generally well
supported by a sound and rigorous body of analysis from the WB, the IMF, and external partners. For
Objective III the analysis used were less country and sector specific. The agricultural productivity reforms were
supported by one sector review and the SCD, while the ICT reforms were supported by the 2016 World
Development Report and a regional Sub-Saharan Africa report.

Despite Chad’s prolonged FCV status and increasing violence, the operations did not identify possible negative
impacts on drivers of fragility and conflict. The program documents did not refer to Chad’s drivers of fragility or
any conflict analysis, nor did they draw on a Poverty and Social Impact Analysis of the reforms supported by the
PAs to identify risks that could increase instability or violence. Overall, while the project design accounted for
Chad’s low capacity, it paid little attention to its FCV issues.

The design of the DPO was relatively complex and ambitious, covering several policy areas, and was
presented and approved as a “high risk, high reward” operation. In the program document, five out of eight
risk categories were rated as high. Political, governance, macroeconomic, and stakeholder risks, including oil
price fluctuation, low oil production, poor record of reforms, insecurity, and political developments linked to the
upcoming elections, were identified at the time of design, and the threats they posed for the achievement of the
PDO were well acknowledged. Yet with some exceptions mitigation measures were not identified. The risk of
low oil prices did indeed materialize, making it difficult or unrealistic to meet the targets related to PDO 2. This
could have been mitigated through a more conservative approach to the operation's design and preparation.
Given Chad’s fragility, a reform program with fewer policy areas and prior actions could have been justified. A
more targeted selection of PAs could have allowed an intensified focus on a well-selected, more streamlined set
of reforms. . Program documents appropriately identified that both the technical design of the program and
institutional capacity for implementation were subject to high risks. These risks were to be mitigated through key
TA and investment projects in each policy area including IMF and WBG TA on debt management, EU support in

                                                                                                     Page 24 of 29
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Chad DPO (P163424)



the analysis of tax expenditures, and audit of payroll; the World Bank’s analytical and project support on revenue
mobilization, SOE reforms, ICT, agriculture, and social protection; and AfDB and EU support on PFM.

Despite past lessons, the Bank did not sufficiently specify RI data sources. Despite the Bank’s accurate
identification of weaknesses in technical and institutional capacity, it did not sufficiently discuss up front and
agree with the government on the data sources that would serve as evidence of achievement of some targets.
This led to the lack of data supporting RIs 2 and 3. In other cases, RIs did not adequately capture the
government’s efforts toward achieving the PDO. These issues, relating to specificity, clarity, and link to
obtainable data/evidence, were also identified in the ICR of the previous standalone DPO.

The operation drew on consultations with major stakeholders and development partners. Design and
preparation were carried out jointly by the Bank and a government inter-ministerial committee, with the latter
also in charge of monitoring implementation. According to Bank staff, the complexity in terms of the number of
different policy reform areas and the ambition of the reforms were a response to the window of opportunity that
had opened and the urgent need for reforms across multiple interlinked sectors. The DPOs were prepared in
collaboration with the IMF, EU, and AfDB, which were also providing support to Chad, as well as other partners
and civil society. During the preparation of the proposed operation, the World Bank consulted with a range of
development partners through a macroeconomic and public finance working group. Various technical workshops
on oil revenue management were organized with the IMF. Consultations on poverty reduction and social-
protection policies involved multiple UN agencies and both national and international NGOs.



Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

b. Bank Performance – Implementation

Rationale

DPO 1 was not effectively supervised, as the inter-ministerial committee failed to provide quarterly
progress reports. During DPO 1, WB specialists supervised the program from the field, while the government’s
inter-ministerial Negotiation Committee oversaw the implementation of the reforms supported by the operation.
However, the committee failed to provide quarterly progress reports as agreed when the series was approved.
The Bank did employ alternative supervision tools, such as the IPFs linked to the series, to monitor progress in
achieving agreed targets; however, this was not always sufficient, especially as some IPFs experienced
implementation challenges themselves.

The COVID-19 pandemic and insecurity both limited the Bank’s capacity to supervise the operation
during DPO2 implementation. Both halted supervision missions on the ground while limiting communication
and exchanges with the authorities. Virtual supervision and implementation support were hindered by a lack of
basic technological capacity (stable internet and computers) and limited comfort and familiarity among
government counterparts with having substantive virtual meetings and discussions. Although the pandemic
could not have been anticipated, building virtual capacity is an appropriate mitigation measure for any FCV
operation that might face security limitations to travel. Monitoring was further complicated by the cancellation of
the COVID-19 DPO. This DPO was cancelled because Chad fell back into debt distress, but as all prior actions



                                                                                                     Page 25 of 29
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Chad DPO (P163424)



had already been met, this negatively impacted the relationship with the Ministry of Finance. This situation also
negatively impacted the collection of data and other evidence as part of developing the ICR.

As anticipated at design, Chad’s limited institutional capacity presented an obstacle to the
implementation of major fiscal and PFM reforms. Complex and administratively difficult measures to
strengthen SOE management, and streamline the payroll and tax expenditures represented considerable
challenges that were not fully mitigated by Bank TA. On some key reforms such as the oil revenue management
mechanism, substantial TA for design and implementation was provided by the Bank utilizing global knowledge
and expertise. However, the overall delivery of technical assistance was reduced at the implementation stage,
as shown by the limited follow-up and monitoring of implementation progress by the Bank.

Despite these challenges the DPOs achieved significant results, especially given Chad’s uncertain and
fragile political and macroeconomic environment and weak institutional capacity. This DPF programmatic
series was assessed and approved as a "high risk and high reward" program. The various high risks were
clearly presented in the program document; it was considered worth the risks to seize the window of economic
and political opportunity that had appeared to develop a significantly more ambitious operation than previous
DPOs in Chad, supporting critical policy and institutional reforms in key sectors, including in the challenging oil
sector. The DPF series could serve as a foundation for further structural reforms.



Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

c. Overall Bank Performance

Rationale

Overall Bank Performance is rated moderately satisfactory. The DPO series used a "high risk, high reward"
approach to leverage a nascent policy reform window. Several lessons learned from past operations were
integrated into the operations, including the need for complementarity and sequencing with a medium-term
growth agenda, being realistic about what can be achieved in terms of reform implementation, and the need for
fiscal stabilization to be complemented by social mitigation. Yet not all lessons were successfully implemented,
as the Bank did not adequately clarify RI data sources. Chad’s limited institutional capacity did present the
anticipated obstacles. The designed substantial technical assistance did not in all cases materialize, while IPFs
whose actions were tied to the program at times performed poorly.


Overall Bank Performance Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

9. Other Impacts

a. Social and Poverty


                                                                                                    Page 26 of 29
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Chad DPO (P163424)



The ICR described an expectation of a positive impact on poverty reduction over the medium- and long
term. It expected this to occur through the promotion of inclusive growth in agriculture, the development of more
affordable ICT services, and broader coverage of social safety nets. However, at this stage, the existing
evidence only supports a poverty impact on the 47,000 households who benefitted from government SSNs and
the 10 percent of Chadians who access the internet. As indicated in the ICR, other expected impacts failed to
materialize. In particular, improved fiscal space for social protection and other public services as well as pro-
growth investment did not materialize due to the pandemic and oil price drops.



b. Environmental

There is no evidence of a significant impact on Chad’s environment, forests, and other natural
resources. The World Bank assessed whether the DPO series could cause significant effects on Chad's
environment and found this unlikely. Most measures were strongly policy-focused with no direct physical
impacts. The extension of geographic coverage of mobile networks involved the destruction of some flora and
fauna.



c. Gender

There is no evidence of current gender impacts.



d. Other

N/a



10. Quality of ICR

Rationale

The quality of the ICR is rated as substantial. The ICR provides a well-written and near-complete critique of the
project. The ICR aptly analyzed the achievement of intended objectives and appropriately linked the efficacy
narrative, ratings, and evidence. When robust and credible evidence was lacking, this was candidly described by
the ICR. The theory of change developed by the ICR mapped a logical chain of how project activities were linked
to the outcomes of project interventions. The ICR is thorough and provides adequate information for preparing
this ICR Review and rating the project. Specific lessons are directly derived from project experience and should
be useful for future DPOs. The various parts of the ICR are internally consistent and logically linked and
integrated. However, ICR could have been further improved. It could have been clearer about data sources and
definitions. It offers limited insight into why the number of PAs in DPO2 was reduced, why and which technical
assistance was reduced at the implementation stage, or the lacking evidence for some of the RIs.




                                                                                                  Page 27 of 29
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Chad DPO (P163424)



a. Rating

Substantial

11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                    IEG
                                                                                  Disagreement/Comments
                                                                               The DPOs achieved significant
                                                                               results considering Chad’s
                                 Moderately                                    uncertain and fragile political
Outcome                                                Moderately Satisfactory
                                 Unsatisfactory                                and macroeconomic
                                                                               environment and weak
                                                                               institutional capacity.
                                 Moderately
Bank Performance                                       Moderately Satisfactory
                                 Satisfactory
Relevance of Results
                                 ---                   Moderately Satisfactory
Indicators
Quality of ICR                   ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

Given Chad’s FCV context and its limited capacity to deal with shocks, there will likely be high-risk high-
reward tradeoffs. Chad’s relative political stability and positive macroeconomic outlook at the time the program
was seen by the Bank as a rare opportunity for a more ambitious operation than what the country’s modest
reform track record would have supported. The Bank could have considered a more conservative approach in
the design and preparation of this operation, anticipating inevitable but unforeseen external shocks that Chad
has limited capacity to deal with. Such an approach would have had fewer but better prioritized pillars and policy
areas. In the end, despite not achieving several results, structural reforms were made in some very challenging
areas, notably the creation of the oil stabilization fund, and the DPO series strengthened the framework for
comprehensive development reforms that did not exist before, and which can serve as a foundation for further
structural reforms. In an environment like Chad’s, to achieve high rewards, the Bank should be realistic that
there will be high risks with the strong likelihood that at least some of these risks will materialize affecting the
achievement of results.

Technical assistance through complementary operations and analytics is crucial to support the
government to implement and closely monitor reforms in a low institutional capacity environment. In an
environment like Chad’s, where institutional capacity is weak, combining policy lending with targeted technical
assistance or capacity building is essential. Robust analysis was necessary to secure government buy-in for the
more contested elements, such as the oil revenue management component. Extensive analysis of several
sovereign wealth fund models, funded from the DPO preparation budget, was the game-changer that secured
government support, despite initial reluctance. The EFSO standalone DPO’s ICR also recommended providing
hands-on TA to implementing units to help achieve the PDOs, given the weak government capacity. Frequent
capacity-building through complementary operations and analytics is also important as it allows continuous
engagement and dialogue with the government, to better keep track of recent implementation developments and



                                                                                                     Page 28 of 29
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Chad DPO (P163424)



timely assistance/adjustment when difficulties arise. The TA supporting this operation was reduced at the
implementation stage, which negatively impacted monitoring and follow-up.

Clear definitions and calculations of RIs are key in low-capacity environments as Chad. Despite various
revisions to the series’ results indicators to specify indicators and targets, the outcome of two results indicators
could not be reported upon. Although, the government claimed achievement, they could not produce sufficient
evidence, adversely impacting the project ratings. This points to the need to be very clear on the definition and
calculation of result indicators and ensuring that this is clearly described in project documents and shared with
the authorities at the outset. This is especially important in low-capacity environments like Chad.

It is important to build an engagement model with the government using virtual platforms that can be
resilient during crises, which are more likely to occur in FCV contexts. This model requires not only basic
technological capacity (stable internet and computers) but also comfort among government counterparts with
having substantive virtual meetings and discussions. This would allow the Bank to continue doing virtual
supervision and provide implementation support during times of limited mission travel in FCV contexts whether
due to political instability, insecurity, or health crisis like COVID-19 and border closures.


13. Project Performance Assessment Report (PPAR) Recommended?

Yes
ASSESSMENT_TABLE
Please explain
This DPO series is a case of a "high risk and high reward" DPO in an FCV country that achieved results,
despite experiencing COVID-19 and security pressures, in a way indicative of what the Bank will increasingly
face as it executes DPOs in FCV countries.




                                                                                                       Page 29 of 29
