     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SN Quality and Equityof Basic Education (P133333)



                                                                                Report Number: ICRR0023388

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P133333                                    SN Quality and Equityof Basic Education

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Senegal                                    Education


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)              Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-52750,IDA-62520,TF-15232,TF-           31-Jan-2018                                       125,691,393.20
 15285,TF-15311,TF-B5169

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 13-Jun-2013                                30-Jun-2022

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                    Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            20,000,000.00                                  56,356,258.40

 Revised Commitment                            133,206,314.74                                  54,336,057.62

 Actual                                        125,691,393.20                                  52,979,849.58




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator        Group
 Susan Ann Caceres           Judyth L. Twigg              Eduardo Fernandez             IEGHC (Unit 2)
                                                          Maldonado




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The project development objective was to improve learning outcomes for early grades, increase access to the
   science and mathematics tracks of secondary schools, and improve equity in access to basic
   education. These objectives were stated consistently in the lending agreement (p. 5) and Project Appraisal
   Document (PAD) (p. iv).



                                                                                                 Page 1 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SN Quality and Equityof Basic Education (P133333)



   Based on IEG/OPCS guidelines, no split rating is required. At a 2018 restructuring and Additional Financing
   (AF), some outcome targets were revised, but most were revised upward. In the one case where an
   outcome target was revised downward, both the original and revised targets were exceeded.




b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  09-May-2018

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Initially, there were three components with several sub-components; at a 2021 AF, a fourth component was
   introduced:

   Component 1: Improving Quality of Basic Education (estimated costs US$56.2 million; 2018 AF US$48
   million; actual costs US$86.68 million). This component aimed to improve the quality of learning at
   schools through four subcomponents:

   Sub-component 1: Performance-based financing education grants. This sub-component was to
   support performance-based contracts between all 14 regional education authorities and the 56 educational
   districts. With AF, this activity was expanded to 16 regional education authorities.

   Sub-component 1.2: School Quality and Management Improvement. This sub-component was to support
   two main activities: (i) local communities' participation and oversight; and (ii) funds to support the
   implementation of quality improvement agreements between districts and schools. With AF, a literacy pilot
   for members of school management communities was added.

   Sub-component 1.3: Implementation of a national program to develop teaching and learning of science and
   math at the middle school level. This sub-component was to distribute 33,000 teaching guides,
   implement the revised middle school curriculum, and train middle school teachers to use the teaching
   guides and low-cost and effective information and communication technology. It was also to
   support renovation of the eight existing Science and Technology Blocks and construction and equipment of
   20 additional Blocks at middle schools. With AF, two specialized high schools focusing on math and
   science, in Kaolack and Sedhiou, were to be developed. Criteria for selecting these two regions were low
   rates of access and completion, high poverty rates, and proximity to other regions. The AF also scaled up
   math and science training for teachers at both primary and secondary levels, and implemented activities to
   improve enrollment of girls in science and mathematics tracks.


                                                                                                 Page 2 of 21
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  SN Quality and Equityof Basic Education (P133333)



 Sub-component 1.4. Improving pre-service teacher training. This sub-component was to improve the
qualification of teachers entering into the education system at the primary and middle school levels via
construction and equipment of four new regional training centers in Diourbel, Kaolack, Kaffrine, and Louga,
and hire consultants to design a new training program aligned with the curriculum. With the AF, additional
activities focused on in-service training, headmaster training, and use of classroom observation tools.

Component 2: Strengthening Equity in Access to Education (estimated US$15.3 million; 2018 AF US$8
million; actual US$25.84 million). This component aimed to reach out-of-school children with quality
education focusing on less advantaged areas. It also focused on replacing all schools that were under
shelters.

Sub-component 2.1. Construction and rehabilitation of schools in lagging or underserved areas. This sub-
component was to build schools in lagging areas, rehabilitate/replace shelters used as classrooms via
public-private partnerships, and construct 200 new primary schools. It was expected that 144 schools in
Kaffrine, Diourbel, Tambacounda, Louga, and Matam, all regions with a relatively high proportion of out-of-
school children, would create spaces for an additional 30,000 children.

Sub-component 2.2. Grants to Daaras. This sub-component was to support 100 Daaras with resources for
rehabilitation of infrastructure, additional French teachers' salaries, learning materials, and incentives for the
headmasters. The supported schools were to use a specific Ministry of Education (MOE) curriculum in
reading and math and to measure results. With the AF, an additional 400 Daaras were to
receive performance-based grants.

Sub-component 2.3: With the AF, a catch-up program for young out-of-school children (ages 8-14) was to
be implemented to allow these children to integrate into the school system in the five regions with the lowest
enrollment rates.

Component 3: Project Management and Capacity Building (estimated US$8.5 million; actual US$7.45
million). This component was to support: (a) project coordination, supervision, financial management,
communication and outreach, and implementation of the safeguard documents; (b) communication,
monitoring and evaluation of the project, including through the reinforcement of MOE's information
technology system; and (c) a program of activities to build the capacity of education inspectorates in the
areas of leadership, human resources management, financial management, planning, monitoring and
evaluation (M&E), and communication.

Sub-component 3.1: Project Implementation and Management. This subcomponent was to finance staff
training, preparation of monitoring reports, and consultants to several departments in the MOE.

Sub-component 3.2: Development of an M&E system. This sub-component was to build an M&E system
both at the sector level and at the regional and district levels so that the various levels of the MOE had data
to monitor indicators and guide decisions with the use of early grade learning assessment data. It was to
support an expansion of education management information system (EMIS); a Service Delivery Indicator
(SDI) exercise to provide better data on teacher behavior and performance; capacity building in policy
analytics at the ministerial level; and continued to support the internal audit department and M&E.

Sub-component 3.3 Strengthening the decentralization of the education sector. This sub-component
addressed capacity-building to strengthen decentralized levels in the MOE, including inspectorate services



                                                                                                    Page 3 of 21
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    SN Quality and Equityof Basic Education (P133333)



  (regional and district). The project was to finance consultants, workshops, and equipment for regional and
  district levels to develop capacity in financial management, planning, M&E, and communication.

  Component 4: Empowerment of Girls and Young Women in Education (AF, US$6.9 million; actual,
  US$5.72 million). This component was added with the final additional financing in May 2021 and supported
  the empowerment of girls and young women in 300 junior and upper secondary schools in the five poorest
  performing regions: Kedougou, Kolda, Tambacounda, Kaffrine, and Matam. Activities included: adapting the
  performance-based contract system to ensure it was gender informed; establishing a system to detect girls
  at-risk of dropping out; elimination of gender-based violence via codes of contact for personnel; provision
  of remediation; training to provide psycho-social support for adolescent girls; and provision of menstruation
  hygiene supplies and rehabilitation of school infirmaries.

  The project used a disbursement-linked indicator (DLI) approach to finance the implementation of activities,
  based on annual work plans for each component and achievement of DLIs.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost: Project costs were US$136.6 million (original amount US$69.7 million and AF of US$66.9
  million). Actual costs were US$125.69 million, representing 92% disbursement. With exchange rate losses,
  the undisbursed amount returned to the Bank was US$1.18 million. Costs for component two (117%)
  were above estimated costs with AF, while costs for components one (90%), three (64%), and four
  (82%) were below estimated costs. The ICR did not explain why less was disbursed than planned for
  components one, three, and four.

  Financing: The parent project was financed by separate sources totaling US$69.7 million, comprised of an
  IDA credit of US$20 million, a Global Partnership for Education grant of US$46.9 million, and an Education
  Sector Capacity Building Trust Fund Grant for US$2.8 million. Two AFs were provided. The 2018 AF was
  funded by an IDA credit of US$60 million, and the 2021 AF of US$6.9 million was funded from the Umbrella
  Facility for Gender Equality Multi-Donor Trust Fund. Overall, the total funding was US$136.6 million
  equivalent.

  Borrower Contribution: The Borrower did not contribute, as noted in the Lending Agreement. The ICR (p.
  12) explained that while the Project Appraisal Document indicated the Borrower was expected to contribute
  US$ 148 million, the Financing Agreement and Grant agreements indicated that IDA and the other financing
  sources were to fully finance the Project.

  Dates: The operation was approved by the Board on June 13, 2013 and became effective on February 10,
  2014. The operation closed on June 30, 2022. The operation was expected to close on January 31, 2018,
  but closed three and a half years later on June 30, 2022. Over the course of the operation there were five
  level two restructurings that were predominantly used to change the closing date (restructurings on October
  30, 2015; March 1, 2016, April 23, 2018) and give time for the processing of the Additional Financing (April
  23, 2018). Additional Financing were added on May 9, 2018 and May 6, 2021. During the restructuring
  changes were also made to the results framework and allocation between components. The restructuring
  also enabled the Government to finalize construction of the four regional training centers, construction of
  Science and Technology Blocks and equipment to the Blocks, and build 10 remaining primary schools (ICR
  p. 18).


                                                                                                  Page 4 of 21
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      SN Quality and Equityof Basic Education (P133333)




   3. Relevance of Objectives

               Rationale
               The objectives were highly relevant to country context. Regional disparities in school enrollment and
               completion were evident, given lack of adequate infrastructure and parental preference (ICR, p. 7). In five
               out of 14 regions in the country, children were lagging behind in education due to parental desire for a
               closer alignment of the education system with their religious beliefs. A large proportion of students attended
               Daaras (Koranic schools), where students memorized the Koran but did not acquire adequate numeracy
               and literacy skills. The number of youth who have never attended school is high. Learning outcomes
               were low. Only 62 percent of students in Grade 5 obtained the required skills in mathematics, based on the
               francophone regional student learning assessment (Program for Analyzing Education Systems of the
               Conference of Education Ministers). There were also issues with teaching and learning. Teachers were not
               well qualified and not familiar with up-to-date curricula, and initial training received in Teacher Training
               Institutes was inadequate.

               The aims of the government’s Sector Plan and National Strategy for Economic and Social Development
               were consistent with the objectives of the operation. The government’s Sector Plan (2013-2025)
               promoted achieving universal primary completion and increasing access to secondary and tertiary
               education; improving education quality at all levels, including learning outcomes in primary grades; and
               eliminating disparities associated with region, gender, poverty status, and rural/urban location, and inclusion
               of children and youth with disabilities. The government’s National Strategy for Economic and Social
               Development (2013-2017) acknowledged the importance of quality education.

               The objectives were highly relevant to country context and Bank strategies throughout the life of the
               operation. The objectives of the World Bank Country Partnership Strategy (FY13-17) and World Bank
               Country Partnership Framework (FY20–FY24) focus on equity, improving human capital, and improving
               results. The project aligned with the 2021 World Bank Africa West Strategy targets to reduce learning
               poverty from 80 percent to 76 percent and increase girls' secondary school enrollment from 42 percent to
               47 percent.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Improve learning outcomes for early grades

                                                                                                                        Page 5 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   SN Quality and Equityof Basic Education (P133333)




Rationale
Improved learning outcomes for early grades were to be achieved through implementation of performance-
based contracts, which supported the establishment and utilization of learning assessments, improved
financial management at the school level, and system-wide improvements to teacher management. Training
in school management was to enable administrators to adequately assess school performance, provide
feedback to teachers, and assess professional development needs. Capacity building at all levels of the
system was intended to strengthen the connections between performance-based contracts, data systems,
and teaching and learning. The results chain for this objective also recognized the importance of system
coherence of all levels of the system (central, regional, district, and school) and stakeholders, consistent with
the World Development Report (2018). Including the root cause of inadequate teaching skills (pre-service
training) was an important aspect included in the project; however, the initial activities supporting pre-service
training were limited, and with AF the subsequent activities further emphasized on-the-job training, which did
not address the root cause.



Outputs

Teacher and Head Teacher Training

All newly recruited teachers were trained with the new program for teaching science and math and certified in
regional training centers, which met the target. This was a disbursement linked indicator. The ICR (p. 24)
reported these new training programs were aligned with the curriculum, but it did not explain or provide
evidence of application by teachers in classrooms.

21,056 teachers received on-the-job training, missing the target (25,000). The ICR (p. 24) clarified that
training was impacted during the global pandemic in 2020.

All school heads were trained, which exceeded the target (60 percent).

Regional Training Centers in Diourbel, Kaolack, Louga, and Fatick provided in-service training that focused
on scripted lessons (which is helpful for teachers with lower levels of teaching capacity and content
knowledge) and a classroom observation tool. The ICR reported that the use of the tool had a positive impact
on classroom instruction.

Pre-service Teacher Training

A new pre-service teacher training curriculum is currently used by the Regional Training Centers.

Student Learning Assessments

A learning assessment system and Early Grade Reading Assessment and mathematics testing were carried
out for primary grades during the operation. The National System for the Evaluation of Internal Returns of
Senegal measured performance thresholds in French, mathematics, and life skills in grade 2 and grade 4.
The ICR noted, “the system included but was not limited to: (i) establishment of a technical team to develop a
strategic approach to learning that included student evaluation, teacher interviews, and lesson observation;
(ii) development of standardized criteria for grade progression; (iii) administration of pre-tests at the beginning

                                                                                                     Page 6 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   SN Quality and Equityof Basic Education (P133333)



of the school year; (iv) administration of two formative evaluations during the school year; (v) sharing of
assessment results with focal points in the region and districts as well as schools that were used to develop
roadmaps for teacher training; and (vi) development of remedial programs where necessary" (p. 23). Thus, a
notable part of this process was additional support provided by the National Research Institute for
Education to decentralized levels to use the data for decision-making and feedback. The data from learning
assessments were part of the performance-based contracts, which according to the ICR (p. 23), “has
improved promotion rates and success rates of the primary schools," which is plausibly related to this
operation.

During the years of the operation, Senegal participated in a regional assessment Education Systems Analysis
Program that evaluated learning outcomes for grades 2 and 6 of primary education.

Overall project and decentralized levels

The project benefited 2,700,000 students, of whom 56 percent were female.

2,059,073students benefitted from direct interventions to enhance learning, which exceeded the target
(1,875,000). Of the students benefiting from direct intervention to enhance learning, 553,500 were girls, which
missed the target (571,500). The ICR did not describe the intervention, or how benefit and improvement were
measured.

77 percent of districts achieved all least 95 percent of established targets, missing the original (80 percent)
and revised (100 percent) targets. The ICR (p. 24) reported that the contracts containing the "established
targets" were a roadmap that connected training needs based on student evaluation, which is a good practice
to improve education quality and learning.

98 percent of schools had Quality Improvement Plans, which exceeded the original target (90 percent) but
slightly missed the revised target (100 percent). This was a disbursement linked indicator. The ICR (p. 24)
noted that areas of focus of the Plans were girls’ enrollment parity, establishment of pedagogical
groups, teacher training, and integration of information and communications technology.

All school have a functional school-based management (SBM) committee, which exceeded the original target
(90 percent) and met the revised target (100 percent). This was a disbursement linked indicator. The ICR (p.
25) noted that the government has such confidence in the committees that it has increased the allocation to
schools from less than US$1 to US$7 per student. The committees manage the funds. The ICR also reported
learning from this experience. It noted (p. 12) that a Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA)-
financed pilot included the creation of a national SBM technical team within the Primary Education Directorate
(Direction de 'Enseignement Elementaire) that developed the tools, tested them, and carried out
an evaluation. JICA continued to provide technical assistance for scale-up of the SBM model as well as
cellphone facilities, software, and database systems to allow communities to report on the quality of service
delivery, notably school functioning, resource transfers, concerns about the utilization of funds, and teachers'
presence and absenteeism.

13,941 school community members were trained using the materials in local languages, which nearly met the
target (14,000). The ICR clarified that the training was impacted due to the global COVID-19 pandemic, when
training had to be suspended.



                                                                                                  Page 7 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   SN Quality and Equityof Basic Education (P133333)



All Academic Inspectorates and Inspectorates of Training and Education have at least two officials in human
resources, statistics, and budget management trained to handle their roles and responsibilities, which met the
original (95 percent) and revised (100 percent) targets. The ICR noted that the transfer of these roles and
responsibilities has allowed the regional and departmental levels to improve the management of the
education system and monitoring at the decentralized level.

A human resources, statistics, and budget management system, including software and equipment, was
established in all Academic Inspectorates and in all Training and Education Inspectorates. An EMIS was
created that includes dashboards with data on location of schools, condition of school structures, students,
teachers, textbooks and materials, financial resources, and exams, and is tailored to each level in the
system. This information system has been institutionalized. At the school level, the dashboards were piloted
in 100 elementary schools, 100 middle schools, and 31 high schools. The project also supported training on
the system for the 16 regions and 59 districts.

A regional education report is produced yearly about the education system at the regional level. MOE used
this report for its sector review.

During the COVID-19 pandemic, MOE produced a report on the pandemic situation in Senegal and
provided strategies and health measures for the reopening of schools.



Outcomes

The percentage of students who, by the end of grades two and four of primary schooling, demonstrated
the ability to read and comprehend grade level texts increased from 34 percent to 73 percent for grade two,
and 52 percent to 75 percent for grade four, which exceeded both the original targets (39 percent for grade
two and 56 percent for grade 4) and revised targets (63 percent for grade two and 65 percent for grade four).

The percentage of students who, by the end of grades 2 and 4 of primary schooling, demonstrated the ability
to compute and solve grade level math problems increased from 51 percent to 74 percent for grade two, and
46 percent to 70 percent for grade four, which exceeded the original targets (56 percent for grade 2 and 51
percent for grade 4) and revised targets (65 percent for grade 2 and 65 percent for grade 4).

The percentage of students who, by the end of grade 1 of primary schooling, demonstrated the ability to read
and comprehend grade level texts increased from 54 percent to 66 percent, exceeding the original target (60
percent) and the lowered revised target (55 percent).

The percentage of students who, by the end of grades 2 and 4 of primary schooling, were able to integrate
experimental approaches or reasoned investigation into learning increased from 0 percent to 67 percent in
grade 2, and from 2 percent to 62 percent in grade 4, which exceeded the target for grade 4 (50 percent), but
not the target for grade 2 (80 percent). The target was not achieved “largely due to the fact that the primary
school programs that were to be revised were not completed in time to reinforce the experimental
approaches" (ICR, p. 23).




                                                                                                 Page 8 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   SN Quality and Equityof Basic Education (P133333)



The COVID-19 pandemic had an impact on the final months of project implementation. The activities most
impacted by the pandemic were civil works and the in-service teacher training, because teachers could not
participate in short-term training programs.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Increase access to science and mathematics tracks in secondary schools

Rationale
The ICR (p. 25) notes the areas that were expected to contribute to improvements in the objective included:
(i) provision of teaching guides and training of all middle school teachers on the guides; (ii) implementation of
a revised middle school curriculum; (iii) performance-based contracts to middle schools to implement the
reform programs related to science and mathematics; (iv) construction and renovation of 28 Science and
Technology Blocks and provision of equipment; (v) pilot technology-based teaching methods for science and
mathematics and utilization of new equipment; and (vi) construction of two new Lycées focused on science
and mathematics. These activities would not be sufficient to address the barriers to lack of access to science
and mathematics for all. The barriers included teachers’ competencies (which implies changes in pre-service
training, as well as robust on-going training and support to address weak content and pedagogical skills);
curriculum; behavior/attitudinal changes to ensure teachers provide mathematics and science for all, including
girls, and not just to those academically advanced; resources/equipment; and measures to ensure coherence
at all levels of the system. Changing gender norms required additional strategies that were needed from the
initiation of the operation; the addition of these elements at the AF was too late for meaningful change to take
hold during the project's lifetime.



Outputs

School infrastructure and facilities

The project supported the construction and/or rehabilitation of 28 Science and Technology Blocks.

Two new Lycées were not constructed as planned. The number of students enrolled in project-supported
Lycées was 0, which did not meet the target for number of total students (600) or the percentage of female
students enrolled in project-supported Lycées (50 percent). The ICR (p. 26) stated that the Lycées will be
completed by the government.

Teacher Training

92 percent of middle school teachers were trained to know how to use the new teaching guides, which nearly
met the target (100 percent). This was a disbursement linked indicator. The ICR did not describe the evidence


                                                                                                   Page 9 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   SN Quality and Equityof Basic Education (P133333)



to substantiate utilization of the training, which was another disbursement linked indicator (percentage of
middle schools implementing the new science and mathematics-oriented program).

Overall education system and decentralized levels

Districts signed performance contracts with 300 secondary schools (that included the 28 new Science and
Technology Blocks) to promote science and mathematics through activities such as science and mathematics
careers days; communications and outreach programs through radio, flyers, leaflets etc.; organization of
science clubs; and teacher training.

The government developed a digital technology strategy that was piloted in 100 primary schools, 300 lower
secondary schools, and 30 high schools to strengthen science teaching throughout the system. The project
financed: 6,699 laptops; 332 laptops that converted into tables for academic teams; 247 video projectors; 231
computer whiteboards, 16 Wi-Fi routers; and other equipment. The ICR noted that this pilot was successful
and will be further implemented in the follow-up operation. The ICR (p. 26) did not state how the pilot was
evaluated or what specifically was learned from the experience.



Outcomes

The percentage of middle school students enrolled in math and science tracks (S1, S2) in secondary level
remained nearly constant, at 32 percent and 31 percent at baseline and endline, not meeting the target (45
percent). The percentage of female middle school students enrolled in math and science tracks (S1, S2) in
secondary level increased from 24 percent to 54 percent, exceeding the target (30 percent). The ICR does
not explain the contradiction of girls' enrollment increasing from 24 percent to 54 percent while the overall rate
of enrollment remained consistent, which would seem to have implications for boys' enrollment in the math
and science tracks.

The ICR (p. 26) attributed the limited progress on this objective to delay in the government’s national science
improvement strategy and teachers’ attitudes that focused upon those skilled in science, instead of
encouraging scientific thinking and experiences among all students. Since the close of the operation, the
national science improvement strategy has been completed. The government has taken action to modify the
bylaws of the teachers' Orientation Committee to promote science and mathematics among all students. The
government has also trained inspectors and trainers on the aligned curriculum and evaluation. The curriculum
will be revised during the Bank’s follow-up operation.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
Improve equity in access to basic education

Rationale

                                                                                                   Page 10 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   SN Quality and Equityof Basic Education (P133333)



Improvements in equity were to be achieved through: (i) construction of new primary schools in less
advantaged areas, referred to as “lagging areas”; (ii) provision of performance-based contracts to Daaras that
expressed an interest in implementing a special curriculum that focused on reading and mathematics; (iii)
implementation of a catch-up program for out-of-school children; and (iv) implementation of programs to
encourage girls to remain in school as well as return to school. These activities were targeted in regions with
enrollment challenges, and the overall approach of the project -- performance-based contracts and alignment
of actions of all levels of the education system (data, stakeholders) -- were integrated with these activities.



Outputs

School infrastructure

82 schools were built by the project to extend the primary education network.

144 new schools in five lagging regions (in terms of access) were built. This was a disbursement linked
indicator. The regions and distribution of schools was: (i) 37 in Kaffrine, (ii) 28 in Diourble, (iii) 30 in
Tambacounda, (iv) 20 in Louga; and (v) 29 in Matam (ICR, p. 27).

Gender

20,000 girls directly benefitted from socio-emotional health and well-being interventions, which met the
target. The ICR did not describe these interventions in detail or how benefit was measured.

1,593 action plans integrating gender and adolescent protection were implemented (at the institution, district,
and regional levels), which exceeded the target (350).

5,000 education personnel were trained on gender-informed management approaches, which met the target.

The number of school-based focal points who were trained on gender-based violence reporting and mitigation
measures increased from 20 to 200, which met the target.

1,486 institutions developed action plans that integrated gender with implementation of those plans.

Other activities that supported enrollment of adolescent girls and removed barriers included: training of
40,000 girls on self-development and leadership; provision of 12,900,066 disposable menstrual hygiene kits
for middle school and high school girls; provision of 22,773 cash transfers for high school girls in vulnerable
situations that might lead to dropping out; and provision of 1,862 bicycles to girls for transportation to school,
which was done in connection with communities.

A strategy to strengthen girls' leadership in schools was developed by the National Center for Vocational
School Guidance. 2,500 manuals and 2,000 workbooks on this strategy were distributed.

280 female school leaders received capacity development on gender, administrative, and financial areas.

Lagging regions



                                                                                                    Page 11 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   SN Quality and Equityof Basic Education (P133333)



In Kafrine, the number of non-repeaters increased from 35,365 students in grades 1 and 4 to 46,590
students, which met the original target (43,611) but not the revised target (49,721).

In Tambacounda, the number of non-repeaters increased from 65,398 students in grades 1 and 4 to 90,728
students, which exceeded the original (81,172) and revised target (86,086).

In Matam, the number of non-repeaters increased from 51,496 students in grades 1 and 4 to 66,684 students,
which exceeded the original (64,063) but not revised target (71,547).

In Louga, the number of non-repeaters increased from 66,834 students in grades 1 and 4 to 86,748 students,
which exceeded the original (83,034) but not revised target (92,692).

In Diourbel, the number of non-repeaters increased from 69,324 students in grades 1 and 4 to 123,081
students, which exceeded the original (86,103) and revised target (109,907).

82 percent of Daaras achieved 75 percent of the agreed targets in their performance contracts, which
exceeded the original target (80 percent), but slightly missed the revised target (85 percent). The ICR noted
that to be eligible, Daaras had to establish a Daara management committee that was fully participatory and
introduce teaching in French. This was a disbursement linked indicator. 527 performance contracts were
signed between local districts and Daaras (Koranic school owners), which exceeded the target (500). 1,580
members of the Daaras management committees were trained, and 527 Daaras buildings were rehabilitated
with at least one shed structure, one waterpoint, and toilets. Performance contracts included reading and
mathematics textbooks and teaching guides, iron supplements and deworming for children, and creation of
school canteens in each Daaras. During COVID-19, additional support such as hygienic kits and sanitary
products, nutritional support, and awareness campaigns were provided to 1,043 Daaras, as they remained
open during this period.

Out-of-school children

56,869 out of school children returned to schools in the system, which exceeded the target (15,000). Out of
the children who returned to schools in the system, 42 percent were girls, which exceeded the target (30
percent). Notably, MOE supported the return of children via school management committees conducting
outreach to parents and children, and implementation of catch-up programs to re-integrate these
children. Facilitators were hired for four years to support the catch-up program.

Distance learning

Distance learning was supported during the project via provision of computers and video equipment to
provide teaching from national television. TeckTal (a mobile learning platform that provides a turnkey plug-
and-play solution for teaching and learning) was leveraged during COVID-19-related shutdowns. 300
teachers were equipped with tablets and trained to use the platform, which resulted in 1,000 courses for the
platform that were validated by the teaching team and put online. The ICR did not report on which groups of
students were able access the course.



Outcomes



                                                                                                Page 12 of 21
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                SN Quality and Equityof Basic Education (P133333)



                            The impact evaluation (IE) conducted of the Daaras under the project suggests that the project’s interventions
                            plausibly contributed to reading and mathematics improvements for Daaras children. The ICR reported:

                            “The IE showed that children who attended Daaras with a teacher who provided approximately eight months
                            of instruction in basic mathematics and French demonstrated higher levels of learning outcomes as well as
                            social-emotional skills than those who attend Daaras without such a teacher. In French, the children who had
                            eight months of instruction had scores that were 23.2 percent higher, while in mathematics children scored
                            25.7 percent higher. The IE also showed that the impact of the interventions in mathematics and French was
                            greater for girls than boys. Interestingly, the IE also showed that while the impact of teaching mathematics
                            and French was more impactful for girls, the impact on socio-emotional skills was more significant for boys,
                            particularly related to the areas of exploring new horizons.”

                            School census data presented in the ICR shows gender parity for the 2022 school year across all levels of
                            education, preprimary to upper secondary. The ICR did not present trends to show whether gender parity was
                            achieved across the life of the operation, or this was a change.

                            The ICR did not present disaggregated enrollment trends data showing that equity in access improved during
                            the life of the operation.

                            It should be noted that the MOE, with support from the West African Development Bank, built 4,967 new
                            classrooms as well as latrines and other needed facilities during this operation's time frame, which likely also
                            contributed to achievement of this objective.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The overall rating for efficacy is substantial. Two out of three objectives were rated substantial. The project
                            has provided a foundation for further improvements to the education system and learning. The project
                            supported the decentralization of the system using performance-based contracts that had a strong focus on
                            quality improvement, learning, and equity. Notably, the minimum proficiency in reading and mathematics
                            increased in early grades. Several other critical inputs into the education system were realized: data systems
                            and student learning assessment systems. Access improved in the disadvantaged areas as well as in Daaras
                            with the provision of additional classrooms and improved facilities. Supported Daaras are teaching French
                            and mathematics, which has improved learning, and a large number of out-of-school children have returned
                            to school.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating


                                                                                                                              Page 13 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      SN Quality and Equityof Basic Education (P133333)



  Substantial



 5. Efficiency
The economic justification for the investment was based on higher returns and earnings and better employment
opportunities for workers with higher levels of skills. For example, for those with some post-secondary
education, earnings are more than four times those of an individual with no formal education (ICR, p.30). At the
national level in Senegal, one additional year of schooling increases income by 10 percent (ICR, p.30). A cost-
benefit analysis that estimated the net present value (NPV) and internal rate of return (IRR) for the whole project
was not conducted at appraisal. Instead, the PAD provided an overview of economic, fiscal, and social context.

An economic analysis that estimated the benefit from the Additional Financing as well as the associated cost
was conducted at the time of the AF. The analysis was based on component-specific intervention design,
beneficiary targeting, and quantifying the benefits, which were adequate assumptions. Three sets of cost-benefit
analyses were conducted related to the AF, related to: quality improvement (component 1), equity in access
(component 2), and capacity building (component 3). The analysis under the base scenario found the
aggregated IRR for the total AF at 21 percent. The present discounted cost was US$24 million, with the present
value of benefits estimated at US$122.7 million. The resulting NPV was US$98.8 million.

At closure, the estimate added the fourth component along with the other three components. The lower bound of
the present discounted value of benefits for the overall project was US$312.9 million. The present discounted
value of costs was estimated to be US$75.6 million. The corresponding NPV was US$237.3 million. The internal
rate of return (IRR) associated with this NPV was 24 percent. The benefit-cost ratio was 3.9 at the ICR
stage. This suggests positive returns.

There was near full disbursement of the credit (92 percent). The use of project funds was adequately monitored
over the course of implementation by regular reporting and internal controls and external financial audits
regularly submitted to the Bank. However, implementation delays impacted activities. For example, there were
delays in developing mathematics and science teaching strategies, and the government had to finish school
construction after the operation closed, which created additional costs for the government. Delays in the civil
works for the Lycées were due to issues with procurement capacity, contract validation, and topographical
studies. Several extensions to the closing date were needed. Moreover, after training teachers and inspectors
on the science curriculum, it was decided that the curriculum would be revised during the follow-up operation,
after a curriculum assessment conducted late in the operation revealed weaknesses, suggesting an inefficient
planning and implementation process. All of these aspects suggest inefficiencies in implementation.

On balance, the project's investments produced value for money, but there were significant implementation
inefficiencies.




Efficiency Rating
Modest



                                                                                                     Page 14 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      SN Quality and Equityof Basic Education (P133333)



a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                    0
Appraisal                                                  0
                                                                                     Not Applicable
                                                                                    100.00
ICR Estimate                                              24.00
                                                                                     Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of objectives is assessed across the entire project and is rated High, given high relevance and
alignment of the objectives with government and Bank strategies over the life of the operation. Efficacy is rated
Substantial overall, but with moderate shortcomings related to modest achievement of the objective to increase
access to science and mathematics tracks in secondary schools. The operation laid a foundation to improve
learning, equity, and access to math and science for girls. The support to decentralized levels of the education
system had a strong focus on learning and equity. Notably, there have been improvements in lower-grade
proficiency in reading and mathematics. Efficiency is rated modest across the entire project due to
implementation inefficiencies. Thus, the outcome is rated Moderately Satisfactory, indicative of moderate
shortcomings in the operation’s preparation, implementation, and achievement.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Several project activities have been institutionalized. The original capacity risks were mitigated through the
institutional strengthening within the MOE's governance structure, and a robust data system is now in place
and data are used by all levels of the system for decision-making. Performance-based contracts are being
continued under the follow-up project, as is expansion of support to other Daaras. Distance learning capacity
has been improved and will be expanded under the Bank’s follow-up operation. These aspects contribute to
the likelihood of project interventions being sustained. However, Senegal still has substantial challenges
related to access, particularly for out-of-school children. At the secondary level, the country still needs to
increase learning outcomes. Capacity issues persist, as illustrated by this project's implementation delays in
the mathematics and science teaching strategy and in the civil works for the Lycées.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance



                                                                                                   Page 15 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SN Quality and Equityof Basic Education (P133333)




a. Quality-at-Entry
  There were several strengths to preparation. Design was based on strong contextual understanding of
  the education system and decentralized structure in Senegal. The project's design was informed by
  lessons learned from the predecessor operation, the Senegal Second Quality Education For All (QEFA2),
  and experience from other operations using DLIs and involving multiple stakeholders to improve
  learning. For example, the Bank team drew upon past experience in: (i) developing DLIs to be a
  mechanism to create incentives and accountability; (ii) designing an operation with adequate
  decentralized resources; (iii) reinforcing school leadership and local authorities to contribute to
  improvement in learning outcomes; and (iv) empowering local communities to participate in the
  management of service delivery and providing feedback. The Bank team identified appropriate risks and
  appropriate mitigation measures. For example, limited capacity of project staff in monitoring interventions
  such as performance-based contracts was addressed by adding field-based task team members to
  provide the necessary support and technical assistance. However, there were design weaknesses. As
  noted in the monitoring and evaluation section, the results framework lacked outcome indicators to
  measure improved equity of access. For example, one of the outcome-level indicators for the 2021 AF
  measuring equity-related outputs rather than outcomes. In addition, there were design
  weaknesses. Project activities were not sufficient to address the barriers to lack of access to science and
  mathematics for all. It was also late (final year of implementation) to begin the gender empowerment work
  that should have been embedded into the approach and design from the start.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The Bank team was actively engaged in supporting the government in its efforts to implement the project
 over the nine-year implementation period. The Bank worked closely with the Directorate of Planning and
 Education Reform, which was responsible for overall coordination of the operation, as well as other
 technical units such as the Directorate for Elementary Education and the Directorate of Middle and General
 Secondary Education, who were responsible for monitoring implementation of the performance-based
 contracts and primary and middle school project activities. Project coordination by these entities was in
 addition to their other ministerial responsibilities, which had a negative impact upon project implementation
 and resulted in the Bank team proactively providing additional technical support. The Bank also identified a
 remedy when it requested that MOE create a team solely responsible for overseeing project
 implementation with clear roles and responsibilities. This change improved implementation (ICR, p. 36).

 The Bank was responsive to the realities facing Senegal during the global pandemic. There was
 supervision continuity with the MOE and the Bank team (composed of both international and local staff),
 which allowed the Bank team to regularly meet with the MOE and the various implementation units. The
 Bank supported the government’s request to extend the project to complete civil works that had been
 delayed because of issues related to procurement, counterpart funding, and the COVID-19 pandemic.




                                                                                                   Page 16 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SN Quality and Equityof Basic Education (P133333)



 The Bank secured two Additional Financings for the operation. Notably, the second one was aligned with
 the government’s focus on gender empowerment and its analysis, but this was late (final year of
 implementation) to begin what should have been embedded into the approach from the start.

 The Bank effectively monitored risks during implementation and was conservative with ratings to ensure
 appropriate mitigation measure were in place. The Bank and the implementing agencies enhanced
 implementation by communicating and engaging with a variety of stakeholders to understand the value of
 project activities.




  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The project's objectives, components, and outcome measures were logically linked, but there were
 weaknesses with the results chain and measurement with one objective (i.e., increased access to
 mathematics and science). The results framework was predominantly composed of output indicators, but
 these measures assisted in tracing the results chain toward achievement of the objectives. There were also
 appropriate outcome indicators, such as increased learning outcomes. However, indicators added in the
 final AF were weak, as they did not measure changes in gender equity; instead, they were outputs
 measuring implementation of activities (i.e. number of education personnel trained on gender-informed
 management approaches; number of school based focal points trained on gender-based violence reporting
 and mitigation measures; number of girls directly benefitting from socio-emotional health and well-being
 interventions; and number of action plans integrating gender and adolescent implementation).

 Additional efforts, beyond indicators in the results framework, were also part of monitoring and
 evaluation. The project supported establishment of a monitoring system applicable for each level of the
 system. Notably, design also included student learning assessments that measured improvements in
 learning, and an impact evaluation of the Daaras was implemented. Finally, there was independent
 validation to confirm achievement of DLIs.




                                                                                                 Page 17 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SN Quality and Equityof Basic Education (P133333)



b. M&E Implementation
  The Division of Planning and Education Reform was responsible for monitoring and evaluation and
  overseeing capacity building activities (as well as overall project coordination). The operation built the
  technical and managerial capacities of the regions and districts so that they had adequate data
  management skills. There was a clear timeline for data collection and analysis and explicit assignment of
  responsibility. Indicators and performance-based contracts were monitored regularly.

  During the operation, additional evaluations were undertaken. A Service Delivery Indicators (SDI) survey
  of elementary schools with a second-grade elementary class was updated. There was a diagnostic of
  regional training institutions. In addition, an impact evaluation was conducted to examine the impact of
  the intervention in Daaras. This evaluation provided evidence of learning among children who attended
  Daaras and had a teacher who provided approximately eight months of instruction in basic mathematics
  and French.



c. M&E Utilization
  There were multiple examples of how the monitoring and evaluation activities conducted under the
  project were utilized by the government. For example, the government used the annual sector report
  during its review meeting. The results of the impact evaluation informed future support in Daaras. Data
  from the data platform were used among schools and at the district, regional, and central level to aid in
  decision-making. Finally, the performance-based contracts were reviewed to inform follow-on contracts.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The environmental assessment category was B at appraisal and remained category B with the two
   Additional Financings (as no activity was expected to have a significant negative impact). The project
   triggered: OP/BP 4.01 Environment Assessment; OP 4.11 Physical Cultural Resources, and OP 4.12
   Involuntary Resettlement. A Resettlement Policy Framework was prepared. The operation updated the
   Environmental Social Management Framework previously prepared under the predecessor project. The
   safeguards were monitored during implementation and were consistently rated satisfactory and moderately
   satisfactory by Implementation Status and Results Reports (ISRs).

   The project employed additional safeguard protections. First, a Grievance Redress Mechanism was
   established in May 2020.This process was used twice to resolve complaints registered in relation to
   recruitment of project staff and another related to a Koranic School. The second AF put in place additional
   activities to mitigate gender-based violence through codes of conduct, training, and awareness-raising
   activities.




                                                                                                  Page 18 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SN Quality and Equityof Basic Education (P133333)




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management

   Ratings were satisfactory or moderately satisfactory for fiduciary management in ISRs for most of the life of
   the operation. Financial reports were regularly submitted and of acceptable quality. The required audits
   were submitted to the World Bank, and the auditors’ opinions were clean over the project period.

   However, issues emerged and ratings were downgraded in 2017. The issues included: (i) delays in the
   transfer of resources by MOE to the regions and districts due to lack of a financial unit, and (ii) delays in
   provision of financial reporting and technical reports that led to a lag in disbursements from the project
   accounts. These shortcomings were resolved when qualified staff were hired and a financial unit was
   established that had greater linkages to the regional level. During the life of the project, the Bank’s financial
   management team provided training to build financial management capacity in the implementing agency.

   The ICR (39) noted that borrower contributions to the sector were a problem in 2017 and 2018; this
   operation was fully financed by the Bank, GPE, and Trust Funds.

   Procurement

   Ratings for procurement were satisfactory or moderately satisfactory in ISRs throughout the life of the
   operation, with one exception. In this one case (December 2020), the rating was lowered due to lack of
   documentation. This situation was resolved when a new procurement staff was hired. From that point, data
   accurately reflected contract progress, which contributed to better contracts management and timely
   delivery of goods and works. World Bank procurement staff provided training and technical guidance to the
   implementing agency.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None reported.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                   Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                     IEG
                                                                                   Disagreements/Comment
                                 Moderately
Outcome                                                  Moderately Satisfactory
                                 Satisfactory
                                                                                   Moderate shortcomings in
Bank Performance                 Satisfactory            Moderately Satisfactory
                                                                                   project and M&E design.

                                                                                                      Page 19 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SN Quality and Equityof Basic Education (P133333)



Quality of M&E                  Substantial              Substantial

Quality of ICR                  ---                      Substantial


12. Lessons

IEG has synthesized the lessons presented in the ICR (pp. 40-41) as the following:

Establishing a feedback loop from central, decentral, and school levels that uses the
information from student learning assessments shifts the focus to improved learning, which
is a necessary step. One of the mechanisms the project used was performance-based contracts
that resulted in schools, head teachers, and school management committees examining learning
data, after receiving capacity development to discuss how to use resources provided by MOE to
improve learning. This was complemented with other actions to support learning by central and
decentral levels: training (to understand the data and how to improve teaching practices) and
inspection. The government has expanded the approach throughout the country. These actions are
important and necessary, but not sufficient, to improve student learning. Other actions are also
needed across the system to ensure system coherence in support of learning: curriculum and
teaching, capacity across all levels of the system, and political commitment.

Sound policy dialogue based on evidence and contextual understanding can play a role in
creating a pathway between the conventional education system and the Koranic education
system. This project strategically launched a competitive process to support Daaras that were
willing to integrate French and mathematics into their traditional curriculum. This was done through
awareness-raising, continuous dialogue, the involvement of Koranic teachers, and patience, as well
as contextual understanding. These sustained efforts led to the introduction of French and
mathematics in the project-supported Daaras. The project’s evaluation showed the approach was
working and opened an important dialogue on expansion of the activities to other Koranic schools.
This is important for the country to have children with literacy and numeracy skills, since the level of
education is related to individual future earnings and poverty. This also shows the importance of the
Bank’s contextual understanding and dialogue.

Emergency crisis situations such as the global pandemic require flexibility and can present
opportunities for change. The outbreak of COVID-19 showed that the Bank team was able to react
quickly to unforeseen events and to find the means in the financing agreement to help the country
deal with unexpected situations. During the pandemic, formal schools were closed; however, Daaras
remained open. Because of the health concerns and needs of the Daaras, the project supported
1,000 Daaras with food, sanitation kits, and sensitization on social distancing. Additionally, the
project team and MOE held discussions to establish mechanisms to ensure learning continuity
during the pandemic. As a result of these timely discussions, the Bank's follow-up operation aims to
provide learning continuity throughout the education system through digital technology, broadcast,
and radio.

Changing attitudes and access to mathematics and science for all students -- regardless of
ability and gender -- requires a comprehensive approach. This project had an incomplete set of
activities to improve access to math and science, which was a design weakness. Other activities
directly changing teachers’ skills and attitudes and behaviors would also be needed. Moreover, the

                                                                                                     Page 20 of 21
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       SN Quality and Equityof Basic Education (P133333)



government’s national science improvement strategy was delayed. As a result, some on the
Orientation Committee viewed access to mathematics and science as only for capable learners. In a
decentralized system such as Senegal's, central-level actions are necessary to support access to
mathematics and science in the form of well-defined strategies and decrees, but implementation
also requires building capacity among decentralized levels to ensure the competencies and
awareness that all learners need access to mathematics and science. It also requires provision of
resources and training for decentralized levels and teachers. Project implementation shows the
importance of engaging with diverse group of stakeholders, particularly in relation to gender norms.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The quality of the ICR was substantial, but additional information in some areas of the ICR would have made
the validation easier. The ICR provided a concise description of the project, its activities, and the factors
affecting implementation, but it was overly repetitive. It analyzed shortcomings in design, preparation, and Bank
performance. The rating for efficiency was not explained well, particularly implementation efficiency. The ICR
reported indicator data and explained when targets were not met and provided a broader narrative of
achievement of objectives. It did not report on all disbursement linked indicators noted in Annex 7 (D1, D10 and
D11). While not required, it would have enhanced the presentation of efficacy if trend data from enrollment and
census data were included to provide evidence of changes in equity for groups, including gender parity.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                   Page 21 of 21
