     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Climate Smart Agricult Support Project (P153420)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0023581

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P153420                                     Climate Smart Agricult Support Project

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Niger                                       Agriculture and Food


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-58300                                  31-Dec-2022                                        107,488,953.22

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 26-May-2016                                31-Dec-2022

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           111,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                            111,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Actual                                        107,488,953.22                                               0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Hassan Wally                Avjeet Singh                 Avjeet Singh                   IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) of the Climate Smart Agriculture Support Project (PASEC) as
   articulated in the Financing Agreement (FA, page 5) was identical to the one stated in the Project Appraisal
   Document (PAD, paragraph 22) and aimed to:




                                                                                                   Page 1 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Climate Smart Agricult Support Project (P153420)



    "(i) enhance adaptation to climate risks, (ii) improve agricultural productivity among the Targeted
   Communities and (iii) in the event of an Eligible Crisis or Emergency, to provide immediate and
   effective response to said Eligible Crisis or Emergency."

   Parsing the PDO. The PDO will be parsed based on the following three objectives:

   1. To enhance adaptation to climate risks.

   2. To improve agricultural productivity among the targeted communities.

   3. To provide immediate and effective response to said Eligible Crisis or Emergency.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The PDO was supported by the following four components:

   1. Investments for Scaling up Climate Smart Agriculture (appraisal cost: US$68.00 million, actual
   cost: US$68.76 million). In each commune, the project would support preparation of an Integrated
   Climate-Smart Agriculture Investment Plans (ICSIP) by a specialized NGO, drawing on the existing
   Communal Development Plan (PDC) developed under the decentralization process by the Government of
   Niger (GoN). They would integrate investments by communes to create business opportunities for farmers’
   groups, and Micro Small and Medium Enterprises (MSMEs). This comprised two subcomponents:

   1.1. Financing CSA-integrated subprojects at the commune level. This sub-component would provide
   investment grants to communes for supporting climate smart agriculture (CSA)-integrated subprojects.
   Building upon the PDC. The project would support the preparation of ICSIP for each commune through a
   bottom-up, participatory approach. Each ICSIP would comprise a number of integrated sub-projects that
   would support a combination of the following five principal intervention categories: (a) improving soil fertility
   and water management for rainfed crops; (b) supporting small- and medium-scale irrigation; (c) supporting
   the consolidation of high potential value chains; (d) improving market access; and (e) improving agroforestry
   and natural resource management.

   1.2. Inclusive enterprise development for sustainability of CSA. The project would support investments
   in the following areas: Business development services support for matching grant recipients to undertake
   entrepreneurial activities using proven business models and technologies to support rainfed production
   systems, irrigation schemes, livestock and high value chains; Establishment of a matching grant facility in
   the amount of US$10 million to promote development of inclusive enterprise in the agriculture sector.

   2. Innovative practices and improved service delivery for mainstreaming CSA (appraisal cost:
   US$33.00 million, actual cost: US$21.91 million). This component would focus on public sector
   institutions to improve the policy and enabling environment and facilitate delivery of relevant services


                                                                                                      Page 2 of 19
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  Climate Smart Agricult Support Project (P153420)



by national and local public sector institutions. In addition, this component would work directly with the
private sector and attempt to develop market mechanisms for sustained service delivery during and after
the project. It included four sub-components:

2.1. Technology transfer. This sub-component would showcase transformative technologies and
innovations that could be adopted and scaled up by value chain operators to improve productivity and
product quality and reduce climate change risks and carbon emissions. It would focus on technology
transfer and use the demand-based Farmers Field School (FFS) approach developed by the Food and
Agriculture Organization (of the United Nations) (FAO) as well as the innovation platform approach
implemented in Niger under the West Africa Agricultural Productivity Programme (WAAPP), to establish
demonstration schemes and facilitate multi-stakeholder participatory processes for the adoption of new
technologies.

2.2 Improved access to information. This subcomponent would support: (a) collaboration with the
Directorate of Meteorology, National Network of Niger’s Agriculture Chambers (RECA), and the National
Institute for Agronomic Research in Niger (INRAN) to invest in commune level weather forecast (seasonal
and short term) and advisory; (b) strengthening information delivery to farmers through upgrading and
expanding the National Network of Niger’s Agriculture Chambers (RECA) web platform, supporting RECA in
compilation of existing content on good agriculture and livestock practices and preparing dissemination
material in local language (Hausa and Zarma), support community rural radios, and leveraging rural
markets for information dissemination; and (c) delivering weather forecast and crop price information to
farmers in selected communes through cellphones.

2.3. Support to national institutions for improved service delivery and policy dialogue. This sub-
component would finance a number of activities to strengthen national institutions’ capacity, including: (a)
organizing workshops, meetings, and field visits and developing and delivering a training program for
building awareness and knowledge sharing on CSA; (b) supporting development of policies, projects, and
programs for CSA; (c) supporting national institutions to help implement PASEC; (d) supporting national
universities to develop curriculum on CSA; (e) supporting Investment Fund for Food Security and Nutrition
(FISAN) for organizing workshops; and (f) supporting INRAN for production of foundation seed for staple
grains.

2.4. Supporting Innovations for Agriculture Development. This sub-component would support
the following activities: a) Piloting of e-vouchers for agricultural input distribution for vulnerable populations
in selected communes; and b) Piloting the use of remote sensing, application for monitoring crop
performance.

3. Contingency Emergency Response (appraisal cost: US$0.00 million, actual cost: US$0.00
million). This component would finance emergency works in case of another disaster event by including a
“zero-dollar” Contingency Emergency Response Component (CERC).

4. Project Coordination and Management (appraisal cost: US$10.00 million, actual cost: US$13.30
million). This component included two sub-components:

4.1. Coordination, management, and implementation support.

4.2. Monitoring and evaluation (M&E), communication. and knowledge production and sharing.



                                                                                                      Page 3 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Climate Smart Agricult Support Project (P153420)




e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project Cost. Total project costs were estimated at US$117.80 million. The actual cost was 107.49 million
   (ICR, Data Sheet, page 2).

   Financing. The project was financed through an IDA credit of US$111.00 million. The actual amount
   disbursed was US$107.49 million (ICR, Data Sheet, page 2). The ICR (footnote #22) explained that due to
   exchange rate movements in favor of the Franc (CFA), the dollar value of the credit was US$105.0 million
   as of 11-June-2023 value date. Of this, US$ 103.8 million had been disbursed or committed, with US$1.2
   million undisbursed.

   Borrower Contribution. Beneficiaries’ were expected to contribute US$ 6.8 million (in-kind). No counter
   part financing was to be provided from the Government of Niger. The actual amount contributed by the
   project beneficiaries was reported by the ICR (Data sheet, page 2) as $0.00. In a further communication the
   project team explained that ", the borrower provided some counterpart funds (30 million FCFA) as a cash
   for compensation for 17 affected people in Torodi commune. The Borrower also provided in-kind
   contributions in office space and other facilities" and beneficiaries provided contributions estimated at (CFA
   664 million) for the integrated communal sub-projects funded in different communes. In addition, matching
   grants beneficiaries provided a cash contribution to their sub-project (totaling CFA1,262 million), for a total
   of about CFA 664+1,262 = 1,926 million, or US$ 3.2 million."

   Dates. The project was approved on May 26, 2016 and became effective six months later on November 30,
   2016. The Mid-Term Review (MTR) was conducted on February 14, 2020 or about three years and four
   months after effectiveness. While the PAD did not report a specific date for the MTR, this Review finds that
   the MTR was timely conducted relative to other Bank-financed operations. The project closed on its original
   closing date on December 31, 2022. The project was restructured once (Level 2) on May 21, 2021, when
   the amount disbursed was US$74.06 million, in order to revise the Results Framework (RF), change
   components, reallocate funds between disbursement categories, and change institutional arrangements.

   The following revisions were made to the PDO indicators: (i) The indicator for “Direct project beneficiaries”
   was split into “Farmers reached with agricultural assets and services” to align with the core indicator
   definition, though the project continued to monitor the other beneficiaries also (e.g., members employed
   under the community work schemes) without reducing the ambition of the indicator; (ii) Agricultural
   productivity indicator was disaggregated by key crops; and (iii) the “Reduced net GHG emissions” indicator
   was dropped as a PDO indicator since it was not necessary for measuring the attainment of the project’s
   development objectives as defined (i.e., focusing on adaptation and productivity), although it was agreed
   that changes in GHG emissions would be estimated at ICR stage to assess the project’s overall contribution
   to mitigating climate change. Considering that the revisions were made to better define and align the
   indicators with the PDO aspects without reducing the project's ambition, the IEG review will not carry out a
   split evaluation.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale


                                                                                                     Page 4 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Climate Smart Agricult Support Project (P153420)



Context at Appraisal. Niger continues to be extremely vulnerable to severe climate shocks, with drought
being the most important risk in terms of frequency and impact. Between 1980 and 2012, 10 major
episodes of drought were recorded, of which 5 led to severe food crisis and contributed to negative GDP
growth rate. Climate change was and is likely to exacerbate Niger’s food security situation. Niger’s
agriculture sector suffers from two fundamental problems: low productivity and low resilience. This project
(PASEC) aimed to address the binding constraints that affect the productivity and resilience of
Niger’s crop-livestock sector.

Previous Bank Experience. The Bank’s (2013) agriculture sector risk assessment for Niger served as the
analytic underpinning of this project. The Bank also has had rich experience in supporting agriculture,
agribusiness, and natural resource management through Bank-funded projects in Niger, Burkina Faso, and
Nigeria. These included: Private Irrigation Promotion Project for Niger (P072996), Niger Agro-Pastoral
Export and Market Development Project (P095210), and the Regional Sahel Pastoralism Support Project
(P147674). Further, the Bank would build on its previous experience with other development partners (FAO,
IFAD) in supporting agriculture in Niger. Finally, the project was informed by the lessons and
recommendations from the Bank's flagship report (2015): Enhancing Resilience in African Dryland: Towards
a Shared Development Agenda.

Consistency with the Bank Strategies. At appraisal, the PDO was in line with Bank Group’s twin goals of
ending extreme poverty and promoting shared prosperity as the project would contribute to increased
production, food security, and competitiveness as well as to improved livelihoods and reduced poverty for
extremely poor beneficiaries. The PDO was also in line with Bank's Country Partnership Strategy (CPS,
FY2013-FY2016) for Niger, which aimed to assist Niger in achieving resilient growth, reducing vulnerability,
and strengthening capacity for service delivery. Further, the PDO aligned with the Bank's Africa Climate
Business Plan (2015), which aimed to boost the region’s ability to adapt to the changing climate.

At completion, the PDO continued to align with the Bank's Country Partnership Framework (CPF, FY2018-
FY2022) for Niger, which emphasized that agriculture and the rural economy hold the key to extreme
poverty reduction in Niger. The CPF also noted that improving productive infrastructure and adapting
technologies to climate change was required for modernizing and diversifying the rural economy. The
PDO was in line with the CPF’s first Focus Area: Improved Rural Productivity and Incomes, especially with
respect to increasing Niger’s low levels of productivity and household incomes in rural areas.

Consistency with the Government Strategies and Priorities. At appraisal, the PDO was in line with the
3N Initiative adopted by the Government in April 2012 as its national strategy to boost agricultural
development and resolve food and nutrition insecurity. The 3N Initiative aimed to (i) increase and
diversify agro-sylvo-pastoral and fishery production; (ii) guarantee regular supply of farm produce and agri-
food products; (iii) improve the population’s resilience to climate changes, crises, and disasters; (iv)
improve Nigeriens’ nutrition situation; and (v) supporting reforms. The PDO was also in line with the
National Decentralization Policy (NDP), which called for repositioning the government in its regulatory
functions and its catalytic role of
support to decentralization reforms.

At completion, the PDO continued to align with the Government's priorities, specifically with the
development objectives in its Vision 2035. The key priority of Vision 2035 was to revitalize and modernize
rural areas through sustainably increasing agricultural production and productivity, which was a key
objective of this project.



                                                                                                    Page 5 of 19
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                       Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Climate Smart Agricult Support Project (P153420)



               Summary of Relevance of Objectives Assessment. The PDO statement was clear, focused, and pitched
               at an adequate level of ambition. At completion, the PDO continued to be in line with both the Bank's CPF
               and with the priorities of the Government of Niger for the agriculture sector. It is also worth noting that the
               Bank was preparing a US$350 million follow-up project, the Livestock and Agriculture Modernization Project
               (LAMP) (P179276), which supported a similar objective (to increase productivity, commercialization and
               climate resilience of the agri-food sector in the project area). Therefore, the Relevance of Objectives is
               rated High.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To enhance adaptation to climate risks.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change (ToC). To achieve the stated objective, the project would support the scaling up of proven
                             climate-smart agriculture (CSA) practices through financing CSA investments at the community level (for
                             example, to support assisted natural regeneration) and stimulating private investments through matching
                             grants (for example, to support irrigation). The project would also promote CSA practices and support
                             improved service delivery by enhancing farmer field schools' technology transfer, improving access to
                             information, including weather forecasts, and supporting innovative technologies to distribute inputs to
                             vulnerable farmers through e-vouchers. The expected outputs of the aforementioned activities would be:
                             increased number of hectares under sustainable land management; increased number of hectares under
                             irrigation; CSA technologies, innovations, or management practices tested by the project and scaled up in the
                             project areas; increase in the number of farmers in the project area using information through information
                             systems promoted by the project; and vulnerable farmers would receive input subsidies through the e-
                             voucher agricultural input subsidy platform. The expected outcomes would be enhanced adaptation to climate
                             change and improved productivity among targeted communities. Anticipated long-term impacts would be
                             improved food and nutritional security and increased income at the community level.

                             The achievement of the objective was underpinned by the following critical assumptions: (i) the acceptability
                             of the promoted CSA technologies by the targeted agro-pastoral community and (ii) the communes’ capacity
                             as implementing partners and their continuing to fully embed these practices in their development plans to
                             sustain the investments made and maintain the momentum generated by the project to reach other farmers.

                             The ToC clearly described the connection between activities, outputs, and expected outcomes in a plausible
                             causal chain. The critical assumptions were comprehensive and logical.



                                                                                                                              Page 6 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Climate Smart Agricult Support Project (P153420)



Outputs/Intermediate Results

     44 communes that developed Integrated Climate-Smart Investment Plans, achieving the revised
        target of 44 but below the original target of 88.
       44 communal sub-projected granted with environmental and social management plans that have been
        implemented, achieving the revised target of 44 but below the original target of 88.
       4,401 ha were provided with new/improved irrigation or drainage services, exceeding the revised and
        original targets of 2,700 ha and 3,400 ha, respectively.
       1,858 ha were provided with new irrigation or drainage services, exceeding the revised and original
        targets of 540 ha and 680 ha, respectively.
        2,543 ha were provided with improved irrigation or drainage services, exceeding the revised target of
        2,160 ha and substantially achieving the original target of 2,720 ha.
       The project beneficiaries who received matching grants achieved a 65% increase in revenue,
        exceeding the original target of 50%.
       99% of Farmers were satisfied with services provided by public institutions supported by the project,
        exceeding the original target of 95%.
       81% of farmers were using information through information systems promoted by the project,
        exceeding the original target of 80%.
       16 CSA technologies, innovations, or management practices were tested by the project scaled up in
        the project areas, exceeding the original target of 10.

Outcomes

     The project supported the wide adoption of sustainable land management practices, supported
      investment in small and large-scale irrigation development, and promoted the adoption of
      several improved climate-smart farming practices. By project completion, 334,155 farmers (37.2%
      were women) adopted improved technologies suitably adapted to climate change, significantly
      surpassing the project target of 120,00 farmers. Also, 376,725 farmers (38.9% were women)
      were reached with agricultural assets or services exceeding the original target of 200,000.
     Adoption of Sustainable Land Management Practices: By project completion, 154,954 hectares (ha)
      came under sustainable land management practices, exceeding the original target of 100,000
      hectares. Supported practices included assisted natural regeneration (applied on 87% of the
      area), sylvo-pastoral half-moons (4.45%), fight against the invasive weed Sida cordifolia (3.92%), and
      agricultural half-moons (2.32%), and stone cordons, sand dune stabilization, low walls, village
      woodlots, anti-erosion benches, gully treatment, fight invasive plants (1.41%). According to the
      ICR (paragraph 22), "these land management practices restored degraded lands and enhanced
      agricultural productivity."
     Investments in Small and Medium Scale Irrigation. By project completion, 4,401 ha were brought
      under irrigation, significantly exceeding the revised target of 2,700 ha and the original target of 3,400
      ha. New irrigation was 1,858 ha, against a target of 540 ha. Matching grant investments in irrigation
      promoted CSA approaches, including solar pumps, micro-sprinklers, and drip irrigation equipment
      (ICR, paragraph 23).
     Promoting climate-smart farming practices. The project promoted 16 CSA technologies (with
      technical assistance from the International Crops Research Institute for the Semi-Arid Tropics-
      ICRISAT) adopted by project beneficiaries. Of these technologies, 11 were largely new introductions,
      whereas 5 were improvements to existing practices. The CSA technologies were successfully adopted

                                                                                                 Page 7 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Climate Smart Agricult Support Project (P153420)



       because of a multifaceted effort to promote them. Promotional efforts supported by the project
       included agro-pastoral field schools, open days and guided tours, community listeners' clubs, and
       utilizing different e-extension activities (ICR, paragraph 25). Finally, to strengthen the analysis of
       climate information, the project equipped the National Meteorology Department with 30 meteorological
       stations and 600 rain gauges. The project also supported the Regional Center for Hydro and
       Agrometeorology in strengthening the capability of the National Meteorology and the National
       Hydrology Directorate to forecast floods and produce warning notes in project communes that were
       bordering watercourses (ICR, paragraph 25).
      COVID-19 Response: In addition, the project distributed climate-smart seeds to 540,498 households
       (169,600 led by women), cassava cuttings were distributed to 62,990 households (1,623 led by
       women), and animal feeds were distributed to 49,275 households (31,876 led by women) as part of
       the COVID-19 response.

Summary of Efficacy Assessment. The project surpassed the targets for its PDO outcome indicators. Also,
most targets for the intermediate results indicators were either met or exceeded. The evidence provided in the
ICR demonstrated that the project promoted technologies that were expected to enhance adaptation to
climate risks. Therefore, the efficacy with which this objective was achieved is rated Substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To improve agricultural productivity among the targeted communities.

Rationale
Theory of Change (ToC). The same ToC mentioned under objective 1 applies since the adaptation and
productivity objectives are closely intertwined. Therefore, enhancing adaptation to climate change invariably
contributes to, and is an important pre-requisite for, enhancing agricultural productivity, especially in the
context of Niger, which continues to be significantly affected by climate change (ICR, paragraph 20).

Outputs/Intermediate Results

      An e-voucher agricultural input subsidy platform was established and operational (target achieved).
      25,517 vulnerable farmers received subsidies from the e-voucher agricultural input subsidy platform,
       exceeding the target of 20,000.

Outcomes

      The project contributed to improved agricultural productivity by promoting natural resource
       management practices, improved irrigation, and introducing improved crop varieties, including
       cowpea, sorghum, and maize (ICR, paragraph 27). The project also provided input subsidies to
       vulnerable farmers.



                                                                                                 Page 8 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Climate Smart Agricult Support Project (P153420)




      By project completion, the increase in agriculture productivity in project areas was demonstrated by
       the increase in the average yield of three key crops: millet, sorghum, and cowpea, reaching 0.69 tons
       per ha, exceeding the target of 0.67 tons per ha and compared to a baseline of 0.42 tons per ha. Millet
       yield reached 0.74 tons per ha, substantially achieving the target of 0.78 tons per ha compared to a
       baseline of 0.52 tons per ha. Sorghum yield reached 0.68 tons per ha, achieving the target of 0.68
       tons per ha compared to a baseline of 0.45 tons per ha. Cowpea yield reached 0.56 tons per ha,
       slightly exceeding the target of 0.55 tons per ha compared to a baseline of 0.33 tons per
       ha. According to the ICR (paragraph 26), project participants consistently obtained higher productivity
       compared to control groups. Productivity for project participants varied from 8% to 27.6% above non-
       participants.
      The ICR (paragraph 26) noted that the participants in the beneficiary satisfaction survey reported that
       the sustainable land management practices supported by the project resulted in increased crop
       productivity combined with increased availability of fodder. Increased fodder resulted in an increase in
       the number of livestock among beneficiary populations and motivated farmers to engage in livestock
       fattening activities.

Summary of Efficacy Assessment. The project achieved its target for its PDO outcome indicator. Also, the
data reported in the ICR showed improvement in the yields of the three main crops in the project areas
compared to control groups, suggesting that the increment in the crop yields in project areas was attributable
to the project-supported activities. Therefore, the efficacy with which this objective was achieved is rated
Substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
To provide immediate and effective response to said Eligible Crisis or Emergency.

Rationale
Theory of Change (ToC). This objective was based on an emergency situation, and the project included
a Contingency Emergency Response (CERC) component that would finance emergency works in case of a
disaster event.

The project contributed to responding to the COVID-19 crisis, as noted under Objective 1, even though the
CERC component was not triggered. The ICR notes that CERC was not triggered since responding to the
impact of COVID-19 was more quickly and easily handled by scaling up the already ongoing project activities.
Since the CERC component was not triggered, this objective is not assessed and treated as Not applicable.




Rating


                                                                                                 Page 9 of 19
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Climate Smart Agricult Support Project (P153420)



                            Not Rated/Not Applicable


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Overall Efficacy is rated Substantial with minor shortcomings. The evidence provided in the ICR
                            demonstrated that the project promoted technologies that were expected to enhance adaptation to climate
                            risks. Also, the data reported in the ICR showed improvements in the yields of the three main crops in the
                            project areas compared to control groups, suggesting that the increments in the crop yields in project areas
                            were attributable to the project-supported activities. The project also contributed to responding to the COVID-
                            19 crisis by scaling up project activities even though the CERC was not activated. Overall, the project
                            substantially achieved or surpassed the targets for its PDO outcome indicators. Also, most targets for the
                            intermediate results indicators were either met or exceeded.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



   5. Efficiency
   Economic and Financial Analysis (EFA)

   ex ante

                               The analysis estimated the overall economic internal rate of return (EIRR) at 16.4% and a net present
                                value (NPV) of US$98.2 million for a 20 year project lifecycle at a 6% discount rate. To calculate the total
                                incremental benefit stream resulting from the project, the analysis aggregated benefits arising from (i)
                                sustainable increase of agricultural production (irrigated and rain-fed systems), (ii) sustainable increase
                                of livestock production, (iii) increased carbon sequestration in soils and biomass (mitigation co-benefits)
                                and, (iv) public infrastructures, such as rural roads.
                               Financial analysis was done for both rainfed and irrigated sub-projects. For rain-fed systems the financial
                                internal rate of return (FIRR) ranged from 10.2% to 22.5%, while for irrigated systems the FIRR ranged
                                from 21.5% to 37.5%.
                               Environmental benefits. The analysis indicated that the activities foreseen by the project lead to a carbon
                                balance of -4.9 million tons of CO2e that would be mitigated over the period of 20 years starting from
                                project implementation.
                               Sensitivity analysis. The project’s returns were sensitive to changes in yields, decreases in prices, more
                                severe droughts, and decrease in adoption rates. A decrease in yield by 20% would drop the EIRR to
                                12.7%, a 20% decrease in output prices would drop the EIRR to 12.5%, a severe drought every 5
                                years would drop the EIRR to 15%, while a 20% reduction in adoption rates would drop the EIRR to
                                12.2%.


                                                                                                                              Page 10 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Climate Smart Agricult Support Project (P153420)



      Overall, the PAD included a comprehensive EFA that provided a convincing justification for the project
       investments.

ex post

      The analysis at completion largely followed the same methodology at appraisal to ensure consistency
       and comparability. The economic internal rate of return (EIRR) was estimated at 25.7% and net present
       value (NPV) of US$ 116.1 million. According to the ICR (paragraph 31) higher EIRR at completion
       compared to appraisal was mainly due to a reduced project scope and better yields than anticipated.
      To calculate the total incremental benefit stream resulting from the project, the ex post analysis had a
       narrower scope relative to appraisal and aggregated benefits arising from: (i) sustainable increase of
       agricultural production (irrigated and rain-fed systems), and (ii) environmental benefits arising from
       increased carbon sequestration in soils and biomass.
      Environmental benefits. The ex post assessment of emissions savings estimated 12.9 million of CO2
       tons equivalent over the entire project time horizon, which was 2.6 times higher than the estimated
       savings at appraisal stage.
      Sensitivity analysis. A probabilistic analysis was applied, which allowed several inputs to vary
       simultaneously and be correlated. The minimal value of the distribution was slightly above 12%, which
       was consistent with the worst-case scenarios reported under the sensitivity analysis of the PAD.

Implementation Efficiency. The project closed on time despite some implementation delays. The project
experienced initial implementation delays due to difficulties in recruiting the project technical staff. Also, the
preparation and approval processes for the communes’ integrated CSA sub-projects were lengthy, and securing
the cash contributions from beneficiaries at the commune level prior to initial disbursement was difficult. Further,
the implementation of matching grants experienced delays due to difficulties in procuring international business
development service provider combined with poor quality of proposals (ICR, paragraph 15). On the other hand,
the ICR (paragraph 35) noted that implementation efficiency benefited from the use of e-extension for
disseminating vital information through electronic communication, estimating yields through remote
sensing/satellite images; and delivering input subsidies to the vulnerable through e-vouchers.

Summary of Efficiency Assessment. The ex-post EIRR at 25.70% was higher than the 16.4% estimated at
appraisal. Also, environmental benefits through carbon dioxide sequestration were 2.6 times higher than the
estimate at the appraisal stage. However, the project experienced some implementation delays, as noted above.
Overall, the ex-post analysis provided a convincing justification for the project investments. Therefore, Efficiency
is rated Substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)



                                                                                                      Page 11 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Climate Smart Agricult Support Project (P153420)



                                                                                   0
Appraisal                                                16.40
                                                                                    Not Applicable
                                                                                   0
ICR Estimate                                             25.70
                                                                                    Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of Objectives was rated High. Overall Efficacy is rated Substantial with minor shortcomings. The
project substantially achieved or surpassed the targets for its PDO outcome indicators. Also, most targets for
the IRIs were either met or exceeded. The evidence provided in the ICR demonstrated that the project promoted
technologies that were expected to enhance adaptation to climate risks. Also, the data reported in the ICR
showed improvements in the yields of the three main crops in the project areas compared to control groups,
suggesting that the increments in the crop yields in project areas were attributable to the project-supported
activities. The CERC was not triggered since it was agreed with the Government that responding to COVID-19
was more easily handled by scaling up the already ongoing project activities. So the CERC objective is not
applicable. Efficiency was rated Substantial. The ex-post EIRR at 25.70% was higher than the 16.4% estimated
at appraisal, and the environmental benefits through carbon dioxide sequestration were 2.6 times higher than
the estimate at the appraisal stage.

Based on the assigned ratings for the three outcome criteria, Outcome is rated Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

According to the ICR (paragraph 58) the following risks could potentially impact the Development Outcome:

1. Technical risk. Sustainable Land Management investments (such as assisted natural regeneration
infrastructure) were technically simple and easy to maintain and operate. Most issues such as unauthorized
harvesting of wood products and fire outbreaks are localized and can be managed at the community level
with existing community structures. Also, household level investments such as home gardens, small
livestock (small ruminants and poultry), and other small investments have low operation and maintenance
needs. Water pumps and other small equipment used are simple and can easily be maintained by local
artisans. Finally, the supply of improved seeds remains a challenge since Niger’s seed sector remains
underdeveloped.

2. Other stakeholder ownership. The project-supported irrigation investments require a higher level of
maintenance. While management committees were set up for managing larger scale irrigation infrastructure,
they remain weak. Also, water fees are still not enough to cover the budget needed for maintaining the
infrastructure, and will need to be periodically increased.



                                                                                                 Page 12 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Climate Smart Agricult Support Project (P153420)



3.Government ownership/commitment risk. Despite that public extension service remains weak, farmer-
to-farmer technology dissemination will most likely continue taking place, in part compensating for the
shortcomings in the public extension service.

The following risk is emphasized by IEG:

4. Political and security risk. Niger has recently experienced a coup where the elected president was
overthrown by the army. As a result, the Bank is expected to suspend operations temporarily till the situation
is resolved. Also, security in certain parts of the country remains a concern. The combination of political
instability and security challenges could potentially reverse the gains achieved under the project.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
        Strategic relevance and approach. The project was strategically relevant and in line with Bank
            strategies and Borrower priorities for the agriculture sector (see section 3 for more details). The
            Nigerien Government requested the assistance of the World Bank in implementing the Action
            Plan for Agricultural Risk Management in Niger (PAGRA, 2014-2023), especially with respect to
            tackling low agricultural productivity and poor adaptation to climate change. The project
            was structured as an Investment Project Financing (IPF), combining IDA credit and beneficiaries
            in-kind contributions.
           Technical, financial, and economic aspects. The project design was anchored in the
            Government's policy framework, namely, the Economic and Social Development Plan and 3N
            Initiative (Nigeriens Feed Nigeriens). Design also benefited from the Bank's sector risk
            assessment (Agricultural sector risk assessment in Niger: moving from crisis response to long-
            term risk management, 2013) which informed the project on the sector issues. Design also
            benefited from the strong collaboration between the Bank and other institutions including: FAO on
            farmer field schools, INRAN and ICRISAT on developing CSA technologies, and RECA on multi-
            modal information systems. Design featured several activities to support climate smart agriculture
            as well as innovative approaches such using e-vouchers to disseminate inputs subsidies. The
            PAD included a robust economic and financial analysis that justified the project investments.
           Poverty, gender, and social development aspects. The project supported mainly subsistence
            farmers who were generally poor, where the project activities helped increase their income and
            living standards. The project also successfully piloted the use of the e-voucher system for
            targeting the distribution of inputs to the vulnerable beneficiaries. The project supported a special
            program for the most vulnerable women who were supplied with livestock and other income
            generating activities.
           Environmental aspects. The project design included appropriate environmental and social risk
            assessments with adequate mitigation strategies.
           Implementation arrangements. There was a six months delay between Board approval on May
            26, 2016, and the project’s effectiveness on November 30, 2016. The project management was
            under the Ministry of Agriculture which according to the ICR (paragraph 55) "had extensive
            experience with World Bank-financed projects." The Bank-funded Agro-Sylvo-Pastoral Exports
            and Markets Development Project (PRODEX) was initially responsible for the implementation of

                                                                                                       Page 13 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Climate Smart Agricult Support Project (P153420)



         this project until the establishment of the National Coordination Unit (NCU). However, there were
         delays in establishing the NCU due to incomplete staffing, overly centralized control systems and
         inadequate coordination (ICR, paragraph 44).
        Risk assessment. Eight risks were identified at the appraisal stage with an overall Substantial
         rating. The identified substantial risks related to five main areas: macro-economic environment,
         institutional capacity, fiduciary-related risks, political, and environment and social risks. Overall,
         risk assessment was adequate, and included relevant mitigation measures such as capacity
         building where deemed necessary. However, the risk related to the low capacity by local
         governments/communes in making a cash contribution was overlooked, and delayed project
         implementation.
        M&E arrangements. A dedicated M&E Officer at the NCU oversaw all aspects of M&E. M&E
         design had some moderate shortcomings (see section 9a for details).

  Summary of QAE Assessment. The project was strategically relevant with a clear PDO. Design
  featured relevant activities to support climate smart agriculture and reflected adequate environmental and
  fiduciary aspects. Implementation arrangements had some shortcomings as setting up the PCU was
  delayed. While risk assessment was thorough, the risk related to the low capacity by local
  governments/communes in making a cash contribution was overlooked. Finally, M&E design had some
  shortcomings. Overall, Quality at Entry is rated Satisfactory with minor shortcomings.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
       The Bank conducted 13 implementation support missions with an average of two missions per year
        over the life of the project. The Bank also provided continuous support through the Niamey World
        Bank Office staff.
       The project teams included an adequate skill mix and were pro-active in addressing the project’s
        critical issues, including restructuring the project to strengthen project management and monitoring
        and evaluation in general (ICR, paragraph 56).
       The project implementation support team relied on virtual missions during the COVID-19
        restrictions. The ICR (paragraph 56) noted that task team leadership (TTL) changes over the
        project’s implementation period were limited. TTL transitions were also handled with extended
        overlaps to limit any potentially negative impact on continuity.
       The project team successfully established cooperation/partnerships with agencies/institutions to
        strengthen implementation. This included cooperating with the Food and Agriculture Organization of
        the United Nations (FAO) regarding farmer field schools, the International Crop Research Institute
        for the Semi-Arid Tropics (ICRISAT) regarding restoration of degraded landscapes in the Sahel, and
        the Regional Center for Hydro and Agrometeorology (AGRHYMET) regarding weather forecasting
        and climate change resilience, and partnered with the Millenium Challenge Corporation (MCC) to
        amplify geographical coverage and ensure symmetry and coherence. However, the Bank team
        should have addressed M&E design shortcomings at an earlier stage of implementation.



                                                                                                     Page 14 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Climate Smart Agricult Support Project (P153420)



 Summary of Quality of Supervision Assessment. The Bank team successfully navigated several
 challenges and guided the project implementation towards a successful outcome. The team was proactive
 in addressing implementation issues and successfully coordinated with other institutions to benefit the
 project. Overall, the Bank supervision is rated Satisfactory.

 Based on the assigned ratings to QAE and Bank Supervision, the overall Bank Performance is rated
 Satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
      The PAD did not include a Theory of Change (ToC) which was not required by the Bank at the time
        of appraisal. Nonetheless, the ICR included a ToC that was constructed based on the project
        activities, outputs, and outcomes as described in the PAD. The ToC also included the underlying
        assumptions that underpinned the achievement of the PDO.
       The PDO was measured through four PDO outcome indicators: 1. The number of
        direct beneficiaries of the project, of which female (percentage); 2. Agricultural productivity increase
        in the project area (productivity indicator); 3. Reduced net Greenhouse Gas (GHG) emissions per
        unit of food (Mitigation Indicator); and 4. Increased adoption of new agricultural and management
        practices promoted by the project (Resilience Indicator). Indicators 1, 2 and 4 were directly
        connected to the PDO , measurable and with realistic targets. Indicator 3 was not aligned with the
        PDO.
       The Results Framework was complex with 22 intermediate results indicators (IRIs) to track the
        progress of the project and measure achievements of different activities. Overall, the IRIs were
        measurable and most were connected to the supported activities. Despite the relatively large
        numbers of IRIs, some activities supported were not captured in the original design including: the
        increase in revenue for beneficiaries of project funding for matching grants, the number of CSA
        technologies, and the innovations or management practices tested by the project and scaled up in
        the project area.



b. M&E Implementation
       According to the ICR (paragraph 49) "there was regular monitoring of beneficiaries and the results
         of project investments in the field."
        Annual yield data was collected for the project beneficiaries as well as non-beneficiaries
         (controls), which enabled better assessment of the impact attributable to the project.


                                                                                                      Page 15 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Climate Smart Agricult Support Project (P153420)



        The Geo-enabling Initiative for Monitoring and Supervision (GEMS) tool mapped all the 2,003
         project sites in the GEMS database. Maps were produced for better visualization of project
         activities, and regularly updated. Also, beneficiary satisfaction surveys were carried out using the
         Kobo Toolbox platform.
        Revision of the RF after the MTR. Through a Level 2 Restructuring on May 21, 2021, the PDO
         outcome indicators and the RF were both revised. Notable changes included dropping PDO
         Outcome indicator #3 (GHG emissions), dropping 13 IRIs to simplify the RF, and adding two new
         indicators to capture activities supported by the project that were not covered under the original
         M&E design.
        Overall, the M&E collection system produced sufficient information to guide project
         implementation and evaluation.



c. M&E Utilization
       The project's M&E system generated data that was used in quantitatively determining the
         economic impact of the major climate smart practices promoted by the project (ICR, paragraph
         50).
        Beneficiary satisfaction surveys were useful in highlighting the usefulness of the various
         technologies and pointed out areas of improvement. In addition, the surveys showed the most
         effective sources of information for different groups of people, for example, 70% of the women
         got their information from radio communication. This information allowed effective targeting of
         different categories of beneficiaries. The system was also adequate in providing data for carrying
         out end-of-project assessments (ICR, paragraph 50).

  Summary of M&E Quality Assessment. M&E design had moderate shortcomings and a complex RF.
  Implementation was effective and enough data was generated to assess the project outcomes and test
  the links in the results chain. Also, several design shortcomings were rectified during implementation.
  Utilization benefited from the data generated which informed both management decisions and the final
  project evaluation. Overall, the Quality of M&E is rated Substantial with moderate shortcomings.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
        The project was classified as an environmental Category B. It triggered seven environmental
          safeguard policies: Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01), Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04),
          Forests (OP/BP 4.36), Pest Management (OP4.09), Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP
          4.11), Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37), and Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50),
          and one social safeguards policy: Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12).
         The project activities were expected to be moderate to low, mostly site-specific, and easily
          manageable to an acceptable level. An Environmental And Social Management Framework

                                                                                                   Page 16 of 19
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Climate Smart Agricult Support Project (P153420)



           (EMSF), Integrated Pest and Pesticide Management Plan (IPPMP), Grievance Redress Mechanism
           (GRM), Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) were prepared as part of the environmental and
           social mitigation plan. The ESMF, IPPMP, and RPF were disclosed publicly both in-country (March
           15th, 2016) and at the Bank's Infoshop (March 17th, 2016) prior to appraisal.

  Compliance with environmental Safeguards. Riparian Notification Letters were sent to all riparian
  countries of the Niger River Basin in compliance with the triggering of OP/BP 7.50. No objection from the
  Niger Basin Authority was received on February 3, 2016. All sub-projects were screened for environmental
  compliance and continuously monitored during implementation. According to the ICR (paragraph 52)
  "environmental compliance was rated Satisfactory."

  Compliance with Social Safeguards. There was one involuntary economic resettlement took place during
  project implementation for an irrigation scheme in Torodi commune (Tillaberi region). The GRM received
  complaints mainly regarding: (i) targeting of beneficiaries of animal kits; (ii) water management and
  distribution problems on irrigated perimeters; and (iii) cutting of protected trees in Assisted Natural
  Regeneration sites. According to the ICR (paragraph 53) "All issues were satisfactorily resolved. At project’s
  end, social safeguard compliance was rated Satisfactory."

  In a further communication, the project team stated that "the project was in compliance with all the
  safeguard policies and all mitigation measures were applied."




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management (FM). Financial accounts were up to date, Bank reconciliation statements
  regularly drawn up, and the quality of reporting satisfactory, overall. Project audits were timely
  submitted and were certified without reservation. The project’s disbursement rate was 98.5%. According to
  the ICR (paragraph 54) "overall financial management performance was satisfactory."

  Procurement. The ICR did not report on procurement activities. In a further communication, the project
  team explained that "the project had no mis- procurement issues or other anomalies, and all contracts
  were completed at project closure."




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  None.



d. Other
  None.




                                                                                                  Page 17 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Climate Smart Agricult Support Project (P153420)



11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                     IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Satisfactory            Satisfactory

Bank Performance                Satisfactory            Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                  Substantial             Substantial

Quality of ICR                  ---                     Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR included four lessons. The following three are emphasized with some adaptation of
language:

1. A collaborative effort of relevant institutions can contribute to a successful climate change
adaptation program. In this case, the project drew on the skills of highly experienced institutions in
critical areas by entering into strategic partnerships with such institutions as AGRHYMET in areas of
weather forecasting and climate change mitigation measures; INRAN and ICRISAT in promoting
climate smart technologies, especially in restoring bio-degraded lands; FAO in promoting agro-
pastoral field schools; RECA on multi-modal information systems; and the Faculty of Agronomy of
the University of Niamey on bourgou production on saline soils. Such institutions need to be brought
on board as early as possible.

2. To ensure a successful outcome for projects in fragile environments, several factors need
to considered including: working with local stakeholders; harnessing digital technology; and
intensified implementation support. The project experience demonstrated that it is vital to work
with local stakeholders including local administration and civil society in project implementation.
Also, harnessing digital technology, including using GEMS and Kobo toolbox, facilitates real time
monitoring, thus aiding in quick decision making in a rapidly changing environment. Finally,
implementation support must be intensified including through a high degree of informality to facilitate
rapid decision making.

3. Delivering agricultural input subsidies to the poor could be effectively achieved through an
e-voucher system. The project helped with the successful establishment and operationalization of
an e-voucher agricultural input subsidy platform. Its use demonstrated agility in facilitating the poor’s
access to inputs while promoting the private sector’s growth in this domain. When such a program is
acting as a replacement to a system of physical delivery of subsidized inputs, institutional inertia and
resistance from vested interests can be a significant challenge. A clear understanding of the political
economy surrounding prevailing input subsidy programs and enlisting the support of farmers’
organizations and other champions is critical in countering such resistance.



13. Assessment Recommended?


                                                                                                     Page 18 of 19
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Climate Smart Agricult Support Project (P153420)




  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

Quality of Evidence. The ICR benefited from the data collected by the M&E system, which enabled tracking the
progress of activities and assessing the achievement of the PDO. The collection of yields data for control
groups allowed an accurate assessment of the project impact and attribution.

Quality of Analysis. The ICR provided clear linking between evidence and findings and used the evidence base
to serve the arguments under the different sections, in particular, the discussion on outcomes.

Lessons. Most lessons reflected the project experience and were based on evidence and analysis.

Results Orientation. The ICR included a comprehensive discussion on the achievement of the PDO. The
outcome discussion was well balanced between what the project actually achieved on the ground and the
achievement of outcome indicators.

Consistency with guidelines. The ICR used the available data to justify most of the assigned ratings.

Conciseness. The ICR provided comprehensive coverage of project activities and candidly reported on most
shortcomings. Reporting on safeguard compliance was brief and lacked an explicit statement on compliance
with the Bank's safeguard policies. Also, the ICR did not report on procurement aspects.

Summary of the Quality of ICR Assessment. The ICR benefited from the evidence base generated through
the project's M&E system. It included a clear discussion on the achievement of outcomes and reflected relevant
lessons. Reporting on safeguard compliance was brief, and the ICR did not report on procurement. Overall, the
Quality of the ICR is rated Substantial with moderate shortcomings.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                   Page 19 of 19
