     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Rural Electrification Project Stage II (P160658)



                                                                                         Report Number: ICRR0023455

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                     Project Name
 P160658                                        Rural Electrification Project Stage II

 Country                                        Practice Area(Lead)
 Vanuatu                                        Energy & Extractives


 L/C/TF Number(s)                               Closing Date (Original)                  Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-60720,IDA-D1930,TF-A4979,TF-               30-Jun-2022                                            2,021,924.21
 A5406

 Bank Approval Date                             Closing Date (Actual)
 31-May-2017                                    30-Jun-2022

                                                IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                                14,220,000.00                                    10,220,000.00

 Revised Commitment                                 14,220,000.00                                      1,528,550.33

 Actual                                                 2,279,386.91                                   1,528,550.33




 Prepared by                   Reviewed by                     ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Joel J. Maweni                Dileep M. Wagle                 Ramachandra Jammi               IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objectives (PDOs), as stated in the Financing Agreement dated July 23, 2017
   (Schedule 1), were to "support increased penetration of renewable energy and increased access to affordable
   electricity services in the dispersed off-grid areas of Vanuatu.“




                                                                                                        Page 1 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Rural Electrification Project Stage II (P160658)



   The statement of the PDOs in the Project Appraisal Document (PAD) dated May 9, 2017 (p.17) was identical
   to that in the Financing Agreement except for the inclusion, in the Financing Agreement, of the word
   “affordable” to describe electricity services in the dispersed off-grid areas of Vanuatu.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The Vanuatu Rural Electrification Project Stage II (VREP-II) comprised three components as follows:

   Component 1: Provision of Solar Home Systems (SHS) and Micro Grid Systems (Estimated cost at
   appraisal - U$5.37 million, Actual cost - US$0.3 million). SHS and micro grids were to be provided in off-
   grid rural areas of Vanuatu by private sector vendors through a demand driven approach. The component
   targeted 37 public institutions and about 8,400 households for a total coverage of about 42,000 people.

   Component 2: Construction of Mini Grid Systems (Estimated cost at appraisal - U$6.8 million, Actual
   cost - US$0.0 million). This component was to support provision of electricity services to about 550
   households or 2,750 people, and to public institutions and businesses. Up to five mini grids were to be
   selected from communities meeting the assessed criteria for financial viability - i.e., those comprising at
   least 75 households and with more than 50% of their total load accounted for by businesses and public
   institutions.

   Component 3:Technical Assistance and Project Management (Estimated cost at appraisal -
   U$2.0 million, Actual cost - US$1.7 million). The technical assistance (TA) was to: (a) support vendor and
   product registration processes for implementation of Component 1; (b) hiring of an owner's engineer to help
   with the feasibility studies, design, procurement and construction supervision of the mini grids under
   component 2, including the preparation and monitoring of safeguards management plans; and (c) provide
   project implementation support to the Department of Energy (DoE) of the Ministry of Climate Change and
   Natural Disaster which had overall responsibility for implementing the project.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Total project cost at completion was US$2.00 million (ICR, Annex 3) compared to US$14.17 million
   estimated at appraisal (PAD, p. 21). The financing plan at appraisal envisaged that US$14.17 million of the
   total cost was to be financed by an International Development Association (IDA) Credit and Grant of US$4
   million, a Scaling up Renewable Energy in Low Income Countries Program (SREP) Grant of US$6.77
   million and a Pacific Region Infrastructure Facility (PRIF) Grant of US$ 3.45 million. The Borrower was
   expected to provide a US$1.5 million “in-kind” contribution to cover Vanuatu’s project related costs such as
   organization of land acquisition for the project and other inter-departmental project coordination costs (PAD,
   p.20). Due to the slow uptake of the SHS and micro grids (Component 1) and non-implementation of the
   mini grids (Component 2) only US$2.28 million or about 16% of the total allocated financing was disbursed
   as follows: IDA Credit and Grant (US$0.68 million), SREP Grant (US$0.58 million) and PRIF

                                                                                                    Page 2 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Rural Electrification Project Stage II (P160658)



   Grant (US$1.02 million).The amount disbursed out of the PRIF Grant was higher than that of other financing
   sources because an attempt was made to prioritize its usage as it initially had an earlier closing date. There
   is a US$0.28 million discrepancy between the total amount of disbursements as shown in the Data Sheet
   (portal data) and the amount shown in Annex 3 of the ICR which is primarily due to exchange rate
   differences between the financing currencies and the US$.

   Dates

   The project was approved on May 31, 2017, and it became effective on August 21, 2017. The project’s
   original closing date was June 30, 2022. However, the PRIF grant was scheduled to close earlier on June
   30, 2020. The project was restructured twice. The first restructuring on October 4, 2018, was intended to
   give Vanuatu access to additional financing for renewable energy investments under the Sustainable
   Energy Financing Project (P098423) - a regional project that was initially financing renewable energy in Fiji.
   Delays in reaching agreement on implementation arrangements with Fiji, difficulties in concluding legal
   agreements with participating financial institutions and the loss of interest by key financial institutions
   prevented the use of this financing in Vanuatu. The second restructuring on March 20, 2020, extended the
   closing date of the PRIF grant by two years to June 30, 2022, to align it with that of the overall project. A
   mid-term review (MTR) was completed on May 18, 2021. The MTR proposed a redesign of component 1
   and extension of the project closing date by two years because of problems that had been encountered with
   payment of ineligible subsidies under the Vanuatu Rural Electrification Project Stage I (VREP-I) (P150908)
   and because of slow demand. The proposed redesign concept envisaged replacement of the vendor
   delivery model under component 1 with a procurement model for public institutions. The vendor model was
   terminated by the end of 2021, however, attempts to restructure the project were abandoned due to
   differences between the Bank and the Government on the procurement rules to apply to the redesigned
   component, and particularly to the mini grids component. The project closed on June 30, 2022, as
   scheduled.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country context: Vanuatu is an archipelago in the South Pacific Ocean consisting of 83 relatively small,
geologically newer islands of volcanic origin (65 of them inhabited). The population of about 258,000 in
2017 was almost evenly distributed among the six administrative provinces. The most recent population
estimate was 319 000 in 2021.

Country strategies. Recognizing the key role of energy as a driver of the country’s social and economic
development the Government of Vanuatu (GoV) developed the National Energy Roadmap (NERM, 2013-
2030). This strategic document contained the following five key priorities to guide the development of the
energy sector: (a) Access to secure, reliable, and affordable electricity for all citizens by 2030; (b)
Petroleum supply - secure, reliable and affordable petroleum supply throughout Vanuatu; (c) Affordability
through lower cost energy; (d) Energy security at all times; and (e) Climate change – mitigation of climate
change through renewable energy and energy efficiency. The NERM set targets for electricity generation
from renewable energy of 65% and 100% by 2020 and 2030 respectively, including 14% of electricity from



                                                                                                    Page 3 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Rural Electrification Project Stage II (P160658)



biofuels. A 100% target for electrification of public institutions in off‐grid areas by 2030 was also
established.

Sector context: Electricity was being provided by independent main grids in larger urban areas, isolated
mini grids in areas with lower population concentrations and decentralized systems. Two private sector
concessionaires generated and supplied electricity in four concession areas (Efate, Tanna, Maleluka and
Luganville). Installed generation capacity in the grid networks of Port Vila, Luganville, and parts of Tanna
and Maleluka was about 32 MW and was inadequate to meet national power supply needs. The critical
sector issues which were considered in the development of the NERM were: (a) the inadequacy of the grid
installed generation capacity to meet the national power needs; (b) the low level of electricity generation
from renewable energy sources (29%); (c) like in most Pacific Islands Countries, the high dependency on
costly imported diesel and other fossil fuels; and (d) the low level of access to electricity at 30% overall with
much lower levels of access in rural areas. Lower population densities in rural areas, remoteness and large
distances between customers, low consumer loads and low incomes limited the scope for building new
distribution lines or extending existing ones to serve new customers. The NERM, as updated in 2016,
incorporated green growth objectives for catalyzing sustainable development, including promotion of
renewable energy in the country’s main economic sectors (ICR, p.13). This Project was designed to support
increased penetration of renewable energy and scaling up of access to electricity by 15% (PAD, Figure 1,
p.15) in Vanuatu’s off-grid areas using SHS, mini and micro-grids based on hydro, solar and biofuels, and
was, thus, consistent with both the key sector issues and NERM objectives.

Alignment with World Bank Strategies: The design of the project was informed by the Regional
Partnership Framework (RPF) for nine Pacific Island States (2017-2021) including Vanuatu. Although the
report was not formally approved by the Board at the time of project approval it was sufficiently advanced to
provide a strategic basis for the project’s design. The RPF was subsequently approved in October 2017.
The RPF’s areas of focus were: (a) full exploitation of available economic opportunities; (b) enhancement of
employment opportunities; (c) protection of incomes and livelihoods; and (d) strengthening of the economic
growth enablers of macroeconomic management, infrastructure, and closing knowledge gaps. The project
supported the RPF’s focus area (d) on strengthening the economic growth enablers of …infrastructure and
…” Specifically, the RPF emphasized increasing electricity supply and efficiency, and setting the stage for
increasing renewable energy development. At closure on June 30, 2022, the project remained aligned with
the RPF (2017-2021) which had not been replaced or updated. The project was not only consistent with the
Bank’s RPF, but also supported: (a) the World Bank’s twin goals of eliminating extreme poverty and
boosting shared prosperity; (b) the EAP flagship report - One goal two paths and sustainable development
goal #7 on ensuring access to reliable, affordable, and sustainable energy for all and SDG #5 on achieving
gender equality and empowering all women and girls.

This project was part of an overall World Bank engagement plan for supporting Vanuatu’s NERM objectives
of increasing access to electricity and improving the role of renewable energy in the generation and
provision of electricity services. The plan included two projects which were ongoing at project appraisal,
namely; (a) the Improved Access to Electricity Project (P125604) financed by the Global Partnership for
Output-based Aid (GPOBA) to support intensification of connections within the concession areas with a
target of increasing the overall connection rate by 10%; and (b) the Vanuatu Rural Electrification Project
Stage I (VREP-I) which was financing scaling up access to electricity for 17,500 households (an access rate
increase of 30%) through “plug and play” systems and for aid posts and communities in the off-grid space.
This project (VREP-II) aimed to increase access by an additional 15% using mostly renewable resources,
SHS, micro and mini grids and included electrification of schools, health care centers, dispensaries, aid
posts and other institutions providing services to communities. Both VREP-I and VREP-II were also

                                                                                                        Page 4 of 17
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Rural Electrification Project Stage II (P160658)



               designed to support the Scaling up Renewable Energy Program Investment Plan prepared by the GoV in
               2013 and approved by the SREP sub-committee in November 2014. Thus, VREP-II represented a logical
               progression and sequencing of Bank support to Vanuatu and was reasonable at the strategic level.

               The relevance of project objectives is rated Substantial because: (a) the project was consistent with the
               GoV’s energy objectives as articulated in the NERM (2013-2030) (although it did not explicitly reference
               renewable energy) and SREP Investment Plan (2014) and addressed key sector issues facing Vanuatu in
               the energy sector at appraisal; (b) remained well aligned with the RPF (2017-2021) at project closure, and
               with other regional and international development strategies for the energy sector; and (c) was part of a
               coherent World Bank strategic framework for assisting Vanuatu in realizing its energy sector objectives.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             "....to support the increased penetration of renewable energy in the dispersed off-grid areas of Vanuatu."

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change

                             The project had the following two objectives:

                                       1. PDO 1: to support increased penetration of renewable energy in the dispersed off-grid areas of
                                          Vanuatu; and
                                       2. PDO2: to support increased access to affordable electricity services in the dispersed off-grid areas of
                                          Vanuatu.

                             Figure 1: Theory of Change diagram of the VREP-II on page 8 of the ICR presents a credible theory of
                             change (TOC) for the project. The project activities were to provide electricity to off-grid households, public
                             institutions and businesses using primarily domestic renewable energy resources (solar, hydro, biofuels, etc.).
                             Component 1 involved the provision of SHS and micro-grids by vendors under a subsidization model intended
                             to ensure affordability of the retail costs to consumers. Under Component 2 mini grids were to be constructed
                             for five villages to provide electricity to households, public institutions, and businesses. Component 3
                             provided technical assistance to support operation of the vendor model, under component 1, and hiring of an
                             owner’s engineer to help with preparation, design, and construction supervision of mini grids.

                             These project activities were expected to lead to the achievement of the project’s objectives. The TOC
                             includes several outputs and intermediate indicators and three outcome indicators. The outcome indicators
                             for the first objective on penetration of renewable energy were identified as MW capacity of RE additions

                                                                                                                                    Page 5 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Rural Electrification Project Stage II (P160658)



(target of 4.5MW) and annual renewable energy generation (target of 2.7 GWh annually) (ICR pp. 8 and
9).The outcome indicator for the access objective was the number of people provided with new electricity
services under the project (target of 44,750).

In the long term the increased availability of electricity would support improvements in living standards,
contribute to the Bank’s twin goals, facilitate better provision of public services, help improve profitability of
businesses and contribute to the global climate change agenda.

Overall, the TOC is sound with clear causal relationships between activities, outputs, and outcomes but there
were some shortcomings. First, the project’s midterm review (2021) subsequently found out that only
relatively well to do households could afford the size of SHS provided under component 1 and that these
households already had electricity. Thus, the SHS would not help to increase access but only to improve
service to those who already had it. Further, VREP-I had helped to substantially increase access such that
Vanuatu had almost achieved 100% electrification with only the remotest areas remaining unelectrified.
These were the areas in which the size of SHS supported by VREP-II were most unsuited due to affordability
constraints. The second shortcoming of the TOC is the use of renewable energy generation capacity and
annual energy generation as indicators for increased energy penetration. The ICR recognized that the share
of RE in the total generation capacity and annual energy generation would have been better indicators (ICR
p. 14). However, the non-comparability of SHS to grid supplied power and the lack of adequate information on
non-project RE activities in the sector means that the indicators used are second best, but practical.

Outputs and intermediate outcomes

The same activities and outputs were expected to contribute to the achievement of both project objectives.
The actual outputs compared to expectations were as follows:

    1.   370 SHS/micro grids were installed compared to a target of 8,400.
    2.   No mini grids were constructed under the project compared to the target of 5,
    3.    104 Public institutions received a SHS, or micro grid compared to a target of 37.
    4.   Zero Number of people connected to electricity through a mini grid constructed under the project
         compared to a target of 2,750.
    5.   Direct project beneficiaries of which 50% are female compared to a target of 49%.
    6.   Total households of which 11.8% are female headed households received a SHS, micro grid or
         received electricity through a mini grid compared to a target of 13%.
    7.   Zero Participants in consultations during project implementation activities compared to a target of
         2,000.
    8.   Zero Participants in consultations during project implementation activities – female compared to a
         target of 980.
    9.   100% Grievances registered related to project benefits resolved compared to a target of 100%.

The completion and delivery of SHS, micro grids and mini grids was critical for the project to achieve its
objectives. The level of SHS sales was only 370 out of 8,400 or about 4% and none of the mini grids were
constructed. As shown above there was substantial underperformance on most of the intermediate indicators.
The ICR evaluation is based on the three outcome indicators described above with additional evidence
derived from two out of nine intermediate indicators. Data on the balance of the intermediate indicators is




                                                                                                       Page 6 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Rural Electrification Project Stage II (P160658)



provided in the results framework. The three outcome indicators and the two intermediate indicators are
adequate for the evaluation of the project’s outcome.

The vendor model for the SHS was plagued by low demand because of several factors, including the small
number of vendors that showed interest, the absence of attractive payment terms combined with the lower
subsidy level of 33% compared to 50% under VREP-I, and disagreements between the GoV and the Bank
over the subsidy arrangements under VREP-I. In addition, the GoV expanded VREP-I to include potential
customers in the concession areas who were unlikely to be connected to the grid soon which may have
reduced some of the demand for VREP-II. By December 2021, a decision was made to abandon the vendor
model and transition to a public procurement approach for SHS and micro grids for public institutions. The
mini grids component had faced difficulties with a two-year delay in the engagement of the owner’s engineer.
The GOV’s subsequent decision to use national procurement procedures for the mini grids could not be
agreed to by the Bank. The proposal to restructure the project was then abandoned and the project closed on
schedule on June 30, 2022.

Outcomes

The limited project implementation resulted in very low achievements of outcome indicator targets as follows:

    1. 0.29 MW of new RE capacity was constructed compared to a target of 4.5 MW.
    2. 0.32 GWh of annual renewable energy generated compared to a target of 2.7 GWh.

The objective of increasing the penetration of renewable energy was not achieved because only about 6
percent of the RE capacity target was installed through SHS/micro grids. None of the 5 mini grids were
installed. Thus, the corresponding annual energy generation was a meagre 0.32GWh or about 11.8 % of the
targeted 2.7 GWh.



Rating
Negligible


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
"..to support the increased access to affordable electricity services in the dispersed off-grid areas of Vanuatu."

Rationale
Objective 2 shares the same TOC, outputs and intermediate outcomes as described under Objective 1 above
but had a separate outcome indicator – the number of people who received electricity service under the
project.

Outcomes

Like Objective 1 the low level of project implementation meant that a small number of people received new
electricity services under the project, i.e., only 3,625 people compared to the target of 44,750.



                                                                                                    Page 7 of 17
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Rural Electrification Project Stage II (P160658)




                            Rating
                            Negligible


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The implementation of activities designed to support the achievement of both PDO1 and PDO2 was negligible
                            and, hence, the Negligible overall efficacy rating. The SHS were to be installed through a vendor model, but
                            the uptake was extremely low due to consumer affordability and financing constraints for both vendors and
                            consumers. The level of subsidy provided to the project retail costs of SHS (at 33% and less than 50% under
                            VREP-I) was not adequate to improve consumer affordability and neither vendor nor microfinancing was
                            available. The mini grids component suffered initially from delays in the engagement of an owner’s engineer
                            who was to support feasibility studies, design, and procurement of the schemes. Before bidding could be
                            undertaken the GoV decided to use national procurement procedures instead of the procedures agreed under
                            the Financing Agreement (Schedule 2, C (3). Since the Bank could not agree to the GoV’s proposal the
                            component was not implemented and, hence, no RE capacity or annual energy generation resulted from it.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating                                Primary Reason
                            Negligible                                             Low achievement


    5. Efficiency
   The economic analysis (levelized economic cost of energy) conducted at appraisal showed that SHS/micro grids
   were the least cost solution for most communities. The economic analysis was supplemented by an affordability
   assessment which showed that systems up to 1kWh/day (about 450-watt peak or maximum electrical capacity
   supplied under ideal temperature and sunlight conditions) would be affordable for most households assuming a
   33% subsidy and payment of outlays over 4 years and a discount rate of 10%. The key factor driving
   affordability was the availability of payment plans to spread the household cost over 4 years. This was
   demonstrated during the MTR of VREP-I. This type of payment plan was not available under VRP-II and, hence,
   the ICR did not apply the appraisal stage methodology for ex post efficiency evaluation of the project. The
   VREP-II costs without the 4-year payment plans were assessed to be considerably more expensive and
   unaffordable, hence, few SHS were sold.

   Instead, the ICR team used a unit cost methodology to compare the VREP-II cost per Wp of installed RE
   capacity to that of VREP-I and the sector more generally. This showed a cost of Wp installed capacity for VREP-
   II of US$7.7 compared to US$8.0 for VREP-I. The VREP-I cost was assessed as reasonable by the project’s
   ICR.

   For the mini grids, the economic and financial analysis at appraisal had supported the conclusion that 100% of
   the capital costs needed to be fully subsidized and the tariff would need to be set at the base level of an existing




                                                                                                                           Page 8 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Rural Electrification Project Stage II (P160658)



grid service to cover the O&M costs. As these parameters would vary with the type of service this delayed
preparation of the TOR amid considerable discussions among the DoE, the regulator and service providers.

Eventually the mini grids were not implemented following the disagreement between the Bank and the
GoV regarding the procurement procedures to be applied. Given that this component was not implemented, the
ICR had no basis for an ex post economic analysis of this component.

The protracted focus of both the Bank and GoV teams on resolving the issue of ineligible subsidies under
VREP-I constrained the time given to managing implementation of both VREP-I and VREP II. Covid-19 also
impacted administrative efficiency through restriction of travel for Bank staff and the absence of the project
manager who was stranded in his home country for more than a year during which period he was not able to
provide project management support.

The ICR analysis concluded that on a unit cost approach VREP-II is somewhat below the norm that would be
expected in the sector and that together with administrative efficiency issues leads to a Modest rating for
efficiency. IEG agrees with this rating.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                 Rate Available?            Point value (%)            *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                       0
 Appraisal                                                   0
                                                                                        Not Applicable
                                                                                       0
 ICR Estimate                                                0
                                                                                        Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The project’s outcome is rated Unsatisfactory based on a Substantial rating for the relevance of Objectives, a
Negligible rating for efficacy, and a Modest rating for Efficiency. The outcome rating is weighed down heavily
by the very low level of implementation of activities and delivery of outputs and, therefore, the major shortfalls in
achieving expected outcomes.


a. Outcome Rating
   Unsatisfactory




                                                                                                       Page 9 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Rural Electrification Project Stage II (P160658)



7. Risk to Development Outcome

The risks to development outcomes are not significant since only a small part of the project was completed.
The relevant risks pertain to inadequate operation and maintenance of the 104 SHS and micros grids for
public institutions and the 370 SHS.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry


  The were some significant shortfalls in the project’s quality at entry. VREP-II was approved about three
  years into the implementation of VREP-I when lessons were starting to emerge which had important
  relevance for the design of the new operation, especially regarding subsidies and vendor and consumer
  financing constraints. A better phasing of the VREP Program would have allowed enough time for
  lessons from VREP-I to be used to improve the design of VREP-II, particularly in the areas of project
  management, verification of SHS and the identification of ineligible subsidies. Despite these challenges
  VREP-I exceeded its target for sales of solar PV systems for homes and reached about 93% of its
  targeted beneficiaries. Efficacy was assigned a substantial rating which together with a substantial rating
  for relevance of objectives and a modest rating for efficiency resulted in an outcome rating of Moderately
  Satisfactory. The high achievement on sales of SHS was possible, despite the issue of ineligible
  subsidies, because of the higher subsidy level (50%) on relatively smaller scale systems than for VREP-II
  which made the systems more affordable, and the availability of some vendor financing (the rate of
  uptake increased substantially after one large vendor who provided financing was registered) (ICR p. 17).

  The economic analysis of the project suggested that the higher cost SHS would be less affordable and
  yet a lower subsidy (33% compared to 50% under VREP-I) was built into the project design. Although
  33% was an “initial” subsidy level it was never revisited during implementation even when demand did
  not pick up. Increasing the subsidy was considered for public institutions solar PV systems in the context
  of the MTR and the restructuring of the project but was not implemented, since the restructuring did not
  proceed.

  DOE’s portfolio of Bank-supported projects was increasing, and VREP-II was to become the largest
  project it had ever managed. While DoE recruited more staff and the project provided technical
  assistance to help with management of vendor and product registration support, preparation design and
  construction supervision of mini grids, the critical issue of an independent verification agent for subsidies
  was not pursued leading to problems of ineligible subsidy expenditures during implementation and to
  their retrospective reassessment.

  The key design flaws for VREP-II were: (a) the overestimation of demand for the larger scale solar home
  systems that was not based on any analytical studies or market consultations; (b) the assumptions that
  consumer financing would be available for the non-subsidized portion of the retail cost of SHS from
  vendor financing or microfinancing; (c) the establishment of the level of subsidy of the retail cost of SHS


                                                                                                     Page 10 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Rural Electrification Project Stage II (P160658)



  at 33% compared to 50% for the smaller SHS under VREP-I; and (d) failure to insist on an independent
  verification agent for SHS..



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Bank supervision missions were conducted about twice a year and ISRs were updated on a regular basis
 to inform management on project status. The ICR reports several issues with the quality of supervision,
 including the taxing burden on both the Bank team and the DoE staff of dealing with the problem of
 ineligible subsidy expenditures, the understaffing of the Bank team at times, the excessive time taken to
 complete the MTR (more than 12 months) which was finally completed after a new task team had taken
 over. The MTR started in February 2020 and was completed in May-July 2021. The lengthy time taken to
 finalize it was due to several reasons, including the efforts to resolve the issues of ineligible expenditures
 under VREP-I, a change in World Bank Task Team Leaders, and the need to process newly received
 information regarding the mini grids component (ICR p. 15). In addition, the MTR was conducted during
 Covid-19 period when the Bank’s implementation support was being delivered primarily on a remote basis
 from Sydney, and when the Project manager was stranded in his home country, away from Vanuatu, due
 to travel restrictions. Following completion of the MTR discussions between the Bank and the DoE
 culminated in an agreement to restructure component 1 replacing the vendor model with a public
 procurement process for SHS for public institutions. However, in April 2022 the GOV decided to use
 national procurement procedures for the mini grids component, a procedure that the Bank did not agree to.
 The Bank then allowed the project to close on schedule on June 30, 2022,

 The ICR implies that the task team was rigid on the issue of ineligible subsidy expenditures and that the
 difficult relationship between the Bank and the Borrower led to the failure to restructure the project and its
 closure and cancelation of substantial concessional resources for the country. In its request for project
 restructuring and extension of closing date in November 2021 the GoV cited among reasons for the project
 problems: "governance" failures by Bank staff, incompetent project design and an unworkable sales and
 subsidy verification methodology.

 There were major shortfalls in the project’s quality at entry and some significant ones during
 implementation. The Bank's supervision performance did improve with a change in task team in the last
 couple of years, but much had been lost, and the project went on to close without achieving its objectives.
 Hence, the Bank performance at entry is rated Unsatisfactory and that during supervision is rated
 Moderately Unsatisfactory. Thus, the overall rating for the Bank's performance is rated Unsatisfactory.




  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory



                                                                                                    Page 11 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Rural Electrification Project Stage II (P160658)




  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Unsatisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The project was generally well designed with appropriate PDO outcome and intermediate outcome
 indicators, baseline targets, and arrangements for monitoring and evaluation. The main indicators for
 tracking the progress of the project were described in the Results Framework (PAD, p.49) and additional
 ones were to be included in the Project’s Operational Manual. Overall, the M&E system was adequate
 although given its growing portfolio of World Bank financed projects the DOE’s capacity was getting
 strained, especially given the responsibilities of a complex vendor subsidy mechanism. The
 project provided TA to support DoE in project management, including on vendor subsidy calculations and
 verifications. There were some shortcomings in the M&E system design as follows: (a) a misalignment in
 the provision of SHS and the PDO2 of increasing access to electricity services because the large SHS
 were not affordable to low income households which were the target group with no access; (b) no
 indicators were included to measure outputs of the TA which could have served as intermediate outcome
 indicators; and (c) the DoE did not retain an independent verification agent who, perhaps, could have
 helped to ease some of the burden and to facilitate resolution of the disputes between the Bank and the
 GoV.



b. M&E Implementation
  The DoE had the responsibility for collection of data, reporting to the World Bank through the six-monthly
  progress report, Interim Financial Reports, and audited financial statements. The ICR reports that the
  DoE shared progress monitoring data with the Bank in the early years but stopped in 2020 and hence the
  limited data available in the project’s last years. The ICR evaluation is based on data available on the
  three PDO outcome indicators and two intermediate results indicators. Most of the other seven
  intermediate indicators, including those on gender and participants consultants during project
  implementation have zero values in the Results Framework (ICR, p. 49). DOE’s non-sharing of data with
  the Bank in the last years of the project was probably due to the difficult relationship with the Bank or the
  Department’s preoccupation with addressing subsidy controversies with the Bank relating to VREP-I. The
  ICR rightly notes that no adjustment was made to the expected indicator of SHS sales even when it
  became apparent that demand was not robust, pending the completion of a MTR which took more than
  12 months to complete.



c. M&E Utilization
  The utilization of the M&E system was constrained by the slow pace of project implementation, the non-
  sharing of data in the latter years of the project and the difficult relationship between the Bank and the
  GoV. The data on all the factors affecting the uptake of SHS (vendors and consumer financing, supply
  chain issues level of subsidy and consumer affordability) could have been used to implement a timely
  restructuring of component.


                                                                                                    Page 12 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Rural Electrification Project Stage II (P160658)



  M&E is rated Modest because of the implementation shortfalls (non-reporting by the Borrower in the
  latter years of the project) and failure to use the M&E data to revise the project based on lessons
  learned during implementation..



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   At appraisal VREP-II’s E&S risk was assessed as Moderate and, hence, it was classified as an EA category
   B project triggering the following World Bank operational policies: (a) OP 4.01 – Environmental Assessment;
   and (b) OP 4.12 – Involuntary Resettlement. OP4.01 was triggered because some activities like
   modular solar, battery, and hybrid diesel systems could result in some site specific, and time bound
   negative impacts. Activities were screened for environmental and social impacts and mitigation measures
   for health and safety, noise and waste disposal were put in place. OP4.12 was triggered because projects
   required land acquisition and or lease by project communities. At appraisal, an Environmental and Social
   Management Framework was prepared to provide a process for conducting environmental and social
   assessments, preparing environmental management plans, including a code of practice for safe disposal of
   batteries. A Resettlement Policy framework was prepared and later implemented for the DOE by the
   owner’s engineer.

   An ESIA for mini grids was completed but the mini grids were not implemented. Regulations for the disposal
   of solid wastes were not adopted by project closure.

   The last ISR rated safeguards compliance as Unsatisfactory as of August 2021. DOE had not recruited the
   E&S staff as required by the financing agreements and, therefore, could not monitor and assist in the
   implementation of safeguards. The DOE was assisted by the owner’s engineer in managing the E&S
   aspects of the mini grids up to the bidding stage before the project closed.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management

   The financial management arrangements for the project met the requirements of the Bank’s OP on
   Investment Project Financing. However, there was a high turnover of the Borrower’s FM staff during
   implementation resulting in delayed preparation of financial statements and submission of IFRs, and
   audited reports. The problems were exacerbated by lack of proper reconciliation of financial data with the
   Government Financial Management System – Smartstream.

   The FM rating in the final ISR in 2022 was Moderately Unsatisfactory.



                                                                                                  Page 13 of 17
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Rural Electrification Project Stage II (P160658)



  Procurement

  At project closure contracts had been signed for only US$1.88 million and no contracts had been signed
  since September 2020. The procurement management problems were significant with lack of regular
  submission of procurement plans, huge delays in GoV procurement decisions, poor record keeping and
  contract management. A major project restructuring and extension of the closing date that had been
  discussed during the MTR and between the Bank and the Gov by December 2021 but could not be
  implemented because of disagreement between the Bank and the GoV on the procurement procedures to
  apply to the restructured project and the mini grid component. The disagreement arose from the
  Government’s decision in April 2022 to apply national procurement procedures to the mini grid component
  instead of the procedures that had been agreed in the Financing agreement (Financing Agreement,
  Schedule 2, (C3)). The Project manager was stranded for a long time in his home country due to Covid-19
  restrictions and when his contract expired in October 2021 it took considerable time for a local replacement
  to be hired




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
  Gender

  The Project design did not have a specific gender objective or targeted component or measures to address
  gender issues. However, because it aimed to increase access to electricity in rural areas and primarily
  through renewable energy sources it was expected to reduce the burden on women of organizing
  alternative energy sources, and widen their employment, learning and education opportunities (PAD, p. 66).
  In addition, renewable energy would have positive health impacts, including improving maternal and child
  mortality. The project’s M&E system included indicators for the proportion of females in total direct project
  beneficiaries, female headed households who received SHS, micro grids or received electricity through mini
  grids and the % of females who participated in project consultations during implementation. The % of
  females in total project beneficiaries was 50% compared to a target of 49% and that of female headed
  households who received SHS, micro grids or electricity through mini grids was 11.8% compared to a target
  of 13%. The indicator on participation in project consultations during implementation was not reported and,
  therefore, no data was provided for the proportion of female participants.

  Institutional Strengthening

  Substantial technical assistance was provided by VREP-II to support the DOE in expanding rural
  electrification and renewable energy in Vanuatu. The institutional strength gained from the project (e.g.,
  from the activities of the owner’s engineer) can potentially help the DOE in future electrification work,
  including under the work initiated through the Green Growth Fund in 2018.

  Mobilizing private sector financing



                                                                                                  Page 14 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Rural Electrification Project Stage II (P160658)



   The project included opportunities for mobilizing private sector financing through consumer and vendor
   financing of SHS and through micro finance. Technical assistance was provided to promote vendor and
   microfinance to make SHS affordable but was largely unsuccessful. One VREP-II vendor used vendor
   financing to promote SHS, but the financing was less attractive than that used under VREP-I, due, perhaps,
   to capital or cash flow constraints. The project was restructured in 2018 to link it to the regional Sustainable
   Energy Financing Project to avail partial loan guarantees to participating renewable energy lenders, but the
   attempt was not successful.




11. Ratings
                                                                                    Reason for
Ratings                           ICR                   IEG
                                                                                    Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                           Unsatisfactory        Unsatisfactory
                                                                                    The project design had major
                                                                                    flaws including: (a) inadequate
                                                                                    assessment of demand for the
                                                                                    larger SHS than those included
                                                                                    in VREP-I; (b) inadequate
                                                                                    subsidy level and financing
                                                                                    mechanisms for consumers and
                                  Moderately                                        vendors, (c) absence of an
Bank Performance                                        Unsatisfactory
                                  Unsatisfactory                                    independent verification agent
                                                                                    for SHS sales and subsidy
                                                                                    expenditures. Supervision was
                                                                                    deficient with delayed/protracted
                                                                                    efforts to remedy design flaws,
                                                                                    and task team deficiencies
                                                                                    exacerbated by the constraints
                                                                                    due to Covid-19
Quality of M&E                    Modest                Modest

Quality of ICR                    ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR has included several important lessons learned from the preparation and implementation of
the Vanuatu REP-II. IEG has derived the following complementary or additional lessons:

    1. The Bank’s engagement in a series of operations in the same sector with same
       implementation agency should be carefully designed to avoid institutional capacity
       overload. When the VREP-I was approved the DoE had already implemented other World
       Bank projects, including VREP-I and the Improved Access to Electricity Project which were in
       progress. VREP-II was to become the largest Bank supported project the DOE had ever

                                                                                                      Page 15 of 17
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Rural Electrification Project Stage II (P160658)



        implemented requiring expansion of human and financial resources. In such circumstances it
        is important to ensure that there is political commitment within the administration to permit a
        buildup of the required resources. Although substantial TA was provided by the Bank to
        assist with the resource buildup, DOE still needed to hire other staff and was unable to
        secure E&S staff as required by the legal agreements, suffered from frequent turnover of
        financial management staff, and lacked adequate procurement staff.
     2. Projects with complex components or elements such as the retail cost subsidy
        program for the SHS require not only technical skills but a flexibility to adapt on both
        the Borrower and Bank side. With flexibility and a strong political commitment, the subsidy
        levels could have been modified based on a sense of the market requirements. The
        assessment from the VREP-I MTR indicated that that a critical determinant of affordability for
        SHS was the availability of sound payment plans for the consumer portion of the capital
        costs. Increasing the subsidy percentage for the public institutions was proposed and would,
        perhaps, have been implemented had project restructuring been undertaken. However, the
        vendor model was to be dropped in the restructured project and, hence, the SHS subsidy for
        the households was no longer relevant.
     3. Appropriate phasing of repeater projects (or use of a multi-phase approach) is
        essential to channel lessons learned from one operation to the next and to carefully
        analyze the impact of differentiators between operations on outcomes. The emerging
        lessons on the subsidy program, the vendor, and product registration processes under
        VREP-I could have been analyzed before completing design of VREP-II. The decision to
        move to higher capacity SHS could also have benefited from a more detailed market
        analysis to inform the changes. The decision to have a lower subsidy for higher capacity
        SHS, which seems counterintuitive, could have benefited from more stakeholder inputs.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is very well written although it is lengthy is some places, due to the need felt by the team to clearly
explain the difficulties that led to the failure of the project to achieve its objectives. Nonetheless, the main text of
nearly 30 pages is more than twice the recommended length.

Overall, the ICR is to be applauded for its candor, but the ICR is unclear whether political economy issues lay at
the heart of the difficult relationship between the GoV and the Bank. In its comments on the ICR the GoV made
strong adverse comments regarding the design of the project, the competence and governance practices of
Bank staff during project preparation and the earlier period of project implementation. At the same time while
the NERM suggests a strong GoV commitment to the development of the energy sector, the failure to
adequately staff and resource the DoE and the apparent rigid position on procurement procedures to the extent
of giving up substantial concessional resources is perplexing and could have benefited from a more explicit
statement on the root cause of the problem.



                                                                                                         Page 16 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Rural Electrification Project Stage II (P160658)



It is understandable that data on many of the output and intermediate indicators were not available towards the
end of the project after the DOE stopped providing project monitoring data to the Bank in late 2020. Probably
the effect is minimal since activities seemed to have scaled down by then, but the ICR could have explained the
absence of data on many of the same indicators in the earlier years up to 2020.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                 Page 17 of 17
