      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Colombia Territorial Development (P170728)



                                                                                    Report Number: ICRR0023383

1. Operation Information



 Operation ID                                Operation Name
 P170728                                     Colombia Territorial Development

 Country                                     Practice Area (Lead)
 Colombia                                    Governance



 Non-Programmatic DPF

 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)                    Total Financing (USD)
 IBRD-90470                                  31-Dec-2021                                          400,000,000.00

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 27-Feb-2020                                 31-Dec-2021

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                Co-financing (USD)

 Original Commitment                               400,000,000.00                                             0.00

 Revised Commitment                                400,000,000.00                                             0.00

 Actual                                            400,000,000.00                                             0.00




 Prepared by                  Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Jorge Garcia-Garcia          Judyth L. Twigg               Jennifer L. Keller              IEGEC




2. Program Objectives and Pillars/Policy Areas
DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives

The program document (PD) defines the objectives in its summary section as to: “(i) strengthen institutions for
regional planning, resource allocation, coordination, and investment prioritization, and (ii) enhance the
efficiency of land management in rural and urban areas” (PD, p. 3). In the main text, the PD defines the
objectives as: “to strengthen the institutional framework for coordination, planning, and resource allocation,


                                                                                                     Page 1 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Colombia Territorial Development (P170728)



promotion of strategic investments at the regional level, and fostering efficient rural and urban land
management to leverage regional development” (PD, p. 16). The Loan Agreement does not define objectives.

For purposes of assessing the program, its development objectives are taken as:

PDO1: Strengthen institutions for regional planning, resource allocation, coordination, and investment
prioritization.

PDO2: Enhance the efficiency of land management in rural and urban areas.

The operation had two pillars: (1) Strengthening coordination, planning, and resource allocation at the
regional level, and (2) Fostering efficient rural and urban land management systems (PD, pp. 17 and 21).


b. Pillars/Policy Areas
Pillar 1: Strengthening planning, coordination, and resource allocation at the regional level. This pillar
supported actions to: (a) promote partnership among territorial entities; (b) create territorial pacts among
subnational governments to encourage better use of resources when investing in interregional projects; (c)
allocate more resources from the royalties fund for conservation and environmental protection activities; (d)
adopt a harmonized budget and accounting classification catalogue for subnational entities to strengthen
planning, monitoring, and evaluation in them; and (e) implement a process to select the administrative
personnel of small municipalities based on merit rather than political connections.

Pillar 2: Fostering efficient rural and urban land management systems. This pillar supported actions to
decentralize the management of the cadaster system, formalize land titles and resolve land tenure problems,
develop alternative financing instruments for municipalities, and incorporate risk analysis and climate change
issues when assessing public investment projects.


c. Comments on Program Cost, Financing and Dates

The program consisted of one development policy loan for US$400 million. The loan was approved on February
27, 2020, became effective on May 27, 2020, and closed on December 31, 2021, as planned. The ICR does not
report a disbursement date.


3. Relevance of Design

a. Relevance of Objectives

 Country Context

 Colombia grew at a moderate, steady pace over the past decade, and its economy has recovered well from
 the COVID shock. These gains can be traced to a solid macroeconomic framework, which includes a flexible
 exchange rate system, and a fiscal framework that follows a fiscal rule for the central government and a



                                                                                                    Page 2 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Colombia Territorial Development (P170728)



medium-term fiscal framework. Although living standards have improved, poverty and inequality persist
despite efforts to reduce them.

Colombia’s economic performance and standard of living varies across people and regions, where some are
better off than others. For example, before COVID-19 poverty rates varied from 59 percent in Chocó and 51
percent in Cauca departments to as low as 8 and 7 percent in Santander and Cundinamarca departments.
Poverty in rural areas is higher than in urban areas, as it is access to basic services such as potable water,
sewerage, and sanitation. The spatial differences in income and quantity and quality of basic services indicate
unbalanced regional development, which in part can be traced to differences in the quantity and quality of
human capital but also to an imperfect system of fiscal decentralization and territorial development. Despite
advances in the fiscal decentralization framework, departments and municipalities lack a legal mandate and
incentives to work together in delivering services, investing in regional programs, and preparing and executing
regional development plans. One notorious weakness in the decentralization framework is the management of
cadaster, until recently a monopoly of the Instituto Geográfico Agustín Codazzi (IGAC), which failed in
delimiting land and granting titles to property, resulting in a large share of the country’s land without titles.
IGAC’s poor performance has resulted in lack of information about land demarcation, land titles, land prices,
and the environmental value of land; weak urban planning; insecurity of land ownership; and disregard for
disaster risk analysis and effective management of infrastructure investments. These problems have been
compounded by weak management capacity at the local level, constraining the activities and investments that
subnational governments can plan and execute. This operation sought to address some of these problems.

Government strategy

Colombia’s 2018-2022 National Development Plan (NDP) Pacto por Colombia, pacto por la equidad consisted
of three structural pillars: legality, entrepreneurship, and equity. The NDP sought to ensure that all Colombians
have access to better opportunities, which would be delivered through various types of pacts: structural (the
core, with 3) , cross-cutting (13) , and regional (9). [1] The pillars of legality and entrepreneurship would
support the equity objective.

Of the cross-cutting and regional pacts (22 in total), five of them (2, 3, 4, 15 and 16) had to do with aspects
covered in this DPF program: economic growth; opportunities for all; sustainability; public administration and
public resources; and integration of regions and rural and urban sectors. For economic growth, it was
necessary to have a good and competitive business environment. Opportunities for all would be delivered
through health, education, and access to housing. For sustainability, the goal was to adapt to climate change
and prevent disaster risks better. For public administration and public resources the goal was to better allocate
budget resources and to have a better administration and be closer to the citizens. For integration of regions
and rural and urban sectors, it was necessary to deepen decentralization and promote more cooperation and
association among regions and subregions.

Bank strategy

The operation supported pillar 1 (Fostering Balanced Territorial Development) and objective 3 (Supporting
Fiscal Sustainability and Productivity) of the WBG’s Country Partnership Framework (CPF). Specifically, the
operation supported the CPF’s objective 1, Strengthened Public Management Capacity to Support Territorial
Development, aimed at addressing issues of land property rights and key challenges to territorial development
using sectoral approaches when feasible. The operation also supported the CPF’s objective 8, Improved
Infrastructure Services and Enhanced Urban Planning to Develop Competitive Cities, through better policies
for land administration, an effective cadastral system, financial instruments for urban development, and better


                                                                                                    Page 3 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Colombia Territorial Development (P170728)



design of public investment projects by including in their design aspects of disaster risk management and
adaptation to climate change.

[1] Departamento Nacional de Planeación, Plan Nacional de Desarrollo 2018-2022 Pacto por Colombia, pacto
por la equidad Todo lo que no le han contado del Plan, page 6.


b. Relevance of Prior Actions

Rationale

1. Number and List of Prior Actions

Objective 1: Strengthen institutions for regional planning, resource allocation, coordination, and
investment prioritization

      PA#1 – Partnerships. The Republic of Colombia has: (a) promoted partnerships among territorial entities
       to plan and execute strategic regional development investment projects; (b) created the Territorial Pacts
       as a resource allocation mechanism for strategic regional development projects; and (c) established the
       Regional Administrative Partnership in the Amazon Region to develop projects aimed at protecting and
       preserving ecosystems in the region.

      PA#2 – Royalty resources: legal reform and access to them. The Republic of Colombia has: (a)
       approved the Legislative Act no. 05 which modifies Article 361 of the Constitution for the allocation and
       use of Royalties Fund (Sistema General de Regalías, SGR) including a special allocation of royalties
       resources for conservation and environmental protection activities, and (b) the National Financial
       Agencies have expressed willingness to support the deployment of a project structuring strategy to
       facilitate access to royalties funds by sub-national governments.

      PA#3 – Fiscal transparency and accountability at the subnational level. The Republic of Colombia has
       taken action to improve fiscal transparency and accountability, as well as the availability of standardized
       information to strengthen planning, monitoring, and evaluation functions at the subnational level by
       launching the harmonized budget and accounting classification catalogue for subnational entities, which
       will be gradually implemented in departments and municipalities.

      PA#4: - Personnel policies at the subnational level. The Republic of Colombia has: (a) authorized the
       allocation of resources to accelerate the implementation of merit-based personnel selection processes
       in category 5 and 6 municipalities; and (b) increased opportunities and created mechanisms for merit-
       based promotions within the public administration at the subnational level.

Objective 2: Enhance the efficiency of land management in rural and urban areas

      PA#5: Land administration functions and land tenure processes. The Republic of Colombia has adopted
       new policies to improve land administration by decentralizing cadastral functions to selected local
       governments, and ANT (Agencia Nacional de Tierras, National Land Agency) has streamlined land
       tenure formalization processes.



                                                                                                    Page 4 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Colombia Territorial Development (P170728)



      PA #6: Agricultural extension and rural land use planning. ADR (Agencia de Desarrollo Rural, Rural
       Development Agency) has strengthened the system of agricultural extension, and the Republic of
       Colombia, through the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development (MADR), has strengthened the
       coordination of information platforms to improve land use planning in rural areas.
      PA #7: Finance instruments for urban development. The Republic of Colombia has established air
       development rights (Derecho Real de Superficie) and tax increment financing instrument (Financiación
       para la Renovación Urbana) as land-based finance instruments to support financing infrastructure for
       urban development.
      PA #8: Risk assessment in public investment. The Republic of Colombia, through the National Planning
       Department (DNP), has developed methodological instruments for the incorporation of disaster risk
       analysis and adaptation to climate change aspects in public investment projects financed by the
       Royalties Fund.

2. Assessing Relevance of Prior Actions

Objective 1: Strengthen institutions for regional planning, resource allocation, coordination and
investment prioritization.

The actions below sought to address problems that hindered good allocation of investment resources and
better administration of subnational governments. Specifically, the rules governing resource allocation to
subnational governments had encouraged the atomization of projects rather than large ones, which in many
instances were necessary to solve problems that affected several subnational entities. Resources from royalties
financed the investments, but because the legislation did not contemplate allocating resources for conservation
and environmental problems, these were not addressed; the program sought to address that problem.
Subnational entities have their own budget catalogues, making it difficult to compare their fiscal information;
moreover, the central government requests numerous reports from subnational entities which they produce with
different classifications and systems of account. Last, political patronage and lack of standards in selecting
public servants hampered public administration in small municipalities.

      PA#1 – Partnerships. The relevance of PA#1 is Satisfactory.

Colombia has taken important legal steps to facilitate alignment around common objectives of investments
across national and subnational entities. Such steps are the Law 1454 of 2011 that operationalized the concept
of regions and the creation of Contratos Plan (2012), reformed into Contratos Paz (2014), which aimed at co-
financing multi-level investments focused on specific regional priority areas. These advances permitted
the financing of investments in about 440 municipalities (out of 1119) for about US$8 billion, but the projects
have small size and limited regional reach: below US$100,000 in about 65 percent of more than 2,400 projects
financed. The atomization and small size of projects has reduced the potential economies of scale that could
come from larger regional projects and limited the ability to address climate change issues which affected the
area of several subnational entities. To overcome these limitations the government enacted a Regions Law
(1962 of 2019) to promote financial and administrative regional associations and to develop Territorial Pacts
(Pactos Territoriales). The reforms permitted creating a Regional Administrative Partnership (Región
Administrativa y de Planificación) among four departments of the Amazon region. The prior action addressed
constraints to using fiscal resources better and would be expected to make a meaningful contribution toward
achieving the objective.

      PA#2 – Royalty resources: legal reform and access to them. The relevance of PA#2 is Satisfactory.


                                                                                                 Page 5 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Colombia Territorial Development (P170728)



The Sistema General de Regalías (SGR-Royalties System), created in 2011, distributes to municipalities
revenues from the exploitation of natural resources. The system has two shortcomings: (a) SGR allocations do
not compensate fully for the social and environmental costs the extractive industries create; and (b) less
developed municipalities have difficulties in accessing SGR resources because they lack the capacity to
process the complex procedures demanded to access them, resulting in a large accumulation of unused funds.
The prior action supported an amendment to article 361 of the Colombian constitution (which defines the
distribution of SGR resources) that mandates a 20 percent increase in resources for investment activities,
especially in producer regions, and the allocation of up to one percent of the SGR’s total income for
environmental investments in areas related to the conservation of strategic ecosystems, national parks and
water resources, and the national fight against deforestation; the central government would manage the one
percent allocation as a special allocation. To help access the funds, National Financial Agencies would deploy a
strategy to structure projects in a manner that would facilitate such access, coupled with development of
supporting instruments, deployment of targeted technical assistance for less developed municipalities, and
other capacity building initiatives.

      PA#3 – Fiscal transparency and accountability at the subnational level. The relevance of PA#3 is
       Satisfactory.

Several reforms conducted prior to 2020 reduced from 230 to 110 the number of reports subnational
governments had to present to the central government. These reports covered areas such as fiscal
performance (following bailouts from the central government in the early 2000s) and the use of royalties. Still,
110 reports per entity is high and costly, and makes it difficult to trace information between the accounting and
budget systems. To reduce reporting costs and improve their timeliness, quality, and consistency, the Ministry
of Finance and the Comptroller General introduced a single harmonized budget and classification catalogue for
subnational entities that would be rolled out, in place, and applied by subnational entities by the formulation of
the 2021 budget. Such action should improve the quality of reports and reduce the costs of reporting.

      PA#4: - Personnel policies at the subnational level. The relevance of PA #4 is Highly Satisfactory.

About 75 percent of workers in the public sector work for the central government’s executive branch, and 18
percent work for subnational governments. The subnational government administrations lack good quality civil
servants and have a large share of vacant positions which tend to be filled through political patronage, leading
to high personnel turnover, workers assigned to jobs they cannot do, and ineffective public administration. The
prior action sought to reduce the extent and depth of these problems for municipalities with a population lower
than 20,000 and 10,000 inhabitants (categories 5 and 6 respectively).

Objective 2: Enhance the efficiency of land management in rural and urban areas.

The actions below sought to address problems derived from the poor institutional structure of the land
administration system in the country. Colombia’s centralized cadaster system does not work well because
Instituto Geográfico Agustín Codazzi (IGAC) has monopolized its administration and has not kept up with the
country’s extensive territory and dynamic land market. Only a small share of Colombia’s land mass has been
titled, giving rise to deforestation, land disputes, poor land management practices, and poor disaster risk
planning and management. Also, few municipalities can raise revenues from property taxes.

      PA#5: Land administration functions and land tenure processes. The relevance of PA# 5 is Highly
       Satisfactory.


                                                                                                    Page 6 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Colombia Territorial Development (P170728)



For about eight decades the IGAC held a monopoly on cadastral services in Colombia, a large country, with
poor roads, lack of other means of communication, and isolated regions and populations. These conditions
resulted in land tenure insecurity, land disputes, deforestation, poor disaster risk planning and management,
and lack of cadastral information for about 94 percent of Colombia’s territory. The prior action supported the
adoption of new policies that decentralize the management of cadaster to territorial entities if they fulfill certain
conditions (e.g., good fiscal management as measured by the DNP’s fiscal performance index, Indice de
desempeño fiscal) and to some national agencies which, for fulfilling their goals, must create or update a
cadaster for land plots. ANT is one of the agencies managing land tenure formalization.

      PA #6: Agricultural extension and rural land use planning. The relevance of PA#6 is Satisfactory.

DNP has found that there is a lack of good technical assistance and extension services. As a result, there is
inadequate use of land and low use and adoption of technology. The 2014 agricultural census found that only
about 10 percent of all agricultural producers received extension services. Providing these services is
expensive, independent of who does it, the government or private producers, in large part because it is difficult
to reach farmers in remote areas. The operation supported government actions to help overcome some of
these problems. Specifically, to increase the reach of the extension service system, the agency supported the
ADR decision to enable various agencies to provide them. Second, the MADR authorized its Rural Agricultural
Planning Unit to operate the sector’s information system, which comprises three systems: one for the rural,
agriculture, and livestock sectors; another for risk management in agriculture; and another for agro-livestock
information and communication. The reforms would help improve the quality and availability of data about the
sector and permit better-informed preparation and development of sectoral and territorial plans.

      PA #7: Finance instruments for urban development. The relevance of PA#7 is Highly Satisfactory.

Central and local government resources finance urban development, but they fall short of what municipalities
need to pay for their urban development. To fill the gap, they need instruments to generate tax revenues. To
achieve that, the loan supported legal reforms that allow municipalities to capture part of the gains in land
values that urban development generates. The reforms allowed the introduction of air development rights and
tax increment financing. The air development right authorizes municipalities to charge for granting a right to a
private party for up to 30 years to exploit a transport infrastructure considered a public good (Article 97.8 of Law
1955/2019); the tax increment authorizes municipalities with population equal to or greater than 500,001
inhabitants (category: special) or equal to or greater than 50,001 (categories 1 and 2) to issue debt against
future revenue from land taxes collected and traceable to urban renovation projects (Article 278 of Law
1955/2019). These revenues would finance works for urban renewal and development.

      PA #8: Risk assessment in public investment. The relevance of PA#8 is Highly Satisfactory.

Colombia suffers from frequent and large natural disasters that affect life, property, and public, private, and
communities’ infrastructure. Colombia has advanced substantially in managing natural disasters that
materialize, has advanced a bit in reducing disaster risks, and advanced little in analyzing them. Some of the
costs from disaster risk can be reduced by designing and prioritizing investments better. Hence, for future
regional investments financed with resources from the Royalties Fund, it is reasonable to allocate more funds
for disaster risk analysis, as that would help design infrastructure more resilient to natural disasters and to the
consequences of climate change. For this purpose, the loan supported the development and adoption of sound
methodologies to include disaster risk analysis and adaptation to climate changes in the assessment of public
investment projects financed with resources from the Fund.


                                                                                                        Page 7 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Colombia Territorial Development (P170728)




Rating

Highly Satisfactory


4. Relevance of Results Indicators

Rationale

 Summary Table on Results Indicators
                                                                              Actual   Most
                                                                              change recent
  RI description                         Baseline Target
                                                               Actual value in RI     value         RI
   (assigning a Associated        RI    (including (including
                                                               as of target relative available achievement
    number to       PA(s)    relevance units and units and
                                                                   date          to   (if not     rating
      each RI)                             date)       date)
                                                                             targeted target
                                                                              change date)
 Objective 1. Strengthen institutions for regional planning, resource allocation, coordination, and
 investment prioritization
 RI1 Number of
                                                               10 (Sept. 30,
 Territorial Pacts   PA1         MU       0 (2019) 4 (2021)                    250%               [High]
                                                                   2021)
 subscribed
 RI2 Share of
 SGR resources
 approved for
                                        62.6% (20 79.8% 92% (Dec. 31,
 investment          PA2          S                                            113%                High
                                             19)      (2021)       2021)
 projects in each
 biannual cycle
 (percent). +
 RI3 Amount of
 climate and
 environmental
 protection-
                                                       COP
 related activities                                           118,881 (Dec.
                     PA2          S       0 (2019)   43,302                    275%                High
 funded with the                                                31, 2022)
                                                      (2021)
 SGR special
 allocation
 (million pesos).
 ++
 RI4 Percentage
 of the budget of
 the territorial                                       100%    97.4% (Sept.
                     PA3          S     0% (2019)                               97%             Substantial
 governments                                          (2021)    30, 2021)
 (department
 and municipal

                                                                                              Page 8 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                      Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Colombia Territorial Development (P170728)



governments)
formulated and
tracked using
the new
harmonized
budget
classification
system.
RI5 Percentage
of category 5
and 6
municipalities
that implement                            20%      30%    61% (Sept. 30,
                    PA4          S                                        410%                   High
merit-based                              (2019)   (2021)       2021)
processes to
promote public
career
employments
Objective 2: Enhance the efficiency of land management in rural and urban areas
RI6 Sub-
national entities
                                                           22 (Sept. 30,
that manage         PA5        HS      6 (2019) 17 (2021)                 145%                   High
                                                               2021)
their own
cadaster
RI7 Formalized
titles that grant
                                                                                20,727
access to land                                    16,171 15,859 (Dec.
                    PA5        HS    850 (2019)                           130% (Dec. 31,         High
[cumulative                                       (2021)     31, 2021)
                                                                                 2022)
value-2019 -
2022] +++
RI8 Number of
Productive
Chain                                                       3 (Dec. 31,
                    PA6        MU      1 (2019)  3 (2021)                 100%                  [High]
Development                                                    2021)
Plans
formulated
RI9 Number of
municipalities
that have
                                                            3 (Dec. 31,
included the      PA7 of PD    MU      0 (2019)  3 (2021)                 100%                  [High]
                                                               2021)
new financing
instruments in
the POTs ++++
RI10 Number of PA 8 of PD       S      0 (2019) 10 (2021) 218 (Sept. 30, 2180%                   High
territorial                                                    2021)
entities that use
the

                                                                                           Page 9 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Colombia Territorial Development (P170728)



methodological
instruments for
the
incorporation of
disaster risk
analysis and
adaptation to
climate change
aspects in
public
infrastructure
projects
financed by
royalties

Source: ICR Annex 1; ISR#2 for P170728 ISR#2; DNP Seguimiento DPL Territorial, abril 2022

Note: RI achievement ratings note achievement of the targeted change for the RI. RI achievement ratings
in brackets reflect ratings that may have been adjusted based on weak relevance of the results indicator
(discussed in efficacy section).

+ Biannual cycle refers to budget period 2021-2022

++ Total funds in Law 2072 of 2020 for biannual cycle were 154,276 million pesos, of which 59,481 million
pesos were allocated for conservation of strategic environmental areas and $59,400 for combatting
deforestation; these two add to the number reported above. The information comes from DNP
Seguimiento DPL Territorial

+++ DNP Seguimiento, Tabla 2

++++ Barranquilla, Bogotá and Medellín



Objective 1: Strengthen institutions for regional planning, resource allocation, coordination, and
investment prioritization

      RI#1 (number of Territorial Pacts subscribed) sought to measure the extent to which the action
       taken to promote partnership among territorial entities and create Territorial Pacts for strategic
       regional development projects (PA#1) resulted in strengthening institutions for allocating resources
       and coordinating and prioritizing investments. The relevance of RI#1 is Moderately Unsatisfactory.

Subscribing territorial pacts is a necessary step to strengthen coordination and planning but signing them
does not necessarily indicate that resource allocation has been strengthened. The indicator can be
measured, and the information can be obtained.

      RI#2 (Share of SGR resources approved for investment projects in each biannual cycle) sought to
       measure the extent to which the action (PA#2) taken to strengthen institutions by modifying the

                                                                                                 Page 10 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Colombia Territorial Development (P170728)



       constitution regarding the allocation and use of royalties and for National Financial Agencies to
       deploy a structuring strategy to facilitate access to royalties by sub-national governments resulted
       in strengthening institutions for regional planning, resource allocation and prioritizing investments.
       The relevance of RI#2 is Satisfactory.

The indicator measures how much of the SGR resources are allocated to investment projects. The
presumption is that a higher share leads to a better allocation of resources, which may be true if the rates
of returns of projects financed exceed the opportunity cost of capital. Because many regions and
municipalities lack basic infrastructure (e.g., good rural roads, flood control works, clean water), it is likely
that allocating more resources to investment may improve resource allocation. The indicator can be
measured, and the information can be obtained.

      RI#3 (Amount of climate and environmental protection-related activities funded with the SGR
       special allocation) sought to measure the extent to which the reforms to the royalties system
       (PA#2) led to allocating more resources to climate and environmental protection-related
       activities. The relevance of RI#3 is Satisfactory.

Allocating resources for climate and environmental related activities seeks to address the little attention
given to offset the environmental costs from deforestation and the operation of extractive industries.
Allocating these resources is an important step toward protecting Colombia’s immense natural
capital, and promoting better use of natural resources and allocation of budget funds, thereby contributing
to achieving the objective. The indicator can be measured, and the information can be obtained.

      RI#4 (Percentage of the budget of the territorial governments (department and municipal
       governments) formulated and tracked using the new harmonized budget classification system)
       sought to measure the extent to which the action (PA#3) taken to improve fiscal transparency and
       accountability and the availability of information results in stronger institutions for regional
       planning, resource allocation, and coordinating and prioritizing investments. The relevance of RI#4
       is Satisfactory.

Using a single, harmonized, budget classification system for subnational governments constitutes an
important advance in budget management and in improving the quality of budgetary institutions at that
level of government. Preparing and executing a larger share of the budget under a harmonized
classification system permits comparison of budgets across jurisdictions and analysis of the efficiency of
their expenditures. Having the power to compare and analyze can lead to better regional planning and to
better resource allocation, thereby contributing to achieving the objective. ,. The indicator can be
measured, and the information can be obtained.

      RI#5 (Percentage of category 5 and 6 municipalities that implement merit-based processes to
       promote public career employments) sought to measure the extent to which by allocating
       resources to select and promote personnel based on merit (PA#4) results in better municipal
       administration and stronger institutions for regional planning, resource allocation and coordinating
       and prioritizing investments. The relevance of RI#5 is Satisfactory.

More qualified public servants help improve the quality of local administrations and their results. Raising
the share of small municipalities that use merit-based systems to select their staff can improve their staff



                                                                                                        Page 11 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Colombia Territorial Development (P170728)



quality, administration, and ability to coordinate and plan with other entities at the regional level. The
indicator can be measured, and the information can be obtained.

Objective 2: PDO2: Enhance the efficiency of land management in rural and urban areas.

      RI#6 (Sub-national entities that manage their own cadaster) sought to measure the extent to which
       decentralizing cadastral functions to selected local governments and the Agencia Nacional de
       Tierras (PA#5) contributes to achieving better land management. The relevance of RI#6 is Highly
       Satisfactory.

Subnational governments have interest and incentives to manage the cadaster because they can collect
revenues from property taxes. As more people have land titles there are more potential taxpayers from
which subregional governments can collect property taxes. Therefore, decentralizing the management of
cadasters can speed up the granting of land titles and create property rights on land, an essential step to
improve the management of rural and urban land. With more land plots titled, land use and management
are more likely to improve. The indicator can be measured, and the information can be obtained.

      RI#7 (Formalized titles that grant access to land) sought to measure the extent to which
       decentralizing cadastral functions (PA#5) results in more efficient land management in rural and
       urban areas. The relevance of RI#7 is Highly Satisfactory.

The ultimate purpose of the reforms was to title land, especially in rural areas. Granting titles to land is
essential to improve land use, as farmers will have incentives to maintain better what that belongs to
them, a title to defend their rights, and no incentive to move to other locations to slash and burn forests.
The indicator can be measured, and the information can be obtained.

      RI#8 (Number of Productive Chain Development Plans formulated) sought to measure the extent
       to which strengthening the agricultural extension system and the coordination of information
       platforms (PA#6) results in more efficient land management in rural and urban areas. The
       relevance of RI#8 is Moderately Unsatisfactory.

The indicator refers to plans formulated. The logical link between formulating productive chain
development plans and fostering efficient rural and urban land management systems is unclear. The
indicator can be measured, and the information can be obtained.

      RI#9 (Number of municipalities that have included the new financing instruments in the POTs)
       sought to measure the extent to which the action (PA#7) taken by which two new land-based
       financial instruments to finance infrastructure for rural development result in more efficient land
       management in rural and urban land areas . The relevance of RI#9 is Moderately Unsatisfactory.

The indicator measures how many municipalities include in their territorial development plans (POTs)
alternative financial instruments to enhance their revenues. The link between the number, the objective,
and its achievement are unclear. The indicator can be measured, and the information can be obtained.

      RI#10 (Number of territorial entities that use the methodological instruments for the incorporation
       of disaster risk analysis and adaptation to climate change aspects in public infrastructure projects
       financed by royalties) sought to measure the extent to which the action (PA#8) of developing


                                                                                                      Page 12 of 18
                   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                   Colombia Territorial Development (P170728)



                      instruments to incorporate disaster risk analysis and adaptation to climate change results in more
                      efficient land management in rural and urban areas. The relevance of RI#10 is Satisfactory.

               The indicator measures how extended is the use of disaster risk analysis in assessing investment projects
               financed with the Royalties Fund. Assessing them is an important step to improving the systems for rural
               and urban land management. The indicator can be measured, and the information can be obtained.



   Rating

   Satisfactory

   5. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
EFFICACY_TBL




                OBJECTIVE 1
                Objective
                Strengthen institutions for regional planning, resource allocation, coordination, and investment prioritization.

                Rationale
                Under this objective, the program supported interventions to strengthen coordination, planning, and resource
                allocation at the regional level.

                The expected results were to increase the: (a) number of territorial pacts subscribed; (b) resources from the
                royalties system going to (i) investment and to (ii) climate and environmental protection-related activities; (c)
                share of territorial governments that formulate and track their budgets using the harmonized budget
                classification system; and (d) percentage of municipalities of categories 5 and 6 (those with fewer people) that
                implement merit-based processes to promote public sector career employments.

                Of the five results indicators [RI1-RI5] four exceeded their targets and one [RI4] missed its target by a bit.
                Specifically, the number of territorial pacts subscribed was 2.5 times the target; 60 percent of municipalities in
                category 5 and 6 implemented merit-based processes to promote public career employment, a substantial
                increase over the 20 percent baseline value; the resources from royalties allocated to investment projects
                rose to 82 percent from 63 percent; and the amount allocated to environmental protection activities was 3.6
                times the targeted amount. Last, 97 percent of the formulated and tracked budget of territorial governments
                used the new harmonized budget classification system. Despite these achievements, there is no evidence of
                investment prioritization, and there is no information of strengthened resource allocation at the aggregate and
                sub-national level.



                Rating

                Satisfactory

                OBJECTIVE 2
                Objective

                                                                                                                   Page 13 of 18
                         Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                         Colombia Territorial Development (P170728)



                      Enhance the efficiency of land management in rural and urban areas

                      Rationale
                      Under this objective, the program supported interventions to foster efficient rural and urban land management
                      systems.

                      The expected results were to: (a) have more sub-national entities managing their own cadaster; (b)
                      formalize more titles to land to grant access to it; (c) formulate more productive chain development plans; (d)
                      include in more POTs the new financing instruments authorized by law; and (e) have more territorial entities
                      include disaster risk analysis and adaptation in public infrastructure projects financed through royalties.

                      Of the five results indicators, four exceeded their targets during the program’s life, and one met the target six
                      months after the loan closed. Specifically, 22 subnational entities manage their own cadaster; about 17,350
                      titles to land have been granted; three development plans for productive chains were formulated; and 218
                      territorial entities included disaster risk analysis and adaptation to climate change in their infrastructure
                      projects financed with resources from royalties. As for the use of financial instruments to finance urban
                      development, by end-June 2022 three municipalities had included the new financing instruments in their
                      POTs. Despite these achievements, there is not yet evidence of efficiency of land management.



                      Rating

                      Satisfactory


OVERALL EFF TBL OLD




Overall Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
Rationale

The program had prior action and most results indicators of satisfactory relevance. Its efficacy is satisfactory
because the results indicators, in aggregate, were not complete measures of achievement of the objectives.



Overall Efficacy Rating
Satisfactory


      6. Outcome

      Rationale

      With relevance of prior actions rated as highly satisfactory and efficacy rated satisfactory, the overall outcome
      rating is Satisfactory.



                                                                                                                         Page 14 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Colombia Territorial Development (P170728)



a. Rating

Satisfactory

7. Risk to Development Outcome

Achieved outcomes are likely to be sustained because there is political and social support for
decentralization in general, and for granting land rights and the power and right to manage the cadaster
system to municipalities and other subnational entities. Merit-based public sector employment in category 5
and 6 municipalities, perhaps the most controversial aspect of the program because of the extended and
entrenched political patronage, is likely to be sustained, as the results achieved were twice as big as the
target set, suggesting that there is demand for better management of government entities at the subnational
level. The overall and long-term sustainability of outcomes will depend on solving a more general problem in
Colombia’s public administration: its limited capacity to deliver good results fast and at low cost.

The COVID-19 pandemic led the Bank to change its macroeconomic risk assessment from moderate to
substantial during most of the program’s life, but the risk had dropped at project closing, and the Bank
lowered it, correctly, to moderate.


8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Bank Performance – Design

Rationale


The Bank designed a sound program, product of good country dialogue and knowledge of the country and
its institutions; that knowledge came from a solid analytical base (e.g., a report on instruments to manage
urban land and finance urban development) and years of experience working on decentralization in
Colombia (e.g., the most recent project was one supporting subnational institutional strengthening). The
program addressed relevant issues, and its design examined the program’s implications on poverty,
gender, and social development aspects and found that it would be neutral. Environmental aspects were
addressed through prior actions that supported allocating a larger amount of royalties’ resources to
investments in climate and environmental protection activities and including disaster risk analysis and
adaptation to climate change to public investment projects financed with royalties. The design showed
good knowledge of the country’s policy and institutions. Its risk assessment was appropriate, with the
environmental and social, and political and governance risks rated substantial and the other seven
categories (e.g., macroeconomic, fiduciary, institutional capacity) rated low to moderate. The
Bank cooperated with the French development agency (Agence Française de Développement - AFD)
during preparation and implementation, working in different regions to complement AFD's support to the
government’s territorial development agenda.



Rating


                                                                                                  Page 15 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Colombia Territorial Development (P170728)



Satisfactory


b. Bank Performance – Implementation

Rationale

The program monitored the program closely, which was made possible because one project task team
leader worked in the Bank office in Colombia. The program lasted 20 months, and during that period the Bank
conducted two monitoring missions whose findings are published in two implementation status and results
reports well documented with informative Aide Memoires; the monitoring missions followed progress using the
results framework in the program document. The COVID-19 pandemic caused initial delays in achieving some
results, but government counterparts’ commitment to the program and the Bank’s more intense monitoring
helped to overcome these problems.



Rating

Satisfactory

c. Overall Bank Performance

Rationale

WBG performance in designing and implementing the operation was satisfactory.


Overall Bank Performance Rating

Satisfactory

9. Other Impacts

a. Social and Poverty

The ICR reports on impacts reported by the DNP on investment projects benefitting multiple beneficiaries and
by the Ministry of Agriculture on technical assistance benefitting small poor land holders. The ICR does not
present evidence of these benefits.



b. Environmental

The ICR does not report negative environmental impacts. The positive effects the ICR discusses (i.e., land titling
and reduced deforestation, analysis of disaster risk in investment projects) have not yet been achieved.


                                                                                                   Page 16 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Colombia Territorial Development (P170728)




c. Gender

The ICR says the operation had indirect, positive effects on gender but does not report specific impacts.



d. Other

---

10. Quality of ICR

Rationale

With a concise text, the ICR provides good information on the program’s achievements, with some moderate
shortcomings. Its narrative considers aspects other than results, such as delays in implementing some
activities, which are not clearly explained. Its lessons could have been better linked to the analysis and the
evidence presented in the text. For results that fall in the category of outputs (such as productive chains), the
ICR could have gone a bit further by reporting on results associated with those outputs or what outcomes they
had generated one year after the program closed.

The ICR should correct the discrepancy between the results discussed in the text and those presented in
Annex 1. The text has the most recent information about results achieved; Annex 1 provides information about
results achieved three months before the loan closed, leading the reader to ask if the narrative about the
program’s achievements is accurate.



a. Rating

Substantial

11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
 Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                  Disagreement/Comments
                                                                                  The ICR rates as partially
                                 Moderately
 Outcome                                               Satisfactory               achieved two results that were
                                 Satisfactory
                                                                                  fully or substantially achieved
 Bank Performance                Satisfactory          Satisfactory
 Relevance of Results
                                 ---                   Satisfactory
 Indicators
 Quality of ICR                  ---                   Substantial

                                                                                                    Page 17 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Colombia Territorial Development (P170728)




12. Lessons

The most pertinent lessons from the ICR are:

      The government’s political commitment to the program is essential for sound design and
       effective implementation. Territorial development and decentralization had a high place on the
       government’s policy agenda, and the policies the program supported helped to strengthen subnational
       governments’ capacity and the underlying territorial development framework. The prior actions
       dovetailed well with the government’s policy priorities, which is reflected in its support during the
       program’s design and its implementation.
      Programs that touch several sectors require are more likely to succeed if there is effective
       coordination and collaboration within the WGB during its design and implementation phases. The
       program has a higher chance of success if the WBG cooperates with other development partners that
       support the same areas the program touches.
      The experience from the program shows that a multi-sector approach to territorial development
       facilitates incorporating climate change issues in plans and projects. Such an approach makes it
       possible to draw on a range of public sector expertise at the time of upstream planning such aspects as
       climate change and disaster risk considerations.


13. Project Performance Assessment Report (PPAR) Recommended?

No




                                                                                               Page 18 of 18
