     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Herat Electrification Project (P162022)



                                                                                     Report Number: ICRR0023467

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                    Project Name
 P162022                                       Herat Electrification Project

 Country                                       Practice Area(Lead)
 Afghanistan                                   Energy & Extractives


 L/C/TF Number(s)                              Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-D2080                                     31-Jan-2022                                          21,708,081.79

 Bank Approval Date                            Closing Date (Actual)
 13-Jun-2017                                   31-Jan-2023

                                               IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                               60,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                                60,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Actual                                            21,708,081.79                                               0.00




 Prepared by                   Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Ihsan Kaler Hurcan            Christopher David             Ramachandra Jammi               IEGSD (Unit 4)
                               Nelson




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to both the International Development Association (IDA) Financing Agreement (p.4) dated July 12,
   2017, and the Project Appraisal Document (p.12) dated May 23, 2017, the project objective is “to provide
   access to electricity to households, institutions and businesses in selected areas of Herat Province,
   Afghanistan.” The Financing Agreement defines “Afghanistan” as “the Recipient.”




                                                                                                      Page 1 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Herat Electrification Project (P162022)



   As agreed between the Independent Evaluation Group (IEG) and the World Bank’s South Asia Region, this
   review will conduct a split assessment of the project performance for the periods before and after the
   Taliban’s takeover of power in the country in August 2021.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   The project consisted of three components:

   A. Electrification of Four Districts in Herat Province. (Appraisal cost: US$20.00 million; actual cost:
   US$15.94 million)

   This component was to finance the construction of a new 110 kV line, four 110/20 kV substations, and
   medium and low voltage distribution networks in four districts in the Herat Province—Chesht, Obe, Karokh,
   and Pashtun-Zarghoon. These activities were ready for implementation at the time of appraisal.

   B. Grid Densification, Extension and Off-grid Pilots in Herat Province. (Appraisal cost: US$36.00
   million; actual cost: US$4.08 million)

   This component consisted of two sub-components:

   B.1. Grid Investments: This sub-component was to finance the extension, intensification, and upgrading of
   the existing grids in the Herat Province.

   B.2. Off-grid investments: This sub-component was to finance the piloting of solar and solar-hybrid mini-
   grid subprojects in areas where grid electricity was not technically and economically feasible.

   The project was to identify the subprojects to be financed under this component after project effectiveness.

   C. Technical Assistance. (Appraisal cost: US$4.00; actual cost: US$1.68 million)

   This component was to provide technical assistance to Da Afghanistan Breshna Sherkat (DABS – a
   vertically integrated state-owned power utility in the country) to manage and coordinate the project’s
   technical operation, implementation, monitoring and evaluation, and public outreach, and carry out
   feasibility assessment of sub-projects, safeguard measures, grid-code, technical studies, and an entity level
   financial model of DABS.




                                                                                                   Page 2 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Herat Electrification Project (P162022)



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project Cost: The project cost was originally estimated at US$60.00 million. The project closed on January
   31, 2023 with a total cost of US$21.71 million. The actual project cost was significantly lower than the cost
   estimated at appraisal because of the incomplete project activities following the Taliban takeover in the
   country in August 2021.

   Financing: At appraisal, the IDA grant amount was estimated at US$60.0 million that would fully finance
   the project cost. At the time of project restructuring in April 2021 (four months before the Taliban takeover),
   the project had disbursed US$17.98 million and committed US$41.38 million, and the two last packages
   worth US$18.50 million were under procurement. The total expected committed amount was US$59.88
   million, which was close to the total IDA financing. However, because of the abrupt cessation of project
   activities following the Taliban takeover, the project could only disburse US$21.71 million by project closing
   on January 31, 2023.

   Borrower’s contribution: At appraisal, no borrower’s contribution was estimated, and none materialized at
   project closing.

   Project Restructuring (Level 2 – June 1, 2021): The project was restructured to extend the project closing
   date by one year from January 31, 2022 to January 31, 2023 to allow time for the completion of sub-projects
   under Component 2. The main reason for the delay in the implementation of activities under Component 2
   was the time required to identify subprojects that took one and a half years after grant effectiveness and
   slow procurement. The country-wide lockdown between March and June 2020 also delayed project
   implementation. At the time of the project restructuring, a one-year project closing date extension was
   assessed to be sufficient to complete all project activities and fully disburse the IDA grant. However, two
   months after this restructuring, the project activities halted because of the Taliban takeover in August 2021.

   Dates: The project was approved on June 13, 2017. The Financing Agreement was signed on July 12,
   2017, and the project became effective on October 18, 2017. The Mid-Term Review was conducted in
   February 2021. The original project closing date was January 31, 2022. The project closing date was
   extended by one year, and the project closed on January 31, 2023. The reasons for project closing date
   extension are given in the restructuring entry above.

   Disbursement Percentages

   The following disbursement percentages will be used in deriving the weights to be applied to the split
   Outcome rating.

                           Disbursed and Undisbursed Amounts              Disbursement Percentage
       Project Objective
                                         ($ million)                                (%)
   Before Taliban Takeover            21.71 (disbursed)                             36.18
   After Taliban Takeover             38.29 (undisbursed)                           63.82
                     Total            60.00                                        100.00

3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale


                                                                                                     Page 3 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Herat Electrification Project (P162022)



The project objective was highly aligned with the World Bank’s strategy as defined in the Country
Partnership Framework for FY2017-20 (CPF) for Afghanistan, which was extended through fiscal year
2022. The project sought to address the development problem of absence of access to electricity in the
urban and rural areas of Herat Province of Afghanistan, which receives electricity from Iran and
Turkmenistan. Increasing access to electricity was to contribute to improved inclusivity across the country,
the absence of which was one of the main drivers of fragility in Afghanistan. Additionally, increased access
to electricity contributes to improved socioeconomic welfare in the medium and long-terms resulting in
reduction of poverty. These development problems fit under the second pillar of the CPF, i.e., Supporting
Inclusive Growth, and contributes to the achievement of “Objective 2.3: Increased power generation and
access to electricity.” The CPF (p.23) defines the intended outcomes at the end of the CPF period as
“increased access to both on-grid and off-grid electricity, reduction in distribution losses as well as improved
regional energy cooperation.” The project was to support the achievement of these outcomes through the
construction of transmission lines and related substations, implementation of off-grid solutions, and the
expansion of the distribution network. These were expected to lead to increased access to electricity both
on-grid and off-grid, improvement in the efficiency of the distribution network, and strengthened cooperation
with Iran and Turkmenistan in electricity trade. The project objective also corresponded to the first pilar of
the CPF, i.e., Building Strong and Accountable Institutions, which aims to improve service delivery by
building the capacity and self-reliance of government institutions, and the third pillar, i.e., Social Inclusion,
the goal of which is to reduce differences in access to services in the country and address vulnerability
shocks (CPF, pp.17 and 26).

The project objective was also highly relevant to the country context. The project objective supported the
implementation of the Afghanistan National Development Strategy (ANDS). The ANDS identified poor
access to electricity as a barrier to economic development and poverty alleviation and aimed at investing in
transmission network and power generation to increase the electrification rate in the country. Given the
fragile and conflict-affected situation (FCS) in Afghanistan, the project objective was appropriately pitched
for the development status in the country as described in the CPF. As advised in the World Bank’s
Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD, 2016), the project’s intervention was carefully selected and tailored to
the fragile circumstances in the country. The Herat Province was selected as it was the province in the
country with the second highest commercial and technical losses in electricity transmission and distribution.
An improvement in the transmission and distribution network in the province would have been expected to
improve electricity supply in the country. Faced with important challenges in its electricity network, such as
large dependency on electricity imports from Iran and Turkmenistan and technical obstacles in
interconnecting its electricity network (which is fed by hydropower generation) to the networks of
neighboring countries, the Herat Province was an ideal place for the project’s intervention results which
could be replicated in other provinces of Afghanistan. Lastly, the project’s intervention was to help address
the significant difference in access to electricity in urban and rural areas of the province contributing to
social inclusion.

Following the reengagement in 2002, the World Bank extensively supported Afghanistan in increasing
access to electricity, both on-grid and off-grid, through interventions in power generation, transmission and
distribution, and technical assistance and policy advice. Some World Bank-financed electricity projects in
Afghanistan are as follows: The Emergency Infrastructure Rehabilitation Project, the Emergency Power
Rehabilitation Project, the Kabul, Aybak, Mazar-e-Sharif Power Project, and the Power System
Development Project. These projects provided support in rehabilitation of hydropower generation assets,
rehabilitation and construction of transmission and distribution assets with the goal of increasing access to
electricity in the country and improving the availability, reliability, and quality of electricity supply. Therefore,
the objective of the project under this review was not pitched at the outcome level given that World Bank

                                                                                                           Page 4 of 18
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Herat Electrification Project (P162022)



               had extensive experience in the country and the sector. However, given the fragile, conflict, and violence
               (FCV) status of the country and rapidly challenging security situation, the project objective was sufficiently
               challenging.

               Overall, the relevance of objective is rated High.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To provide access to electricity to households, institutions and businesses in selected areas of Herat
                             Province, Afghanistan.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change

                             The main causes of Afghanistan’s fragility were defined as weak state institutions, poor governance and
                             dysfunctional societal relations that frequently led to violent conflict between groups (ICR, p.5). To address
                             the drivers of fragility, the World Bank strategy (CPF 2016) was designed to build strong and accountable
                             institutions, support inclusive growth, and expand and deepen social inclusion. The project was to contribute
                             to the achievement of the World Bank strategy by increasing access to electricity in Herat, one of the most
                             conflict prone regions in Afghanistan. By providing electricity to households, institutions and businesses, the
                             project was to contribute to the alleviation of poverty and ensure inclusivity of access to electricity to benefit
                             all segments of the population in the project area (ICR, pp.5-6). The project was also to address the fragility
                             driver of weak state institutions through technical assistance to build DABS capacity in service delivery.

                             The project was to use the project’s inputs—IDA grants—to finance the construction of a new transmission
                             line and its substations, expansion of the distribution network, and implementation of off-grid pilots. The
                             expected outputs of these activities were transmission lines and substations constructed that connected four
                             districts in the Herat province, distribution network expanded through medium and low voltage lines while a
                             new 220 kV transmission line constructed to provide more electricity to the province, and two off-grid pilots
                             implemented in two villages. The intermediate outcomes expected from these outputs were the provision of
                             electricity to 230,800 people and 1,600 non-residential customers. The outcomes expected from increased
                             access to electricity were not defined, such as improved availability, reliability, and quality of electricity supply.
                             Therefore, the project objective was more output-oriented rather than outcome-oriented, but taking the
                             country’s FCV status into account, the formulation of the project objective was realistic and appropriate to
                             country conditions. Increased access to electricity was to be expected to contribute to the improvement of the
                             overall socioeconomic welfare of the residents in the project area and address drivers of fragility in the
                             country. The project supported the achievement of this long-term goal with awareness campaigns targeting

                                                                                                                                    Page 5 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Herat Electrification Project (P162022)



women on uses of electricity and safety aspects. The project was also to finance technical assistance
activities to strengthen the capacity of DABS in service delivery. These were to be achieved by the
preparation of a grid code and a grid extension study. The expected outcomes from these outputs were
DABS’ increased capacity in facilitating interconnection and synchronization of the power system within
Afghanistan and with neighboring countries from which Afghanistan imports most of the electricity consumed
in the country and preparing feasibility studies for future grid extensions. These outcomes were expected to
lead to medium and long-term sustainability of reliable electricity supply in Afghanistan. Overall, while the
project objective was output-oriented, this was appropriate to the fragile country context, and the causal
pathways from inputs to outcomes were valid and direct; the achievement of the outcomes and project
objective could be attributed to the project’s intervention. However, the indicators in the result framework were
insufficient to fully capture the project outputs and outcomes, as the subprojects to be financed under
Component 2 were not identified prior to grant effectiveness; therefore, the achievements of most of the
intermediate results indicators were recorded as “Yes” or “No.”

Outputs

      Transmission line constructed under the project. The project’s target was to construct 25 km of
         transmission line. The achievement was 31.30 km.
      Capacity of new substations constructed or commissioned. The target was to construct 40,000
         kilovolt-ampere (KVA) total substation capacity. The construction of substation facilities was
         completed, and the transformers were delivered to the sites for installation. The construction of the
         whole transmission line including the substations was 95 percent complete, and the project was only
         one transformer away to energize the system, which would deliver electricity to 90,000 people and
         1,600 non-residential customers as targeted (ICR, p.11). Because of the Taliban takeover, the system
         could not be energized.
        Additional distribution grid asset created. The procurement of contracts for the construction of
         additional distribution grid asset was delayed, which was one of the reasons for the extension of the
         project closing date. However, the bids were opened, and the contract was ready for signing when the
         Taliban took power in the country. It was expected that the project was to achieve the construction of
         additional distribution grid assets by the revised project date of January 31, 2022 but failed to do so
         because the project activities abruptly ceased after Taliban takeover. A specific target was not set for
         this indicator. The achievement was recorded as “Yes” or “No.”
        Off-grid pilots implemented. The project signed a contract for a solar mini-grid but could not
         complete its construction because of Taliban takeover. Similar to the previous indicator, a specific
         target was not set for this indicator; the achievement was recorded as “Yes” or “No.”
        Grid code prepared. The grid code preparation was on track and was expected to be finalized by the
         project closing date of January 31, 2022. The international consultant prepared the final draft of the
         grid code, and it was under review, but because of the Taliban takeover in August 2021, the grid code
         could not be finalized.
        Grid extension study prepared. The project financed the preparation of a grid extension study as
         planned.
        Awareness campaigns targeted to women on uses of electricity and safety aspects: The project
         financed the awareness campaigns as planned.
        Under the second component, the project had already signed the installation of solar photovoltaic (PV)
         panels for hospitals, supply of a capacitor in 24 Hoot 110 kV substation, construction of 38 km 220 kV
         transmission line from Noore Jahad to Pul-e-Hashemi, and construction of 220kV Pul-e-Hashemi
         substation. The project could not start these activities because of Taliban takeover, except the

                                                                                                   Page 6 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Herat Electrification Project (P162022)



       installation of solar PV panels to ten hospitals during COVID-19 as back-up power for COVID-19
       patients. The results framework did not include indicators to capture the achievement of the outputs
       related to these activities.
      The project was to finance the procurement and installation of prepaid/smart meters, but it was
       cancelled because “DABS decided to revise the technical specification of meters to fit to the general
       specification of meters for the whole Afghanistan” (ICR, p.12). The results framework did not include
       an indicator to capture the number of prepaid/smart meters to be installed by the project.

Outcomes

      People provided with new or improved electricity service. The target was 230,800 people. The
       transmission line was to provide electricity to 90,000 people and distribution network expansion and
       off-grid pilots were to provide electricity to 140,800 people. At the time of the Taliban takeover in
       August 2021, the project was about to achieve its target of 90,000 people with grid electricity under
       Component 1, and project activities were on-track, despite some delays, to achieve the project target
       of 140,800 people with electricity through distribution network expansion and off-grid solutions under
       Component 2. The project could not achieve these targets because of Taliban takeover when all
       project activities ceased.
      Number of non-residential consumers provided with new or improved electricity service. The
       target was 1,600 non-residential consumers through grid electrification and the project was about to
       achieve this target under Component 1 when the Taliban took power in the country. The achievement
       was only ten.
      The number of girl schools with electricity service. The target was five, but the project could not
       connect any school to electricity.

At the time of the Taliban takeover in August 2021, the project was on track to achieve its project objectives,
despite delays in the procurement and implementation of activities under both Components 1 and 2. As
explained above, there was only one transformer left for installation under Component 1 to provide electricity
to 90,000 people, and five out of seven contracts under Component 2 were already signed and the sixth
contract was ready to be signed. With the extension of the project closing date, the project was expected to
achieve all its outputs and increase access to electricity to 230,800 people and 1,600 non-residential
customers. Therefore, the project’s efficacy in achieving the project objective before the Taliban takeover is
rated Substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
The objective was not revised, but official operations ceased after the Taliban takeover on August 15, 2021.

Revised Rationale
For theory of change and project outputs and outcomes please see Objective 1 above.



                                                                                                  Page 7 of 18
                                 Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                 Herat Electrification Project (P162022)



                              Because of the Taliban takeover, all project activities ceased in August 2021. The project could not complete
                              the project activities and achieve the project outcomes, though the transmission line did have the capacity to
                              be used in the post-Taliban period. However, given the tenuous application to supporting new infrastructure,
                              the efficacy of the project in achieving the project objective following the Taliban takeover is rated Negligible.



                              Revised Rating
                              Negligible


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Before the Taliban takeover in August 2021, the project was about to complete the construction of the
                            transmission line and its related substations under Component 1, and, despite some delays, was on track to
                            complete the project activities under Component 2 by the revised project closing date. The technical
                            assistance activities for DABS capacity building and awareness activities on uses of electricity and safety
                            aspects were completed. If the Taliban takeover had not happened, the project would have been expected to
                            complete most of its activities and achieve its outcomes and objective. Therefore, the project’s efficacy before
                            the Taliban takeover in achieving the project objective to provide access to electricity to households,
                            institutions and businesses in selected areas of Herat Province is rated Substantial.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial

                  OBJR1_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
                            Following the Taliban takeover, the project activities ceased without fully achieving the project outputs and
                            outcomes. Thus the project’s achievement of its targets was negligible. Therefore, the project’s efficacy after
                            the Taliban takeover in achieving the project objective to provide access to electricity to households,
                            institutions and businesses in selected areas of Herat Province is rated Negligible.



                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating                          Primary Reason
                            Negligible                                                  External shock


   5. Efficiency
   Economic Analysis



                                                                                                                                   Page 8 of 18
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Herat Electrification Project (P162022)



Although the project objective was output-oriented, the quantifiable benefits for economic analysis conducted at
appraisal were defined as “the increases in welfare that will accrue as households and institutions are connected
to the grid and provided with a secure, cost-effective supply of electricity” (PAD, p.59). These outcomes were
measurable through increases in consumer surplus because of the reduction of the cost of lighting,
information/entertainment, cooking, refrigeration, and motor drives, and the ability to access new services that
were not available or affordable before the access to electricity. Other benefits that were more difficult to
quantify were not included in the economic analysis such as improved education and healthcare, opportunities
for income growth and job creation as businesses increase their production, and reduction in greenhouse gas
emissions as the project was expected to result in lower use of small generators that burnt diesel and more
efficient use of hydropower from Salma Hydropower Plant replacing thermal-generated electricity imports. The
cost of the transmission line and related substations that were to electrify four districts of the Herat Province (i.e.,
activities implemented under Component 1) was included in the cost-benefits analysis in addition to the cost of
maintaining the transmission line and substations. The cost of activities that were to be implemented under
Component 2 were excluded from the analysis as the subprojects to be financed under that component were not
identified at the time of appraisal. The assumptions included in the analysis were realistic, such as number of
new customers connected to the gird, electricity demand growth each year, and avoided use of substitutes. The
benefits were conservative as the analysis did not include some not easily quantifiable benefits. The cost used
in the analysis represented around one third of the total project cost estimated at appraisal. Using these costs
and benefits, the economic analysis at appraisal resulted in an Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR) of 36.4
percent and a Net Present Value (NPV) of USD36.4 million at a 10 percent discount rate. When the same
assumptions were used to cover the whole project, the EIRR increases to 39.1 percent and the NPV to USD92.9
million at a 10 percent discount rate (PAD, p.64).

At project closing, an economic analysis could not be conducted as the project activities were not completed and
the project outcomes did not materialize. The ICR (p.12) states that procurement resulted in a 20 percent saving
in project costs and there were no cost overruns when the project was implemented before the Taliban takeover.
As the project was about to complete, the project activities for the electrification of four districts of Herat
Province, and the project activities under Component 2 were on track to be completed by the revised project
closing date, it would be highly likely that the project would close with an acceptable EIRR and NPV that would
justify the economic viability of the project. However, the project could not achieve any outcomes because of the
sudden interruption of project implementation following the Taliban takeover. The project could only disburse
around 36 percent of the IDA grant. It is also highly unlikely that the Taliban government will complete the
remaining activities, nor maintain the infrastructure that was already built under the project.

Financial Analysis

At appraisal, the project’s financial benefits to DABS were assumed to come from increased revenue resulting
from additional sales of electricity in the four districts of Herat Province. The financial costs were taken as the
capital cost of the project, including taxes and duties, incremental operating and administrative costs, and
incremental costs of importing electricity to meet the increased demand. The calculations resulted in a Financial
Internal Rate of Return (FIRR) of 22.3 percent and NPV of USD17.8 million at a discount rate of 10. When more
customers are assumed to be connected to electricity because of the activities that were to be financed under
Component 2, the FIRR increased to 23.4 percent. At appraisal, it was concluded that the electrification of the
four districts in the Herat Province was a financially attractive option for DABS.

A financial analysis was not conducted at the time of project evaluation because the project outcomes had not
materialized because of the Taliban takeover.



                                                                                                          Page 9 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Herat Electrification Project (P162022)



Administrative and Operational Efficiency

The implementation of the project activities under Component 1 was efficient despite some delays in
procurement. The project procured all main contracts for the electrification of four districts in Herat Province
under Component 1, and the project was about to complete all activities under that component when Taliban
took power in Afghanistan in August 2021. However, there were some moderate inefficiencies in the
implementation of the project activities under Component 2 and 3. By April 2021, when project was restructured,
the main contracts were signed but implementation had not started yet. The implementation of these activities
was partly delayed by the onset of Covid pandemic in March 2020, but the main delay was because of late
identification of subprojects under Component 2. The identification of subprojects took 18 months after project
effectiveness, which eventually led to the one-year project closing date extension. Because of the unstable
security situation and political uncertainty in the Herat Province and Afghanistan, most highly qualified bidders
did not participate in the biddings. This led to procurement delays and procurement of less qualified contractors
and suppliers. However, the ICR does not provide any evidence whether the procurement of those less qualified
contractors and suppliers resulted in poor quality construction of the transmission line and related substations in
the four districts of Herat Province. Lastly, the procurement of prepaid/smart meters was cancelled because of
DABS’s decision to revise the technical specification of meters to fit the general specification of meters installed
in the country. This mismatch between the technical specification to be used in the project and the general
specification used in the country was not identified during project preparation.



Overall, the project’s efficiency in achieving the project objective to provide access to electricity to households,
institutions and businesses in selected areas of Herat Province is rated Modest.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                 Rate Available?             Point value (%)            *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                        100.00
 Appraisal                                                   39.10
                                                                                         Not Applicable
                                                                                        0
 ICR Estimate                                                 0
                                                                                         Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The project objective was highly aligned with the World Bank strategy and relevant to the country context at the
time of project closing. Therefore, the relevance of project objective is rated High. A split assessment was
undertaken to evaluate the project’s efficacy in achieving the project objective before and after the Taliban

                                                                                                        Page 10 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Herat Electrification Project (P162022)



takeover in August 2021. Despite some delay, the project was on track to achieve the project outcomes by the
revised project closing date prior to Taliban takeover. Therefore, the project’s efficacy in achieving the project
objective is rated Substantial for pre-Taliban period. However, after the abrupt cessation of the project activities
following the Taliban takeover, the project could not complete all activities, and expected outcomes did not
materialize. Hence, the project’s efficacy in achieving the project objective is rated Negligible for post-Taliban
takeover period. Because of the absence of the outcomes and moderate administrative and operational
efficiencies, the project’s efficiency in achieving the project objective is rated Modest. These ratings result in an
Outcome rating of Moderately Satisfactory for pre-Taliban period and an Unsatisfactory rating for post-Taliban
period in accordance with the World Bank guidance (p.37). According to the split rating methodology adapted
specifically for the Afghanistan portfolio, the project’s overall outcome is rated Moderately Unsatisfactory. The
calculation of the split rating is given in Table 1 below.

Table 1: Split Rating Calculation

                                                Before Taliban Takeover After Taliban Takeover
 Relevance of Objectives                                                High
 Efficacy                                             Substantial               Negligible
 Efficiency                                                           Modest
 Outcome Rating                                 Moderately Satisfactory       Unsatisfactory
 Outcome Rating Value                                     4                         2
 Amount Disbursed/Undisbursed
                                                    21.71 (disbursed)             38.29 (undisbursed)
 (US$ million)
 Disbursement (%)                                      36.18%                          63.82%
 Weight Value                                           1.4472                        1.2764
 Total Weights                                                  2.7236 (rounds up to 3)
 Overall Outcome Rating                                      Moderately Unsatisfactory (3)
a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Unsatisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The project could not achieve any development outcomes because of the abrupt halt of project activities
following the Taliban takeover in August 2021. The project was able to achieve some project outputs, such
as the construction of the 31.8 km 110 kV line in four districts of Herat Province, but the line was not
energized because the construction of the related substations was incomplete. It is highly unlikely that the
current Taliban government will have the commitment and financial means to complete the pending project
activities. In the unlikely event of the completion of the pending project activities by the Taliban government,
the utility will not be able to efficiently operate the system because of lack of the technical and operational
capacity that was to be strengthened under the technical capacity component of the project. Overall, the risk
is significantly high that the outputs achieved under the project will not be sustained, and the project’s
development outcomes will never materialize.




                                                                                                       Page 11 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Herat Electrification Project (P162022)



8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The expansion and interconnection of the power grid was a top priority for the government to increase the
  electrification rate in Afghanistan as outlined in the Afghanistan National Development Strategy and
  address the drivers of fragility through inclusivity and poverty alleviation. The selection of Herat Province
  for project implementation was appropriate as the province was a smaller scale model of the country
  regarding the quality of electricity supply service and electrification rates. Implementation of the project in
  Herat Province would have provided experience and lessons to be used in similar projects in future
  projects. The project’s approach was simple and straightforward consisting of the construction of
  transmission lines and related substations, expansion of low and medium voltage of distribution lines, and
  installation of off-grid systems. However, the project was not fully ready for implementation. The
  subprojects to be implemented under Component 2 were not identified during project preparation. These
  subprojects under Component 2 were to be identified after grant effectiveness. This led to delays in
  project implementation and weaknesses in the M&E design as most of the indicators did not have
  measurable targets (see section 9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization). The technical assistance
  to be given to DABS was appropriate to strengthen the utility’s capacity in system operation and planning.
  The project benefited from the experience and lessons learned in various World Bank-financed projects
  in the energy sector in Afghanistan, such as consultations with the local communities that were to benefit
  from the project, relevance of the project to the government’s priorities, and adequate planning for
  contingencies to deal with cost overruns. The technical aspects of the project were appropriate. The cost-
  benefit analysis conducted at appraisal was limited to the activities to be implemented under Component
  1. The fiduciary aspects and implementation arrangements of the project were adequate. As some
  subprojects were not identified, a framework approach was adopted for safeguard policy implementation.
  The risks assessment was detailed but the political and governance risk was not adequately identified.
  Even if that risk had been adequately addressed, mitigation measures would have been insufficient when
  Taliban took power in August 2021, but it could have accelerated the identification of the subprojects to
  be implemented under Component 2 (ICR, p.18).

  Overall, the quality at entry is rated Moderately Satisfactory because of moderate shortcomings in the
  preparation and appraisal of the project.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 In-person missions were held twice a year until the onset of the COVID pandemic in March 2020, after
 which the project team supervised the project virtually. However, field visits were limited because of the
 security situation in the project areas. This shortcoming was partially addressed by the verification of
 progress in project implementation by a third-party monitoring agency. Two Task Team Leaders managed
 the project from appraisal through to project closing. A review of the Aide Memoirs and Implementation
 Status and Results Reports (ISRs) showed that the project team closely monitored the project
 implementation, which was adequately reflected in these documents. The candor and quality of
 performance reporting was high. The key issues regarding project implementation including fiduciary and

                                                                                                      Page 12 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Herat Electrification Project (P162022)



 safeguards implementation were reported in detail. While the project team’s primary focus was on various
 delays in the procurement and issues related to contract management processes, the project team’s focus
 on the achievement of the development impact of the project was sufficient as reported in the ISRs. The
 project team proactively acted to restructure the project and extend the project closing date to allow time
 for the completion of project activities because of slow progress in procurement. The project team provided
 targeted contract management trainings to the project managers and the procurement department followed
 by a training to the DABS’ evaluation committee to address procurement issues (ISR No:7, p.2). The
 procurement improved significantly following the Mid Term Review in March 2021, which was conducted
 virtually. Eleven out of thirteen contracts were concluded, and the remaining two contracts were in the
 advanced stage of procurement when project activities were abruptly halted because of the Taliban
 takeover in August 2021. Following the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic, the project team proactively
 supported the installation of solar PV panels and battery storage systems at ten hospitals in Herat Province
 to improve electricity supply serving COVID-19 patients. The project team’s supervision of fiduciary aspects
 of the project was sufficient. Following the control weaknesses identified by the external auditors, the
 project team discussed these weaknesses with the PIU and an action plan was agreed and implemented to
 comply with the audit recommendations. The project team’s supervision of the safeguard aspects of the
 project was also sufficient. However, the project team did not use the project restructuring as an
 opportunity to revise the results framework and capture the project outputs and outcome following the
 identification of the subprojects to be financed under Component 2 (see Section 9.b M&E Implementation).



 Overall, the quality of the project team’s supervision of the project is rated Satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 While the project objectives were output-oriented, they were clearly specified and sufficiently challenging
 for an intervention in a FCV status country. The theory of change was sound, and causal links from project
 activities to the achievement of project outputs and outcomes were direct and valid, but it was not
 adequately reflected in the results framework. The indicators did not adequately capture the project outputs
 and outcomes related to the activities under Component 2 as they were not identified during project
 appraisal. Most of the indicators recorded the achievement of the targets set for activities under
 Component 2 as “Yes” or “No.” These indicators were not measurable. The indicators related to the
 achievement of project outputs under Component 1 were measurable, time-bound, relevant, achievable,
 and specific. The project development objective indicators captured the number of people and non-
 residential customers who were to gain access to electricity because of the project’s intervention, but the
 results framework did not include any indicator measuring the impact of the project on the availability,

                                                                                                    Page 13 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Herat Electrification Project (P162022)



 reliability, quality, efficiency, and affordability of electricity supply. The M&E arrangements were in place.
 DABS was responsible for overall M&E implementation, and its local offices were responsible for data
 collection. A Third-Party Monitoring Agency (TPMA) to be hired under the project was to verify the M&E
 data on a quarterly basis.



b. M&E Implementation
  DABS implemented data collection to the extent possible, and the TPMA verified the data; the data was
  reliable and of good quality. Indicators that were measurable were measured and reported, such as the
  length of the transmission line constructed. The weaknesses in the indicators in capturing the
  achievement of the outputs and outcomes under Component 2 were not addressed during project
  implementation following the identification of the subprojects. For example, the results framework was not
  revised to include indicators to measure the length of the 220 kV transmission line and the number of
  related substations to be constructed and number of solar panels and smart/prepaid meters to be
  installed under Component 2. The indicators with “Yes” or “No” results were not revised to be more
  specific following the identification of subprojects. The results framework was not revised to include
  indicators to measure the immediate impact of the project on the availability, reliability, quality, efficiency,
  and affordability of electricity supply. However, it should be noted that because of the nature of such
  infrastructure investments, the achievement of the indicators was expected to materialize towards the
  end of project implementation when the transmission lines and related substations and mini-grids were
  energized. As noted in the ICR (p.11) “[t]he Project was just ‘a transformer away’ from providing 90,000
  people and 1,600 non-residential customers with new or improved electricity service’ when project
  activities were abruptly halted following the Taliban takeover.



c. M&E Utilization
  The M&E data related to the progress of the civil works was reported to the World Bank quarterly. Such
  data was utilized to evaluate the progress towards achieving the project outputs and outcomes. The
  M&E findings led to the extension of the project closing date by one year as the implementation of the
  activities under Component 2 was delayed. As the project had not completed the project activities when
  Taliban took power in Afghanistan, the project outputs and outcomes did not materialize; therefore, there
  was no M&E data to provide evidence of outcomes achieved by the project.

  Overall, while there were some moderate shortcomings in the M&E design and implementation, the M&E
  system as designed and implemented was sufficient to assess the achievement of the objectives and
  test the links in the results chain.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards

                                                                                                       Page 14 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Herat Electrification Project (P162022)



  At appraisal, the project was classified as Category B under Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) and
  triggered Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) and Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) safeguard
  policies.

  Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01): The project was classified as Category B because of the
  potential site specific and manageable impacts of the works at substations and installation of transmission
  and distribution lines on the environment. These impacts were identified as the disposal of construction
  waste, changes to localized drainage patterns, removal of trees and vegetation, and handling of chemicals
  and transformer oil during operations. A framework approach was adopted because subprojects under
  Component 2 were not identified during appraisal. An Environmental and Social Management Framework
  (ESMF) was prepared during appraisal to guide the preparation of Environmental and Social Impact
  Assessment (ESIA) and site-specific Environment and Social Management Plans (ESMPs) before the start
  of any civil works. The ESMF was disclosed on the World Bank’s website on May 1, 2017, and in country on
  May 2, 2017. Before the start of the project, DABS had appointed safeguards focal points. During project
  implementation, an ESIA and ESMPs were prepared for project sites. The PIU maintained a dedicated
  safeguard unit through to project closing. The project did not record any health and safety issues or fatalities
  during implementation. The project was in compliance with the Environmental Assessment safeguard
  policy.

  Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11): The project triggered this safeguard policy because of the
  presence of significant cultural resources in the project districts selected under the first component. At
  appraisal, it was assessed that discovery of archaeological sites was possible as chance finds. The ESMF
  included screening provisions for assessing the potential impacts of subprojects and provided guidance for
  the preparation of cultural heritage management plans. A Chance Find Procedure was also prepared in line
  with the requirements of the national laws and regulations (PAD, p.28). The ICR does not report the
  implementation of this safeguard policy.

  Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12): The project triggered this safeguard policy because of the
  possibility of land or other asset acquisition in densely populated areas for the construction of the
  transmission and distribution lines, and substations. The ESMF guided the preparation of an abbreviated
  Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) for the 110 kV Karokh Transmission Line. The ICR (p.17) states that the
  project implementation unit provided “reports on RAP implementation compliance” and that “the project was
  generally compliant with the World Bank’s social requirements/policies” but does not provide detailed
  information about the implementation of this safeguard policy. The ISRs recorded that physical
  displacement/relocation or economic displacement was not expected because of project activities.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management

  The Head of Finance of the Project Implementation Unit (PIU) had overall responsibility for project financial
  management. DABS hired one finance officer and one cashier within three months after project
  effectiveness as planned. The PIU submitted interim financial reports on time, and they were acceptable to
  the World Bank. An independent firm audited the project annually. The external auditors’ opinions were
  unqualified, but some shortcomings were identified, such as the absence of a committee to perform
  physical verification of assets, absence of records of consumable assets, and shortcomings in the project

                                                                                                   Page 15 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Herat Electrification Project (P162022)



   staff record management and personnel files. These shortcomings had not been addressed by the time the
   project abruptly halted because of the Taliban takeover in August 2021. The hiring of an internal audit
   specialist was also delayed. There were no known issues of corruption or misuse of funds associated with
   the project.

   Procurement

   Procurement was conducted in accordance with the Bank procurement regulations. The majority of the
   main contracts were awarded prior to the suspension of project activities in August 2021. However, there
   were delays in the procurement of contracts under Component 2 because of late identification of
   subprojects after loan effectiveness. It took 18 months for the identification of subprojects rather than one
   year as planned at appraisal. The onset of the COVID pandemic in March 2020 also adversely affected the
   procurement process because of the country-wide lockdown until June 2020. These delays led to a one-
   year extension of the project closing date. There were also delays in the evaluation of bids and
   modification of contracts (ICR, p.17). The procurement of the prepaid/smart meters was cancelled because
   of the decision of DABS to revise the technical specifications in accordance with the technical
   specifications used nationwide.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None.



d. Other
   None.



11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                           ICR                 IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
                                  Moderately          Moderately
Outcome
                                  Unsatisfactory      Unsatisfactory
                                  Moderately
Bank Performance                                      Moderately Satisfactory
                                  Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                    Substantial         Substantial

Quality of ICR                    ---                 Substantial


12. Lessons

This review has drawn two lessons based on the information in the ICR.



                                                                                                    Page 16 of 18
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Herat Electrification Project (P162022)



Lack of project preparedness before grant effectiveness in an FCV country can significantly
adversely affect project implementation and the achievement of project objectives. This is a
lesson that is applicable to every project. However, the experience gained in this project shows that
full project preparedness is extremely important for a smooth project implementation and the
achievement of project objectives in FCV countries. For example, although DABS had already
initiated the tendering process for the activities to be financed under Component 1 before grant
effectiveness, there were still delays in the procurement of the contracts. Additionally, the project
was to identify the subprojects to be financed under Component 2 after grant effectiveness. There
were significant delays in the identification of subprojects and procurement of contracts because of a
lack of capacity at DABS, lack of interest from bidders, and the onset of COVID-19 pandemic.

Political and economic instability in FCV countries can lead to insufficient interest from
qualified bidders that can be partly addressed by simpler procurement procedures. Because
of the political and economic instability in Afghanistan, there was insufficient interest from qualified
bidders to the tenders. Difficulty in attracting the interest of qualified international firms resulted in
procurement and implementation delays, especially related to the consultancy work for the
preparation of the Grid Code. The ICR notes that this difficulty can be addressed through
implementation of simpler procurement procedures to ensure efficiency in terms of time and effort
for bidders, and this can be further supported by “bidder events and conferences to build interest
from bidders and to get useful feedback from them for the preparation of procurement strategies”
(ICR, p.19).



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is candid and concise and follows most of the Bank Guidance and its Appendix L, Preparation of ICR
in FCV Setting for IPF Operations. The ICR provides a detailed overview of the project. The report is results-
oriented to the extent possible given the abrupt cessation of project activities following the Taliban takeover in
August 2021. The report is internally consistent; there is a logical linking and integration of various parts of the
report. The reference to the project’s theory of change helps the reader to understand how the ratings have
been reached. The narrative supports the outcome ratings, but there were mistakes in calculating the overall
outcome rating for the period after Taliban takeover (A high rating for Relevance of Objectives and negligible
ratings for both efficacy and efficiency give a Highly Unsatisfactory rating for Outcome but the ICR rated this
Unsatisfactory). The Fiduciary Compliance and Safeguards sections could have benefited from a more detailed
discussion. The entries in the “Lessons and Recommendations” are based on specific experiences of the
project and sufficiently linked to the report’s narrative.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial


                                                                                                        Page 17 of 18
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
Herat Electrification Project (P162022)




                                                                       Page 18 of 18
