     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     RY: Yemen Emergency Crisis Response Proj (P159053)



                                                                                Report Number: ICRR0023450

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P159053                                   RY: Yemen Emergency Crisis Response Proj

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Yemen, Republic of                        Social Protection & Jobs


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-D1320,IDA-D1620,IDA-D1970,IDA- 31-Aug-2018                                              887,397,603.19
 D4180,IDA-D4620,IDA-D4630,TF-
 A9572,TF-B4056

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 19-Jul-2016                               31-Mar-2022

                                          IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                          50,000,000.00                                   32,138,190.00

 Revised Commitment                          871,720,498.65                                   32,138,190.00

 Actual                                      887,397,603.19                                   32,138,190.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator        Group
 Aliza M. Belman Inbal      Denise A. Vaillancourt       Eduardo Fernandez             IEGHC (Unit 2)
                                                         Maldonado




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   As stated in Annex B (p. 12) of the original Disbursement Agreement between the International Development
   Association/IDA (or the “Disbursing Organization”) and the United Nations Development Programme/UNDP
   (or the “Receiving Organization”) for the benefit of the Republic of Yemen (the “Beneficiary”), co-signed on
   August 2, 2016, the objective of the project was “… to provide short-term employment and access to selected
   basic services to the most vulnerable and preserve existing implementation capacity of service delivery

                                                                                                 Page 1 of 26
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     RY: Yemen Emergency Crisis Response Proj (P159053)



   programs.” In 2017, as part of a second restructuring and Additional Financing (AF) to respond to the
   worsening situation in Yemen, a fourth objective was added “… to provide emergency cash transfers to the
   poor and vulnerable in response to the food crisis.” (Financing Agreement, Second Additional Financing, May
   2017, p.6).

   Notwithstanding the addition of a fourth objective under AF2, a split evaluation will not be undertaken. None of
   the original indicators and targets were removed or reduced. Moreover, this is in keeping with ICR/ICRR
   guidelines, which note that, if a project became more ambitious overall, a split rating is usually not
   applied. Instead, such an operation can be assessed on the basis of the more ambitious revised outcomes
   and outcome targets.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  19-May-2017

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   1. Labor Intensive Works and Community Services (Original IDA Grant $45.0 million; Total $375.5;
   Actual expenditure: $386.75 million) (According to the ICR, Actual expenditure was more than the
   allocated amount due to utilization of exchange rate gains). This component endeavored to (a) provide
   income support to targeted communities through temporary employment opportunities, (b) increase the
   productive assets and means of livelihood of beneficiary households and communities and improve access
   to community and social services, and (c) preserve the implementation capacity of the two key national
   social service delivery programs, the Social Fund for Development (SFD) and Public Works Program
   (PWP). Project subcomponents included cash-for-work and youth-targeted community services, as well as
   referrals to nutrition services; funding of small community infrastructure work; and a range of support
   measures for small and medium-size enterprises (SMEs), including support for microfinance institutions
   (MFIs), cancellation of SME debt and provision of grants, training/technical assistance, and in-kind support
   to revive their livelihoods, increase food production and reduce the prevalence of food insecurity (PAD, p.6)

   2. Project Management and Monitoring (Original IDA Grant $5.0 million; Total $24.5 million; Actual
   expenditure $24.80 million) The project was conducted under the framework of the 2008 World Bank and
   UN Fiduciary Principles Accord for Crisis and Emergency Situations (SecM2008-0404) (FPA), which
   enables the Bank to contract with designated UN agencies to support emergency recovery programs in
   weak-capacity environments. Under the FPA, all funds transferred by the Bank to the UN agency are
   received, administered, managed, expended, reported on, and audited, exclusively in accordance with the
   policies and procedures of such UN agency (including relating to its environmental, social and resettlement
   policies) in a manner consistent with the standards set out in the FPA. In accordance with this agreement,
   this component supported project management, monitoring, and evaluation (M&E) and financed UNDP’s

                                                                                                    Page 2 of 26
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    RY: Yemen Emergency Crisis Response Proj (P159053)



  general management support (indirect costs), direct project management and supervision, third-party
  monitoring (TPM), and project assessments/evaluations (PAD, p.10). The subsequent addition of a third
  component for emergency cash transfers (see below under Revised Components) was governed under a
  separate agreement with UNICEF, with the latter agency responsible for all project management and
  monitoring for the component.

  Revised Components:

  The two original components were not revised during the course of the project. However, in AF1 (January
  2017) and AF4 (May 2019), resources allocated to these components were increased significantly.

  In addition, in AF2 (May 2017) a new component was added:

  3. Emergency Cash Transfer (IDA Grant (AF2) US$200.0 million; Total US$471.62 million; Actual
  expenditure US$475.80 million). This component was added due to the worsening humanitarian situation
  related to the ongoing conflict, and the emergence of diseases such as cholera (2016 and 2017), dengue
  fever (2018-2020), and COVID-19 (2020). The component financed Emergency Cash Transfers in
  response to the heightening food insecurity crisis, with UNICEF as the grant recipient and implementing
  agency. The component also supported monitoring of cash transfers through consultancy services, third
  party monitoring and grievance and case management (Financing Agreement, Second AF, May 2017). As
  itemized in Section 2d, subsequent AFs (AF3 December 2018 and AF5, October 2020) provided additional
  financing for further cash transfers under this component.




e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost. The total project cost was $887.4 million, eight and one half times the original estimate of
  $50 million. This was due to the provision of considerable additional financing during the course of project
  implementation, which expanded the scope of the original components and added a third component.

  Project Financing. The project was originally financed by an IDA grant of 35.7 million SDRs ($50 million
  equivalent). Four AFs, itemized below, brought the total amount of IDA grant financing up to 610.9 million
  SDRs ($839.60 million equivalent). The project also benefited from two multi-donor trust funds: TF A9572
  in the amount of $8.58 million; and TF B4056 in the amount of $23.56 million (funding a fifth AF). All five of
  the IDA grants (original and four AFs) and the two multi-donor trust funds were 100% disbursed.

  Key Dates. The project was approved on July 19, 2016, became effective less than a month later on
  August 2, 2016, underwent a mid-term review on May 27, 2018, and was closed on March 31, 2022, three
  years and seven months after the original closing date of August 31, 2018. The project was restructured
  seven times, against the backdrop of a continually worsening situation in the Republic of Yemen and, in
  consequence, growing need. The following were the dates and details of the restructurings:




                                                                                                    Page 3 of 26
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     RY: Yemen Emergency Crisis Response Proj (P159053)



       1. AF1 (January 2017): A further SDR 184,700,000 ($250 million equivalent) was made available to the UNDP
            benefit of the Republic of Yemen, enabling significant expansion of program scale. As part of the restructu
            relevant targets were greatly increased and new targets were added, such as “Number of people (women a
            children) who benefitted from nutrition services” in order to better measure program outcomes.
       2.   AF2 (May 2017): An additional SDR 145,900,000 ($200 million) was provided to UNICEF to fund a new co
            to provide cash assistance to reduce the vulnerability of eligible beneficiaries and to enable target househo
            purchase food. In addition, the grant funded the engagement of TPM Agent(s), Payment Agency(ies) and G
            Redress Mechanism firm(s) and covered administrative costs for cash transfers. The PDO was expanded
            the enlarged scope of the project and established new output and outcome indicators to measure results of
            component. None of the original indicators or targets was adjusted as part of this AF. AF2 underwent thre
            restructurings (August 2017, February 2018 and July 2018), in all cases involving minor reallocation of proc
            among withdrawal categories, due to changing costs and exchange rates, without any resultant change in t
            or nature of project activities, nor in indicators or targets.
       3.   AF3 (December 2018): A supplemental grant of SDR 100,400,000 (US$140 million equivalent) was provide
            UNICEF to support additional cash transfers to the designated beneficiaries under Component 3 of the proj
            changes were made to targets as a result of this AF, as they reflected number of beneficiaries and not cum
            amounts distributed. AF3 was restructured in June 2019 to reduce UNICEF’s indirect costs and reallocate
            surplus to cash transfers and a second time (September 2019) to extend the grant closing date from Septe
            2019 to June 2020 to accommodate delays in contracting outcome assessment of the emergency cash tran
            component.
       4.   AF4 (May 2019): This grant scaled up financing for the project by another SDR 144,200,000 ($200 million
            equivalent), including scaling up of the Cash-for-Work component. AF4 extended the project closing date t
            September 2021 and included increase of the PDO1 targets to reflect this additional investment.
       5.   AF5 (October 2020): AF5 was a US$23.56 million contribution from the United States Department of State
            the Yemen Emergency Multi Donor Trust Fund to enable a tenth and final payment cycle to component 3
            beneficiaries. The AF’s original closing date was April 2021 but this was postponed until July 2021 in a res
            (December 2020).
       6.   In addition, UNICEF received a grant from the Multi Donor Trust Fund in the amount of $8.58 million to sup
            activities to help mitigate the growing food insecurity in Yemen.
       7.   A final restructuring in August 2021 extended the project closing date from September 2021 to March 2022
            to enable completion of activities under all components.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The project is highly relevant to current country conditions. The Yemen Emergency Crisis Response
Project (ECRP) was conceived as an emergency response to the rapidly deteriorating situation in Yemen,
which remains dire due to the ongoing conflict. According to the FY2022-2023 Yemen Country
Engagement Note (CEN), 24.1 million people, over 80 percent of the population, remain in need of
humanitarian assistance with over 17 million people (more than half of the population) experiencing acute
food insecurity and 2 million children acutely malnourished, amidst conditions of declining household

                                                                                                    Page 4 of 26
                       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                       RY: Yemen Emergency Crisis Response Proj (P159053)



incomes, destruction of local food production and disruption of domestic food supply chains. (CEN FY22-
23, p.31) Moreover, the war has led to a deterioration in access to utilities, with close to 18 million people
lacking access to safe water and sanitation. In recent years, the situation has been compounded by
massive flooding and worsening displacement, with over 4 million internally displaced persons (IDPs) as of
early 2022 (CEN FY22-23, p.7).

The PDO is also highly relevant to the Bank’s current strategy for Yemen.             The project is strongly in
line with the Bank’s MENA peace building strategy (Building for Peace: Reconstruction for Security, Equity
and Sustainable Peace in MENA. World Bank, 2020), which recognizes one of the Bank’s primary
contributions in fragile and conflict states such as Yemen, as “supporting legitimate and inclusive
institutions.” This strategy is also found in the FY2022-2023 Yemen Country Engagement Note, which
states: “At this critical juncture, the World Bank Group’s priority is to stay engaged across multiple possible
scenarios, with the overarching goal of supporting the people of Yemen and preserving the institutions that
serve them.” The CEN FY22-23 lists the World Bank Group’s focus areas in Yemen as: (i) supporting basic
service delivery and human capital preservation; and (ii) promoting food security, resilience, and livelihood
opportunities (p.4). These two goals underpin the rationale of the project, which focused on providing short-
term employment, addressing food security challenges and providing basic service delivery and
infrastructure and services through collaboration with and budgetary support to existing governmental
programs.

The World Bank’s previous experience in the relevant sectors in Yemen, and in the design and
development of emergency operations in Yemen and in other Fragile, Conflict and Violence (FCV)
countries rendered it well-equipped to take on this project. At the time of the project launch, the Bank
had already been working with and investing in the two government partners, PWP and SFD, for two
decades and was well positioned, through its partnership with the UN, to fund activities to support
institutional preservation of these two well-functioning programs. The Bank’s partnership with the UN under
the FPA enabled it to support basic service provision and the preservation of existing institutions, at a time
when there was no staff presence in the country due to the conflict. The application of FPA followed the
successful implementation of the Horn of Africa Emergency Health and Nutrition Project, the only IDA
project for which the FPA had been used to date. (PAD, p.1)

The relevance of project interventions was also confirmed by both the TPM of subprojects
completed under Component 1 and the external evaluation commissioned by the UNDP. The UNDP’s
endline evaluation (Final Evaluation of the Yemen Emergency Crisis Response Project. UNDP, 2022.)
found that the project was highly relevant, both in terms of selection of subprojects, and overall beneficiary
satisfaction from the aid modality of cash for work (CFW), which enabled beneficiaries to gain skills and be
useful in their community.




Rating Relevance TBL




Rating
High




                                                                                                          Page 5 of 26
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  RY: Yemen Emergency Crisis Response Proj (P159053)



   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               To provide short-term employment to the most vulnerable.

               Rationale
               The theory of change for achieving this objective involves the provision of budget support to Yemen’s capable
               and operational PWP and SFD programs in order to sustain and expand their service delivery activities so
               that they could respond to the needs of vulnerable populations for short-term employment, while maintaining
               their capacity and operationality. In support of Objective 1, the project, through these programs, aimed to
               provide short-term CFW opportunities to vulnerable people and provided training/short-term employment for
               youth. In addition, by paying off the outstanding microfinance loans of SMEs, including farms and fisheries,
               and providing support needed to rehabilitate and revitalize damaged businesses, the project aimed to provide
               another source of wage employment to the most vulnerable. As laid out in the theory of change presented in
               the ICR (p.10), this support was expected to culminate in increased access to short-term employment for the
               most vulnerable. While not explicitly stated in the theory of change, the undertaking of these activities and
               the achievement of this objective was intended to protect targeted poor and conflict-affected families and
               communities from falling into extreme poverty.

               Outputs/Intermediate Outcomes

                     The project provided funding to SFD and PWP programs to finance the costs of delivering services to
                      vulnerable populations.
                     The project also paid staff salaries.
                     Staff capacity of SFD and PWP was maintained, and indeed further expanded, through the continued
                      application of their skills and experience as they continued to deliver critical services to substantially
                      more beneficiaries with substantially increased funding.

               Outcomes

                     450,257 persons benefitted directly from wage employment, exceeding the original target of
                      58.700 and substantially achieving the formally revised target of 470,000 (96% achievement). Of
                      these, 29.68% were female (target: 30%), 19.6% IDPs/Returnees (target 15%), and 60.59% youth
                      (target: 30%) and 1.02% were persons with disabilities (3% target). According to the country team,
                      disability targets were introduced only in AF4, and it was not possible to retroactively gather data on
                      percentage of disabled persons benefitting from CFW programs prior to AF4. As such, the reported
                      percentage of disabled persons may not be fully representative of the entire project period.
                     10,112,274 working days (target 9,365,600) were created under subcomponent 1.1 (Cash-for-Work
                      and Youth-targeted Community Services) of the project and 2,098,187 working days (target: 2 million)
                      under subcomponent 1.2 (Small Community Infrastructure) both exceeding the upwardly revised
                      targets. Percentages of youth, IDP/returnees and female beneficiaries met or exceeded targets.
                     Indirect beneficiaries from income support (ie family members of workers) numbered 1,988,148 under
                      subcomponent 1.1 and 838,149 under subcomponent 1.2, both exceeding targets.

                                                                                                                   Page 6 of 26
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   RY: Yemen Emergency Crisis Response Proj (P159053)




      63,332 individuals benefitted from farm, fishery and animal production-based wage employment (short
       or long term, including informal), exceeding the increased target of 46,100. Of these, 20% were
       female, in accordance with targets.

The project also provided training and work experience to youth, which is likely to contribute to their future
employability. Young graduates were trained and provided with short-term employment opportunities in
diverse sectors: nearly 4,900 youth (45 percent female) worked as facilitators/advocates for community
socioeconomic development; 2,771 youth (51 percent female) as short-term teachers; and over 15,200 youth
(73.5 percent female) as community health workers (ICR, p.20).

The UNDP’s external final evaluation of the project (p.35) raised some concern with regard to the minimal
levels of support given to some individuals, particularly with regard to number of days of employment. “In
terms of results, the actual effects seem to be uneven, notably since the support provided was relatively small
and for a few days of work only – with an average of 22 days based on the ratio working
days/beneficiaries.” When asked by IEG about this criticism, the task team provided the following
response: “..to maximize coverage and reduce widespread and increasing food insecurity, the project limited
workdays and increased beneficiaries. The project was implemented amidst widespread damage to basic
infrastructure, which significantly reduced employment opportunities. Although the TPM reports indicated that
beneficiaries were satisfied with the payments and the majority indicated that they used the amounts to
purchase basic needs (mainly food and medicine), there were concerns as employment opportunities were
short-term while the crises were persisting.” The ECRP task team noted that the project “had equipped the
beneficiaries (majority of them are unskilled) with skills and experiences that would help most of them
continue finding other opportunities for income.” As no measures were included in the results framework of
the impact of day labor on household welfare, it is unclear the extent to which short-term employment was an
important survival mechanism for beneficiaries during the project period.




Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To provide access to selected basic services to the most vulnerable.



Rationale


                                                                                                 Page 7 of 26
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   RY: Yemen Emergency Crisis Response Proj (P159053)



The theory of change for this objective involved the using cash for work and cash for nutrition programs in
order to train and support service provision to communities. This included:

1. Provision of a range of services, including referrals to nutrition services, creation of Village Community
Councils (VCC), and development, through labor intensive works, of communal public goods such as
irrigation, water harvesting, rehabilitation of agricultural terraces, maintenance and improvement of village
access roads, improvement of drinking water resources, watershed management, agricultural inputs, or
others based on the priority needs identified by each targeted community.

2. Subprojects providing income opportunities, training and work experience to youth in the 16 to 25 year age
bracket, engaging them in the delivery of community services, including literacy, alternative schooling,
nutrition services, planting trees, paving of roads, cleaning shorelines, and in youth initiatives promoting the
protection of human capital through special attention to nutrition-related interventions.

 3. Relief of the operating deficit of rural-based MFIs, to enable them to sustain their levels of capacity and
outreach, and continue to provide the financial services needed by the poor.

Outputs/Intermediate Outcomes

      5 MFIs benefitted from the cash support against a target of 9 (revised from the original target of
       7). According to the ICR, the revision of the target from 7 to 9 was an “error”. [6] Of the 7 that were
       originally targeted by the project, one of the MFIs was dropped from the project due to fraudulent
       practices, and another when the area in which the MFI is located in Taiz City was inaccessible as a
       result of heavy conflict. According to the ICR (p.24) “..the actual target was six MFIs, as four MFIs
       provided support through the first AF and AF4 were the same MFIs targeted under the parent project.
       The first AF and AF4 erroneously increased the number of MFI’s to nine."
      As reported under Objective 1, 10,112,274 working days (target 9,365,600) were created under
       subcomponent 1.1 (Cash-for-Work and Youth-targeted Community Services) of the project and
       2,098,187 working days (target: 2 million) under subcomponent 1.2 (Small Community Infrastructure)
       both exceeding the upwardly revised targets. Percentages of youth, IDP/returnees and female
       beneficiaries met or exceeded targets.

Outcomes

      5,638,389 persons received access to key services provided through CFW programs, including both
       beneficiaries of services provided through the program and those who benefitted from community
       infrastructure projects greatly outstripping the revised target of 2,760,400 after program expansion
       in AF4. 50% of beneficiaries were women, in line with revised targets but 0% were persons with
       disabilities, despite a target of 8%.
      5,804 microfinance clients (SMEs) were supported by the project, substantially achieving the target
       of 6,000 (97 percent achievement), of which 47% were female, against a target of 50% (94 percent
       achievement).
      678,723 women and children benefitted from nutrition services, provided by community health
       educators trained and financed through the cash for nutrition activity, over three times the formally
       revised expanded target of 216,191. Of these, 275,197 were women and 403,526 children. Only
       1.36% of beneficiaries were persons with disabilities (target: 3.5%).



                                                                                                     Page 8 of 26
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   RY: Yemen Emergency Crisis Response Proj (P159053)




      Public works funded by subcomponent 1.1 delivered above-target results, including: 536,207 cubic
       meters of water schemes constructed/rehabilitated as part of the public works funded by the project;
       10,590ha. of agricultural land and terraces rehabilitated against an upwardly revised target of
       3,530ha.; and 397km of roads improved.
      Public works funded by subcomponent 1.2 led to the following achievements: 362,423m3 of water
       schemes constructed/rehabilitated; 13,326ha of agricultural land protected; and 2,552 classrooms
       rehabilitated. All of these significantly surpassed project goals.
      5,804 microfinance clients (SMEs) were supported by the project, substantially achieving the target
       of 6,000 (97 percent achievement), of which 47% were female, against a target of 50% (94 percent
       achievement).

Amongst the notable achievements of the project not included in the results framework:

      Over 3,000 VCCs and village resilience plans were developed.
      Over 9,700 self-help initiatives, including over 2,200 youth led community initiatives, were
       implemented.
      According to the ICR (p23), the cash for nutrition services decreased the share of children diagnosed
       with moderate or severe malnutrition. It has also led to improved hygiene practices and maternal and
       child health; lessened the spread of disease; contributed directly and indirectly to strengthen the role
       of women in the communities and reduced their vulnerabilities in a challenging context; and reduced
       selling of assets. Of the cash transfer recipients, over 178,300 beneficiaries, including 46,956 women
       and 69,695 children were assessed to be at risk of malnutrition and referred to treatment in nearby
       health facilities; and 4,662 acutely malnourished lactating and pregnant women and 4,678
       malnourished children were provided cash assistance to be able to access health facilities far from
       their residence. Furthermore, the women health workers, trained by the project, delivered about
       193,000 public health education sessions and family home visits, attended by over 242,800 women.
       Topics included basic health issues, such as breastfeeding, general and personal hygiene, nutrition,
       diarrhea, malaria, reproductive health, immunization, and cholera. According to surveys done as part
       of TPM, beneficiary mothers and youth service providers were highly satisfied with the training topics,
       payment process, CT payment amount and timeliness of implementation. This activity is having
       spillover effects, with non-beneficiary households also attending nutritional training sessions and
       sharing knowledge with families and friends, providing long-term benefits to communities. An impact
       evaluation on the cash for nutrition services completed by the International Food and Policy Research
       Institute (IFPRI) and the World Bank in April 2018, found that the cash for nutrition program increased
       household purchases, expenditure on food items, significantly improving women and children’s dietary
       diversity; and decreased the rate of children diagnosed with malnutrition by 7-10 percentage points,
       and severe acute malnutrition by 3-5 percentage points. While the year 2018 is only two years into
       the project’s almost six-year implementation period, it provides an indication of the benefits of the cash
       for nutrition support under the project.
      Beneficiary surveys that were done as part of the TPM found that 90 percent of surveyed beneficiaries
       of UNDP implemented activities expressed satisfaction with the project’s participatory approach, and
       97 percent with the time in which registered grievances were addressed.




                                                                                                   Page 9 of 26
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   RY: Yemen Emergency Crisis Response Proj (P159053)




Rating
High


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective

To preserve existing implementation capacity of service delivery programs.


Rationale
The theory of change for preserving the implementation capacity of the PWP and SFD involved employing
these two agencies as the main implementing partners for project activities. A capacity assessment done by
UNDP before the project launch determined that there was adequate capacity within these two programs to
serve as implementing partners, and thus no capacity support was provided for in the PAD or mandated in
the Additional Financing agreements. However, as the project unfolded and expanded, and needs were
identified, capacity building activities were carried out with these two agencies, as detailed below.

Outputs/Intermediate Outcomes

Same as those reported under Objective 1, plus: 100 percent of PWP and SFD core staff were maintained, in
accordance with the revised (expanded) target from AF1.

Outcomes

The PWP and SFD also benefitted during the project from needs-based capacity building support, although
such support was not originally planned as part of the PAD or additional financings. According to the ICR (p.
31), amongst the primary ways in which the project supported institutional capacity were:

        Monitoring, fiduciary and safeguards capacities were enhanced with technical assistance and training
           from the World Bank, UNDP, and UNICEF.
          The PWP procurement process was strengthened by updating contract documents.
          Through partnership in the ECRP, the SFD and PWP developed enhanced capacity to adapt their
           business model and implement key basic services and provide emergency response during protracted
           conflict and ensure more precise targeting and inclusivity of affected groups, and integrate a conflict
           sensitive approach.
          Both organizations developed/enhanced their complaints handling mechanisms at the national and
           sub-national levels, based on the World Bank grievance handling structure.
          PWP and SFD increased their safeguards-focused field monitoring capacity and benefitted from
           several capacity building activities, which included an international certified Operational Health and
           Safety (OHS) training for eight staff members from UNDP’s Project Management Unit, SFD and PWP
           in 2019, and a training session on the new OHS framework and tools for over thirty senior staff at SFD
           and PWP headquarters and branch offices in April 2019. In response to work site injuries, SFD
           provided two-day safeguards training for 42 staff from their Sana’a branch office, and a four-day
           training targeting 46 headquarters staff. Moreover, 826 staff received OHS training, including 407

                                                                                                   Page 10 of 26
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   RY: Yemen Emergency Crisis Response Proj (P159053)



         project officers and 419 consultants. Under PWP, 1,348 people received OHS training, including 815
         supervision consultants, 312 contractors, 161 technicians and 60 field staff.

SFD enhanced its monitoring capacity by developing a Remote Monitoring System that comprised: (i) a
mobile friendly system (Android app) for off-site data collection that supports bi-directional data
synchronization and online/offline data submission; (ii) a web application that supports online submission of
forms; and (iii) an interactive dashboard to monitor project progress that can be automatically updated with
customizable metrics for reporting. The PWP also diversified its monitoring tools, such as site boxes, hotline,
WhatsApp, and initiated a web-based system to monitor project activities and manage grievances.



Rating
High


OBJECTIVE 4
Objective

To provide emergency cash transfers to the poor and vulnerable in response to the food crisis.


Rationale
This program objective was added in the Second AF of 2017, against the backdrop of a rapidly deteriorating
humanitarian situation in the country and high levels of hunger. The project financed cash transfers to
targeted households on Yemen’s Social Welfare Fund’s (SWF) 2014 beneficiary payment list.

Outputs/Outcomes:

        1,426,761 households on average benefitted from 10 payment cycles of cash transfers over the
         course of the project period, slightly below the target of 1,500,000 households (95% achieved). 47.8%
         of beneficiaries were women, exceeding the target of 40%) (120% achieved). Up until the outbreak of
         COVID-19, receipt of cash transfers was conditional upon attending nutrition information sessions,
         however this requirement was later deferred due to COVID precautions. According to the ICR (p.19),
         the project was 5% below target for this outcome indicator because at project preparation, the de facto
         government only agreed to allow implementation of the cash transfer program by limiting it to SFW’s
         existing list of CT beneficiaries. As this beneficiary list was outdated by ECRP’S implementation in late
         2017, around 11 percent of beneficiaries on the list never interacted with the project, provided
         verification of their identity, or were verified and they did not collect their cash payment, despite
         concerted outreach efforts.
        9,113,064 benefitted from unconditional cash transfers under social safety net programs, exceeding
         the target of 8 million (114 percent achievement). Of these, 4,082,763 (45 percent) were women.
        Beneficiary surveys that were done as part of the TPM found that 100 percent of CT beneficiaries
         (Component 3) reported being consistently highly satisfied with the support they received.




                                                                                                   Page 11 of 26
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                RY: Yemen Emergency Crisis Response Proj (P159053)




                            Rating
                            High


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            In an extremely challenging context, the project reached or exceeded, sometimes by wide margins, almost all
                            of its targets, and accomplished all of its objectives. ECRP provided critical cash assistance targeted to more
                            vulnerable regions and beneficiaries, supported development of community-based infrastructure to meet
                            basic needs, supported youth employment, built community cooperative mechanisms that reinforced social
                            cohesion, preserved and reinforced the capacity of two critical government social assistance programs and
                            helped improve nutrition outcomes for targeted beneficiaries.

                            The project substantially met or exceeded expectations in achieving Objective 1 (to provide short-term
                            employment to the most vulnerable) exceeding most outcome targets and substantially achieving (94 percent
                            or higher achievement) other outcome targets, including number of vulnerable people employed, number of
                            employment days, number of youth trained and employed to provide social services. Considering UNDP’s
                            evaluation raising questions about the adequacy of the number of workdays per beneficiary/impact on
                            household welfare, IEG rates the achievement of this objective as substantial. It also greatly exceeded
                            expectations in achieving Objective 2 (to provide access to selected basic services to the most vulnerable),
                            including nutrition services for vulnerable women and children and construction/rehabilitation of critical
                            infrastructure culminating in a high achievement rating. Objective 3 (to preserve institutional capacity of PWP
                            and SFD) was highly achieved, as capacity was not only maintained, but also further strengthened. Objective
                            4 (to provide emergency cash transfers to the poor and vulnerable) was highly achieved, with the project
                            exceeding targets for number of persons benefitting from unconditional cash transfers under social safety net
                            programs and substantially achieving (95%) targets for households benefitting from emergency cash
                            transfers. IEG considers 95 percent achievement as fully achieved, culminating in a high achievement of this
                            objective, considering that the other related target was exceeded.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            High



    5. Efficiency
   The project was implemented efficiently with a high and fast expenditures rate, despite the rapid and significant
   scaling up of the funding.



                                                                                                                             Page 12 of 26
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       RY: Yemen Emergency Crisis Response Proj (P159053)



A cost-benefit analysis was not conducted at project appraisal or at completion due to data collection
constraints given the highly insecure and volatile situation in the country. The ICR (p.28) notes that, at
the time, the assessment was made that a rapid response was needed in order to protect human and social
capital and any delays in the project appraisal period would likely “prove far costlier from the strategic,
institutional and development perspective.”

A rate of return was calculated at AF1 (for Component 1) to reach at least 100 percent, and at AF2 (for
Component 3) to reach about 400 percent after one year of CT delivery. The ICR (p.28) anticipated that the
ECRP’s rate of return was likely to be far higher due to the follow-on effects of its support for institutional
preservation, as well as the multiplier effect of CFW and cash transfers in the economy with increased demand
for food and services; reduced malnutrition, spread of disease, and deaths; preserved human capital; and
fostered human development. In addition, the ICR noted several other efficiency-related aspects of the
program, including utilizing foreign exchange gains and contingency funds, re-adjusting activities to facilitate
rapid response to the COVID-19 and 2020 flood crises, and partnering with financial institutions used by food
importers to support food import.

The ICR (p.29) also notes that, at appraisal, the World Bank negotiated a lower rate for UN service fees than the
standard, and thereafter negotiated a sliding scale with the UN, which was applied to all projects in Yemen. This
reduced the UN’s standard fees for indirect costs down to 3.0 percent for UNDP and 2.0 Percent for UNICEF.
Overall, administrative costs (M&E, UN direct and indirect costs) under both agencies were six percent of their
total allocations (see Annex 3 -Changes in Project Cost by Component). This is low compared to an average of
around 10–12 percent for most CT programs.

Project implementation was efficient. The project built on the Bank’s previous successful experience of
partnering with UNICEF and the World Health Organization (WHO) in Yemen in the health sector, as well as the
Bank’s longstanding partnership with PWP and SFD, and UNDP’s ongoing partnership with SFD to implement
small-scale CFW interventions during the conflict. This enabled the project to hit the ground running, with very
little time elapsed between project approval and the beginning of disbursements for Component 1’s CFW
Program. Moreover, despite country conditions of extreme instability, the project was able to rapidly absorb
and fully disburse several additional financings over the course of the project, raising the total project budget
from $50 million to over $887 million. While the project closing date was extended several times, these
extensions were related for the most part to the additional financings, with one further six month extension
granted at the end of the project (August 2021) in order to enable completion of activities. In short, the almost
tripling of the project’s implementation period (from 2 years to almost 6 years) enabled it to absorb and
effectively use seventeen times the initial financing (from $50 million to $887 million). Finally, as detailed later
under Quality of Supervision, the project’s robust monitoring mechanisms and efficient feedback loops ensured
that the project team was able to respond quickly to changes on the ground, including through shifting
deployment of funds, as needed


Efficiency Rating
High


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:


                                                                                                      Page 13 of 26
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      RY: Yemen Emergency Crisis Response Proj (P159053)




                               Rate Available?              Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      0
Appraisal                                                   0
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      0
ICR Estimate                                                0
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of the project was assessed to be high, as the project was supportive of the Bank’s regional and
country strategies, addressing acute needs of the population in a worsening conflict context. Efficacy was
assessed as high with the achievement of most objectives surpassed and the rest almost fully achieved (94
percent, 96 percent and 97 percent achieved). Efficiency was high, with evidence presented of how both design
and implementation supported high project returns and ensured implementation efficiency, exceeding
expectations.


a. Outcome Rating
   Highly Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The risk to development outcome is considerable, due to the ongoing conflict in Yemen. Many of the
program’s achievements, including the continued functioning of PWP and SFD, depend on continuing donor
support to fund their operations in order to sustain the benefits of the project’s achievements, including
providing short-term employment, preserving existing implementation capacity and providing emergency
cash transfers. The project's emergency design did not substantially monitor or provide for maintenance and
sustainability of community infrastructure developed through the project. Nevertheless, the project did try to
mitigate risk to development outcomes through the establishment of VCCs to oversee maintenance of the
basic infrastructure built or restored by the project and by building employability through training of youth and
women to provide basic social services. However, both the TPM and UNDP Final Evaluation Report
asserted that funding is essential to ensure adequate maintenance of the built infrastructure.

Acknowledging this need for continued support, an IDA grant of US$203.90 million was approved for the
Emergency Social Protection and COVID Response Project (P173582) on December 17, 2020. The
ESPECRP builds on the objectives of the ECRP and seeks to work with PWP and SFD to provide cash
transfers, including nutrition linked cash transfers, and increased access to basic services and economic
opportunities to food-insecure populations affected by COVID-19, the conflict, and climate-related shocks, as
well as to continue to strengthen the capacity of national institutions.




                                                                                                     Page 14 of 26
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     RY: Yemen Emergency Crisis Response Proj (P159053)



8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  Project design overall was simple and flexible, making possible quick action to address the crisis
  situation. Project design drew heavily on the extensive experience of both the UN partners and
  implementing agencies. Both SFD and PWP had considerable experience working with local
  communities and community-based organizations in implementing small infrastructure and social service
  interventions and building community capacities to maintain and operate these assets.

  Project design reflected both the World Bank’s longstanding engagement in Yemen and the
  Bank’s evolving perceptions and policies with regard to its role in conflict situations. Project
  design prioritized institutional preservation, as mandated by World Bank Group’s 2016 strategy for
  Promoting Peace and Stability for Development in the Middle East and North Africa Region and
  successive Yemen Country Engagement Notes. The program opted to work through subcontracting
  arrangements with the PWP and SFD, with whom the Bank had a two decade track record of investment,
  and who were deemed by the Bank as Yemen’s two most effective social protection delivery agencies.

  The project drew on lessons learned from the successful implementation of the Horn of Africa
  Emergency Health and Nutrition Project, the only IDA project for which the FPA instrument was
  used previously. Contracting specialized UN partner agencies with long track records in Yemen under
  the FPA, enabled the Bank to provide effective emergency response and bridge the gap between the
  humanitarian response and the broader development agenda, and accommodated the need for speed
  and flexibility, which were vital for tackling an emergency crisis.

  To mitigate the “high” risk rating assessed at appraisal, the project was designed with robust
  feedback mechanisms. Citizens and communities were engaged in subproject selection and
  beneficiary selection, preparation, monitoring, operation, and maintenance. UNDP designed monitoring
  and communication activities within communities. Additionally, provisions were made for a TPM agency
  to visit project sites and conduct frequent checks that would inform the need for action. One of the
  benefits of this design was the possibility of strategically deploying day-labor engaged by the project in
  order to address new challenges and needs as they were identified.

  For the most part, project design was robust, correctly identifying needs and challenges and identifying
  risks and mitigation mechanisms. However, there was one critical shortcoming in project design:

  Adequacy of safeguards was given insufficient attention at appraisal. As part of the FPA, Bank
  environmental and social safeguards policies did not apply. Rather, the UNDP’s environmental and social
  guidelines were used for this operation which, according to the PAD, were assessed to be broadly
  consistent with those of the Bank. The PAD did not identify workplace safety as a risk requiring
  mitigation, although it would have been reasonable to do so given that the project was at the time of
  design almost entirely focused on community-based CFW projects. This was an oversight which had
  negative effects. In total, between 2017, and when Bank safeguards were triggered in 2019, nine project
  related fatalities and multiple injuries occurred, including five work related deaths on construction sites
  and the death of a young boy in a trench in a sanitation work site. Subsequent to the triggering of Bank
  safeguards, in May 2019, as well as several other measures taken in 2019 to address safety concerns
  (See Section 10.a), there were no further deaths. It is probable that the likelihood of certain project-
  related fatalities could have been reduced if the project plans had initially recognized workplace safety as
  a significant risk and had incorporated assistance to the UNDP PMU, the PWP, and SFD to enhance

                                                                                                   Page 15 of 26
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     RY: Yemen Emergency Crisis Response Proj (P159053)



  their ability to ensure workplace safety, similar to the efforts implemented from 2019 onward. Moreover,
  the lack of workplace deaths after World Bank safeguards were triggered, presents the question of
  whether the assumption inherent in both the FPA and the PAD, that UNDP safeguards were largely
  comparative to those of the Bank, and thus closer Bank supervision was not needed, was a correct
  assumption.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Supervision arrangements were, for the most part, robust and multi-layered. The project benefitted
 from close supervision by both the World Bank and its UN Partners, including robust use of TPM in order to
 inform ongoing project-related decisions. The Bank team maintained regular virtual contact with
 implementing partners. During the 5 years and 8 months of implementation, five out-of country
 implementation support missions and two virtual missions (due to the COVID-19 pandemic), comprising
 core team members, were carried out separately with UNDP and UNICEF. This allowed the task team to
 maintain oversight of the project, with detailed Aide Memoires produced to capture the key issues and
 outline next steps.

 The project team responded in an agile manner to most challenges that were identified in ongoing
 monitoring. This includes fiduciary challenges, such as identification of instances of fraud, operational
 challenges such as varying intensity of fighting in locations targeted by the conflict, and country level
 challenges (such as outbreaks of cholera, COVID-19 and flooding). The project team responded in a
 flexible and timely manner to these challenges, redeploying resources where necessary to address
 changing needs and conditions.

 Supervision focused on maximizing the project’s development impact and resulted in continuous
 adjustments. (ICR, p.44). As the humanitarian situation progressively worsened over the project period,
 the Bank was proactive in seeking AFs, increasing project budget from US$50 million to over US$887
 million. In addition, funds were redeployed as the situation changed to maximize impact. For example, to
 address the impacts of COVID-19 on a large segment of the population, the cash for nutrition activity under
 subcomponent 1.1 was adapted by reducing the coverage duration from twelve to six months while
 doubling the number of beneficiaries. This resulted in a funding gap of around US$7.0 million, which was
 covered from uncommitted amounts under AF4 due to unspent allocation for social services-education
 (US$2.2 million) as schools had shut down due to COVID-19, a redundant contingency amount of around
 US$4.0 million for COVID-19 awareness under CFW, and from a SDR gain of around US$1.0 million (ICR
 p.17). Consistent attention to progress in achieving targets also guided strategic decision-making and, in
 many cases, the raising of additional funding and targets.

 Project management funds were deployed to ensure smooth transition to the follow-on
 project. Component 2 financed capacity building activities and assessments of SFD in preparation for the
 transition of implementation arrangements under the new emergency operation (ESPECRP). The lessons
 learnt through ECRP implementation and M&E also helped in designing ESPECRP (ICR p.40).



                                                                                                 Page 16 of 26
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     RY: Yemen Emergency Crisis Response Proj (P159053)



 Project complaints handling mechanisms were robust. Ninety-seven percent of surveyed beneficiaries
 of UNDP implemented activities were satisfied with the time in which registered grievances were
 addressed (ICR, p.65).

 The Results and M&E Framework did not adequately consider the intended project impact on
 household welfare. As will be detailed in Section 9a, the results framework did not adequately measure
 the interim level outcomes and impact of project interventions, so that it is difficult to gauge from the results
 framework indicators the extent to which the project had an impact on individual and household welfare
 during the project period. It is possible to understand several of the important outcomes of the project from
 data gathered as part of the TPM and UNDP evaluation. However, few of these measures were
 formalized as part of the project results framework. As a result, it is difficult to ascertain the adequacy of
 support given through CFW and cash transfers. Given the imperative for swift action during project
 inception, coupled with the uncertainty surrounding feasible ground-level data collection and the project's
 limited scope at appraisal, the absence of these more advanced indicators was justifiable. However, with
 AF1 and AF2, as the project rapidly expanded in scope and ambition, the project’s focus on development
 impact would have been well served by the incorporation of some measures of household welfare.

 For social and environmental safeguards, in particular workplace safety, Bank supervision in the
 initial years of the project was insufficient. As detailed in Section 10a, the implementing partners
 reported to the World Bank on safeguard issues as part of their semi-annual report. This included in cases
 of injury or death, where time lag between project deaths and the World Bank being informed of these
 deaths was as long as 8 months. Moreover, it seems apparent that response to project related deaths was
 slower than optimal, with training on Operational Health and Safety occurring only in 2019 despite work-
 related deaths occurring from 2017 onwards. The Task Team, in response to questions submitted by IEG
 explained that “The Bank identified this issue as an area for improvement and close oversight upon being
 informed of the first fatality...under the project (the incident occurred in March 2017 but was only reported
 to the Bank in November 2017 during an implementation support mission). During that time however, the
 Bank’s safeguards policies did not apply, and the Bank relied on UNDP’s safeguards policies.” It would
 have been preferable if, from the outset, or at least after the first project-related death, the Bank had asked
 to be kept fully and immediately informed of all deaths and serious injuries. From May 2019, Bank
 safeguards were applied to the project as part of AF4, and the one project related death occurring after this
 date (July 21) was brought to the attention of the Bank two days later, suggesting substantially improved
 quality of supervision on workplace safety once Bank safeguards were applied.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization


a. M&E Design


                                                                                                      Page 17 of 26
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    RY: Yemen Emergency Crisis Response Proj (P159053)



The project was designed to benefit from extensive field monitoring, including by UN partners and
a TPM agency to undertake quarterly performance verification and field monitoring of subprojects
funded under the project. The PAD (p.12) describes “ a ‘live’ monitoring system, which entails frequent
data collection from the field, with the use of digital technology when possible, collecting and reporting on
stories from the field, establishing grievance redress procedures, and through quarterly visits by UN
partners and reports from the TPM agent.” In addition, several studies contributed to data on project
outcomes beyond those specifically referred to in the results framework.

The defined PDOs were clear and appropriate, and project results framework was largely robust,
with clearly defined indicators, however PDO level indicators did not always adequately measure
project outcomes and capture intermediate effects of project interventions. The PAD, in its
description of the higher level objectives of the project, commits to improving “the resilience of participating
households and communities” as well as protecting “the targeted poor and conflict-affected families and
communities from falling into extreme poverty.” Similarly, the Financing Agreement for AF2, which
introduced the cash transfer component of the project, contextualizes the component as a way to “reduce
the vulnerability of eligible beneficiaries.” As such, implicit in the ToC is the goal of improving personal and
household welfare. However, the M&E framework includes no measure of household welfare as an
outcome. Consequently, there is no way to gauge the adequacy of support through the M&E
framework. And, in fact, TPM reports, as cited in the UNDP external evaluation of the project (p.40),
highlighted the issue of insufficient amounts/funds for beneficiaries and minimal living standards
improvement due to low numbers of wage days per beneficiary and low wages. While a measure of
household welfare may not have been reasonable to expect under the original (two-year, $50 million)
project, its expansion to almost six years of implementation and $887 million should have accommodated
such an assessment.

Table 1 reviews and critically analyzes the PDO Level Indicators.

Table 1: Adequacy of PDO level indicators for measuring outcomes.

                    PDO-Level
PDO                                      Adequacy for Measuring Outcomes
                    Indicator
                                    While the indicator directly measures the project objective as
                                    defined, it does not indicate the adequacy of employment
                                    provided. Moreover, the indicator as written provides a false
                                    incentive to provide fewer work days per person in order to
                                    maximize number of beneficiaries, rather than limiting the scope of
                                    employment to the most vulnerable in order to ensure they receive
Providing short-
                   Number of direct a critical mass of support. A measurement of the effect of short-
term employment
                   beneficiaries of term employment on targeted “most vulnerable” households would
to the most
                   wage employment have given a better understanding of the adequacy of
vulnerable
                                    support. While it is acknowledged that doing a formal household
                                    survey was impossible under the security situation, TPM reports, as
                                    quoted in both the ICR and the UNDP evaluation, provide several
                                    different types of evidence which could have served the basis for
                                    measurement of project outcomes on welfare of targeted
                                    households.
Providing selected Number of people The measures of selected services to the most vulnerable were
basic services to provided with     appropriate, given project goals, tracing a clear path between

                                                                                                    Page 18 of 26
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     RY: Yemen Emergency Crisis Response Proj (P159053)



 the most           access to key        project outputs such as cash for work activities and outcomes such
 vulnerable         services             as improved infrastructure and access to services. The TPM also
                    Number of people     provides supplementary evidence on the impact of these outcomes
                    (women and           on malnutrition, thereby showing a clear results chain from outputs
                    children) who        to outcomes to impact.
                    benefited from the
                    nutrition services
                                       Although adopting an output-oriented formulation, the selected
                                       indicator was appropriate, considering the FCV context in which the
 Preserving existing The percentage of
                                       project was designed and implemented.
 implementation      core staff
 capacity of service maintained in PWP
                                       Given this context, measuring the retention of staff members who
 delivery programs and SDF
                                       were already part of the PWP and SDF teams served as a robust
                                       proxy for assessing implementation capacity.
                     Beneficiary
 Providing                             The indicators, while an important measure of outputs, does not
                     households of
 emergency cash                        provide evidence of the sufficiency of support for helping
                     cash transfers
 transfers to the                      households maintain a minimal acceptable diet over the program
                     (Number)
 poor and                              period, which is important for understanding project success. In
                     Beneficiaries of
 vulnerable in                         the absence of such an indicator, there is no way to know whether
                     social safety net
 response to the                       cash transfers provided an adequate safety net for the poor and
                     programs
 food crisis                           vulnerable in response to the food crisis.
                     (Number)




b. M&E Implementation
  As envisaged in the design, the ECRP benefitted from regular field monitoring by the UN partners and
  SFD and PWP, and independent TPM, including both quantitative and qualitative data gathering on a
  quarterly basis, as well as community monitoring and feedback. Daily verbal and visual monitoring were
  carried out using mobile and cloud-based application, phones, GPS-enabled devices, geo-tagging of
  project sites, and social media and technology. These activities enabled two-way communication with
  beneficiaries and service providers, helped to identify implementation issues, get real time updates on
  conflicts on the ground, manage grievances, and monitor non-compliance/fraud by service providers. In
  the FCV context, the multi-layered monitoring model at all levels of implementation using an array of
  technology ensured rapid identification of emerging issues and their timely resolution (ICR, p.94).

  Real-time monitoring on the ground enabled timely course adjustments. The Implementing Partners and
  entities involved in monitoring, including the TPM, local field workers and consultants, set up real time
  mechanisms to communicate in a timely manner on security threats on the ground. Protocols were
  established to inform decisions, for example to suspend implementation in locations deemed inaccessible
  and reallocate funds. UNDP’s PMU carried out 336 field visits using common social media platforms,
  such as WhatsApp and a chatbot enhanced by artificial intelligence, to enhance remote and real-time
  monitoring, which enhanced transparency and communication, including enabling submission of
  complaints, and responding to queries. SFD utilized Remote Verification and Monitoring (RVM) through a
  call center and social networking that enhanced project monitoring using mobile friendly system (Android


                                                                                                 Page 19 of 26
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     RY: Yemen Emergency Crisis Response Proj (P159053)



  app) for off-site data collection. PWP used its MIS for monitoring purposes, and shared regular updates
  with UNDP (ICR, p.39)

  For Component 3, (Cash Transfers) a TPM firm monitored progress to ensure compliance with payment
  delivery protocols for every payment cycle and post distribution monitoring to gauge, for example, usage
  of the ECT payments. The TPM firm conducted its own direct monitoring using enumerators, who
  conducted Observations, Spot-checks, Key Informant Interviews and Focus Group Discussions, and
  provided daily verbal and visual feedback using mobile and cloud-based applications. Use of technology
  enabled community members and field officers to support field monitoring efforts and provide updates on
  evolving security challenges. The UNICEF PMU conducted field visits six days a week from the Country
  Office in Sana’a and five field offices to gather first-hand knowledge on the progress of implementation
  and main challenges and were supported by over 27 Field Monitoring Consultants throughout Yemen’s
  22 governorates. In governorates divided by the conflict, one field monitoring consultant was assigned to
  each side. Daily monitoring was conducted via the use of phones, email, and WhatsApp/Signal, with
  information collected on payment site functionality, security challenges or project compliance with Project
  protocols. These were logged into the MIS, establishing a central repository for all documentation, and
  tracking of issues, with access provided to Facilitation and TPM organizations. The UNICEF PMU
  established an Emergency Operations Centre where dashboards connected to the MIS, service provider
  dashboards (Payment & TPM) and other platforms (e.g., issues log using SharePoint) allowed real-time
  implementation monitoring. Tools, such as Kobo, were utilized by the PMU and field consultants to
  monitor payment sites and provided cost-effective real-time monitoring of ECT payments, provision of
  reliable information, even from remote and difficult-to-access areas, and timely response (ICR, p.94).



c. M&E Utilization
  Data collected through multiple mechanisms was effectively used during regular monitoring and
  missions to inform real-time decisions about resource distribution (such as reallocation of assets when
  necessitated by the security situation) and to inform decision-making including for AF and project
  restructuring. Feedback gathered from ECT beneficiaries and TPMs enabled the project to promptly
  address cases of bribery, payment frauds, lengthy lines at payment sites, and difficulties accessing
  payments by vulnerable people (elderly, sick and persons with disabilities). The lessons learnt through
  ECRP implementation and M&E also helped in designing the follow-on project (ESPECRP). In addition,
  a mid-term evaluation conducted in September 2019 produced 11 recommendations, most of which
  were subsequently addressed.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified in the PAD as a Category B operation. In accordance with the FPA, UNDP’s
   2014 Social and Environmental Standards were applied to the project at appraisal, rather than those of the
   World Bank. Under this arrangement, the Bank relied on UNDP to manage any environmental and social

                                                                                                   Page 20 of 26
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    RY: Yemen Emergency Crisis Response Proj (P159053)



  impacts of the project. Similarly, for Component 3 (Emergency Cash Transfers), managed by UNICEF,
  UNICEF’s social and environmental safeguard policies and procedures were applied. As such, the PAD
  triggered no Bank safeguards policy, and included no substantive discussion on environmental and social
  risks, other than noting that “The application of these guidelines, which are broadly consistent with those of
  the Bank, will help mitigate potentially high adverse environmental and social impacts stemming from the
  selection and implementation of subprojects.” (PAD, p.20). As mentioned in Section 8a, workplace safety
  was not identified in the PAD as an area of concern, although, in effect, inadequate workplace safety was
  responsible for multiple injuries and five workplace safety-related deaths on site, one work-related death in
  an off-site car accident and an additional death of a young boy in a trench in a sanitation work site. Project
  related deaths spanned a period of over 21 months, between October 19, 2017 and July 21, 2019.

  The implementing partners reported to the World Bank on safeguard issues as part of their semi-annual
  report. This included in cases of injury or death, where time lag between project deaths and the World Bank
  being informed of these deaths was as long as 8 months.

  As CFW programs began, and project injuries and fatalities began to accrue starting in 2017, according to
  the ICR (p.41), the following measures were undertaken:

  The UNDP developed a Safeguards Action Plan, which was shared with the Bank on November 21, 2018
  13 months after the first project fatality. In 2019, over a year after the first project fatality, and more than
  two years after project launch, additional measures were taken including the preparation of an
  Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF), including an OHS Framework and
  Toolkit. Safeguards capacity building as well was undertaken in 2019. According to the ICR (p.31) “The
  implementing partners increased their safeguards-focused field monitoring capacity and benefitted from
  several capacity building activities, which included an international certified OHS training for eight staff
  members from UNDP’s Project Management Unit (PMU), SFD and PWP in 2019, and a training session on
  the new OHS framework and tools for over thirty senior staff at SFD and PWP headquarters and branch
  offices in April 2019. In response to work site injuries, SFD provided two-day safeguards training for 42 staff
  from their Sana’a branch office, and a four-day training targeting 46 headquarter staff. Moreover, 826 staff
  received OHS training, including 407 project officers and 419 consultants. PWP responded to work site
  injuries by appointing an OHS supervisor to each work site and an OHS focal point for each Governorate.
  Under PWP, 1,348 people received OHS training, including 815 supervision consultants, 312 contractors,
  161 technicians and 60 field staff. Moreover in 2019, PWP appointed safeguard focal points for each
  Governorate for monitoring compliance, while SFD hired a Safeguards Officer that substantially improved
  and ensured safeguard compliance. Furthermore, UNDP appointed an international Environmental and
  Social Safeguards Specialist in 2019 to oversee the project."




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  At appraisal, the project was given a “High” fiduciary risk rating. Under the FPA, the UN partners’
  operational policies and procedures applied instead of the usual Financing Agreement and the Bank
  operational policies and procedures, which apply to the Investment Project Financing (IPF) instrument. The
  FPA and the Bank’s senior management oversight committee contained features intended to mitigate the
  high risk: agreed reporting requirements; a joint resolution mechanism for serious issues that merit further
  scrutiny, including fraud and corruption; the inclusion of appropriate remedies (including the right to


                                                                                                    Page 21 of 26
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    RY: Yemen Emergency Crisis Response Proj (P159053)



  suspend or to terminate further disbursements); and a clear delineation between the responsibilities of the
  UNDP and those of the Bank.

  There were several instances of fraud or non-compliance that were detected and addressed during the
  course of the project in a timely manner. The ICR (p.42) itemizes these instances as follows: ‘Under
  Component 1, a ghost/fraudulent loan was made by one of the MFIs for US$200,000, and TPM detected a
  case of bribery in August 2020, by a head of one of the VCCs for a rooftop rainwater harvesting cistern
  subproject. Both issues were adequately resolved, with the MFI involved dropped from the project, and by
  adopting a number of mitigation measures, such as raising awareness of beneficiaries and VCCs, obliging
  the VCCs to comply with their terms of reference, strengthening supervision and reporting by UNDP and
  SFD. Under Component 3, Ex Post Facto Review Reports of each ECT payment cycle enabled detection
  of fraud and corrective actions to be taken. Fraudulent activities were identified from the start, including
  Payment Cycle 1 experiencing 15 fraud cases whereby payments were pilfered via identity theft, and some
  service providers taking cuts from beneficiaries’ payments. There were also lack of compliance by payment
  agencies with the project’s payment protocols and procedures. In all cases, UNICEF took appropriate
  action and mitigation measures with no loss of IDA /project funds incurred."




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
      1. According to the ICR (p.33), support to farmers had a replication effect of 3:1. Farmers who were
            not supported by the project saw the benefits and replicated the farming technology/techniques
            introduced by the project by utilizing remittances. The replication effect increased job opportunities
            and food security in these communities. Businesses invested in farmers’ training to support
            modernization that also increased agricultural production and food security.
       2.   According to beneficiaries surveyed in TPM, “the project led to an improvement in social cohesion
            since interventions were selected and implemented through community participation, which brought
            various groups of community members together, addressing community needs, creating jobs and
            income opportunities for different vulnerable community members. The project contributed to
            strengthening the linkages within the communities, between the local population and the IDPs and
            reducing conflict, mainly over scarce resources, such as water. Beneficiaries overwhelmingly
            believed that the project helped “create a culture of trust among the community.” (UNDP, p. 46)
       3.   The World Bank’s re-engagement in Yemen mobilized donor support and funding. Demonstrating
            quick results on the ground by partnering with UN agencies and national implementing partners,
            ECRP facilitated the creation of the Yemen MDTF for increased engagement in the Yemen
            portfolio. According to the ICR, the project also supported improved coordination and alignment of
            interventions within the sector, and aspects of the ECRP design were adopted by other World Bank
            projects and by development agencies for the interventions they supported (i.e., FCDO, United
            States Agency for International Aid/USAID, UNDP, and UNICEF).
       4.   Establishment of a Safeguards Technical Working Group in June 2020 included the World Bank,
            UNDP, UNICEF, SFD, PWP, FAO, United Nations Office of Project Services (UNOPS),
            International Labor Organization (ILO), University of Sana’a and Ministry of Environment and
            Water, with the objective of developing a joint safety culture in Yemen, improving social safeguards,
            and enhancing contracting and implementation of OHS measures.
       5.   The project team made significant efforts to support the gender mainstreaming throughout the
            project, in terms of operational capacities and adjustment of the design of the intervention, and with
            activities largely oriented to women, notably Cash for Nutrition and support to fisheries under the

                                                                                                    Page 22 of 26
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     RY: Yemen Emergency Crisis Response Proj (P159053)



           SME component. Amongst project achievements was providing access to identification cards for a
           few thousand women (UNDP, p. 9).



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Highly Satisfactory   Highly Satisfactory
                                                                                 Insufficient attention to
                                                                                 workplace safety as a project
                                                                                 risk, leading to multiple project-
Bank Performance                Highly Satisfactory   Satisfactory               related deaths and injuries and
                                                                                 missed opportunity to assess
                                                                                 project’s impact on household
                                                                                 welfare and food security.
                                                                                 The project’s results framework
                                                                                 did not provide adequate
                                                                                 measure of outcomes such as
Quality of M&E                  High                  Substantial                adequacy of cash for
                                                                                 work/emergency cash transfers
                                                                                 for household welfare/food
                                                                                 security.
Quality of ICR                  ---                   High


12. Lessons

Lessons drawn from the ICR (p.45):

1. The World Bank can be an important actor in FCV contexts, even where it lacks field
presence. The project was highly innovative in its approach, both as only the second Bank project
invoking the FPA and as a reflection of the World Bank’s emerging understanding of its value added
in humanitarian contexts. Partnership with the UN organizations proved to be a pragmatic and
effective way of leveraging the complementarities between humanitarian and development agencies
and delivering effective interventions in the midst of a conflict. The Bank brought its technical
expertise in delivering innovative social protection and short-term job opportunities in FCV, while the
UN agencies capitalized on their country-wide presence, high risk tolerance, large humanitarian and
political network, and service providers on the ground. In this partnership, the Bank contributed
financing as well as technical and operational expertise, and the UN agencies carried out on-the-
ground project implementation by engaging national institutions and provided supervision of project
implementation. Through this groundbreaking and successful collaboration, the ECRP restored
basic services and supported the resilience of the conflict-affected population. This innovative

                                                                                                    Page 23 of 26
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     RY: Yemen Emergency Crisis Response Proj (P159053)



partnership also helped to preserve local institutional capacity for rapid program scale-up during
potential post-recovery and reconstruction.

2. In the FCV context, the multi-layered monitoring model at all levels of implementation
using an array of technology ensures rapid identification of emerging issues and their timely
resolution. Project design put a strong emphasis on both ongoing monitoring and on community
engagement for selecting infrastructure projects, both of which made it possible for the project to
tailor interventions to divergent needs of various localities and to be responsive to the changing
security situation on the ground. In an FCV context, the security situation is highly volatile, with
crises often emerging and compounding the existing vulnerable situation. In order to ensure that
the project remained fully aware of and responsive to shifting circumstances, the project benefitted
from multiple layers of feedback, including regular monitoring by the UN partners and SFD and
PWP, independent TPM, community monitoring and feedback and remote monitoring using mobile
and cloud-based application, phones, GPS-enabled devices, geotagging of project sites, and social
media and technology. These modalities enabled two-way communication with beneficiaries and
service providers, helped to identify implementation issues, get real time updates on conflicts on the
ground, manage grievances, monitor non-compliance/fraud by service providers, etc.

3        Partnership with local, politically neutral, and well-respected institutions with strong
local knowledge improves implementation efficiency amidst civil conflict and supports post-
conflict reconstruction through institutional preservation. This approach was supported through
the engagement of the SFD and PWP, with long established reputations for political neutrality,
credibility and objectivity for effective targeting and program delivery. They played a critical role on
technical aspects, such as coordinating with local stakeholders, targeting beneficiaries, and
supporting communities in identification and prioritization of investments, and were instrumental for
achieving rapid results for emergency response. Their well-established networks with government
officials, civil society and NGOs helped garner political buy-in, mitigate political interference, threats
and insecurity on the ground. This approach allowed the project to have an efficient and effective
implementation model, highlighting the importance of tapping into existing local resources and
partnerships to maximize the development impact, and were key to the project’s success during the
active conflict.

4.       Donor funding is critical for preserving key national service delivery institutions
during conflict. Over the years, the World Bank played a key role in providing a platform for donor
coordination and for the advancement of policy and institutional reforms; economic and social
development; and building national capacity in Yemen. The World Bank’s continued engagement
during the conflict and continued dialogue with donors has served to mobilize resources beyond
humanitarian funding and contributed to better coordination and alignment of interventions within the
sector. SFD and PWP have been kept operational during the conflict by external aid from a
consortium of donors that is providing approximately 80-85 percent of its financial resources,
including the World Bank. Such support enables these local institutions to deliver services during
conflict and ensures their readiness for scaling up implementation during the recovery and
reconstruction phase.

Additional Lesson:

Even under the FPA, under which the Bank delegates safeguards responsibility to UN and UN
safeguards apply, the quicker reporting of issues by the UN and a more active role by the


                                                                                                      Page 24 of 26
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       RY: Yemen Emergency Crisis Response Proj (P159053)



Bank in monitoring safeguards application may have reduced the work-related deaths and
injuries, which occurred under the project, and prompted a quicker response to gaps in UN
safeguards and safeguards compliance. The project did not achieve a minimally acceptable
standard of workplace safety until 2019, with the Bank task team only learning about project related
deaths after a significant time delay as part of implementation support missions. When questioned
about this by IEG, the task team noted that, “Application of the Bank’s safeguards policy and later
the ESF allowed the Bank to provide better oversight, monitoring and capacity building in the areas
of Occupational Health and Safety, gender, among others. Through the systematic preparation of
Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs) – the Bank was in a better position to apply
its mitigation measures to ensure that worker safety is ensured.” As a result, the Bank task team
concluded that application of the Bank’s ESF policies is an “important aspect to consider particularly
in an FCV environment.




13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR adequately presents the project’s considerable achievements, including citing evidence of the multiple
benefits of the project not directly accounted for in the results framework. It also provides a thought-provoking
and insightful list of lessons learned. However, the ICR could have included a more thorough discussion of the
UNDP evaluation, particularly the finding regarding the adequacy of CFW support in enhancing food security
and improving household welfare. Likewise, the ICR did not critically examine the issue of workplace-related
deaths or consider the lessons to be learned from the project's failure to protect CFW beneficiaries from harm
during the first two years of implementation. Apart from these shortcomings, the overall quality of the ICR was
high.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       High




                                                                                                   Page 25 of 26
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
RY: Yemen Emergency Crisis Response Proj (P159053)




                                                                                  Page 26 of 26
