     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Sichuan Chongqing Cooperation: Guang'an (P133456)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0023490

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P133456                                     Sichuan Chongqing Cooperation: Guang'an

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 China                                       Urban, Resilience and Land


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-84720                                  30-Sep-2020                                           95,181,544.50

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 16-Mar-2015                                 25-Sep-2022

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                       Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           100,000,000.00                                                0.00

 Revised Commitment                             95,181,544.50                                                0.00

 Actual                                         95,181,544.50                                                0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Cynthia Nunez-Ollero        Vibecke Dixon                 Avjeet Singh                   IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Financing Agreement (FA, p. 5) and the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, paragraph 13),
   the Project Development Objective (PDO) of this China: Sichuan Chongqing Cooperation:
   Guang'an Demonstration Area Infrastructure Development Project is "to improve Linshui County and
   Qianfeng District infrastructure and investment support services."

   This review will parse this objective into two and assess performance against the following:


                                                                                                    Page 1 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Sichuan Chongqing Cooperation: Guang'an (P133456)



         to improve infrastructure investments in the towns of Linshui County and Qianfeng District
         to improve investment support services in the towns of Linshui County and Qianfeng District



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   1. Technical Assistance (US$0.60 million from the World Bank at appraisal; US$0.34 million actual, with
   0.14 million from the World Bank and US$0.20 million in counterpart funds). This component was to finance
   the preparation of a strategic environmental and social impact assessment, urban capital investment, and
   municipal asset management strategies for the towns of Linshui County and Qianfeng District. In addition,
   this component was to finance an industrial value chain assessment (VCA), private sector demand survey
   (PSD), and recommendations on improving the branding and investment promotion strategy (IPS) of
   the Economic and Technological Development Zone (ETDZ) of Linshui County.

   2. Linshui County Town (US$56.8 million from the World Bank and US$7.6 million in counterpart funds at
   appraisal; restructuring increased this component to US$63.4 million from the World Bank and
   US$16.6 million in counterpart funds; actual disbursed US$61.8 million from the World Bank and
   US$29.5 million in counterpart funds). This component was to finance the construction of the following: (i) a
   green transport corridor consisting of a main road with bus lines; (ii) a link to the highway connecting
   Guang’an City to Chongqing at the southeastern section of the Linshui ETDZ including public transport
   facilities, urban greenery, and lighting; (iii) selected storm water drainage, sewage interceptors, sewerage
   pipelines, and treated effluent pipelines; and (d) Number 3 Wastewater Treatment Plant (WWTP).
   This component was also to finance the establishment of a public skills training center at the Linshui County
   Vocational High School (LVS), by assisting the Linshui Department of Education and Department of Human
   Resources and Social Security to develop a skills training program, assess training needs, develop training
   curricula, conduct skill training activities, and purchase training materials. At restructuring, loan
   savings were to finance two added activities - the rehabilitation of an existing road with underground
   sewerage networks in Linshui ETDZ and the construction of a new LVS campus.

   3. Qianfeng District Town (US$37.4 million from the World Bank and US$5.2 million in counterpart
   funds at appraisal; restructuring reduced this to US$31.2 million from the World Bank and increased to
   US$13.4 million from counterpart funds; actual disbursed was US$26.9 million from the World Bank and
   US$15.6 million in counterpart funds). This component was to finance the development of a passenger and
   cargo route that bypassed the Qianfeng District Town’s urban core by constructing a transport corridor
   connecting Qianfeng District Town’s urban core and Qianfeng District’s southern industrial expansion area
   with parks and green areas along the Luxi River, and wastewater interceptors, stormwater drainage, sewer
   pipelines, and lighting. At restructuring, together with loan savings, the planned construction of the Binghe



                                                                                                    Page 2 of 17
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Sichuan Chongqing Cooperation: Guang'an (P133456)



  North road was replaced by two additional activities, the rehabilitation along the upstream section of the
  Luxi River and the construction of the Xiejawan reservoir park.

  4. Project Management and Capacity Building (US$1.77 million from the World Bank at
  appraisal, restructuring increased this to US$1.82 million; actual reached US$2.20 million from the World
  Bank and US$0.27 million in counterpart funds). This component was to finance technical support to the
  participating institutions within the two towns of Linshui County and Qianfeng District to manage project
  implementation. This was to include (i) training on financial management, procurement, contract
  supervision, technical design, and project reporting; (ii) construction supervision services; and (iii)
  independent safeguards monitoring services.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost: The total original project cost was US$100.0 million. Restructuring reduced this to US$95.2
  million (see Dates below). The loan disbursed US$95.2 million at closing.

  Financing: The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) financed this project.

  Borrower Contribution: The government originally committed US$103.3 million in
  contributions including US$90.50 million for land acquisition and resettlement, project overhead, and
  contingencies. The government increased its contribution to US$166.2 million. The government disbursed
  US$45.6 million because the need for land acquisition and resettlement was reduced.

  Dates: The project was approved on March 16, 2015 and made effective on August 27, 2015. The Mid
  Term Review (MTR) was conducted on March 15, 2018. The project was to close originally on September
  30, 2020 but was extended by almost 24 months to close on September 25, 2022. The project had four
  Level II restructurings:

        on March 27, 2020 to acknowledge the use of loan savings to finance new activities in Linshui
         County Town and 3 Qianfeng District Town (see components above). The loan extended
         the closing date by 12 months, from September 30, 2020 to September 30, 2021. This restructuring
         also amended the FA, because the added activities triggered the Bank safeguard policy on dam
         safety.
        on September 27, 2021 to extend the loan closing date by nine months from September 30, 2021 to
         June 30, 2022.
        on February 21, 2022 to modify the components’ costs by shifting US$3 million from Qianfeng
         District to Linshui County.
        on June 29, 2022 to extend the loan closing date by two months and 25 days, from June 30, 2022 to
         September 25, 2022.

  Split Rating: No split rating of the outcome will be undertaken. The PDOs remained unchanged throughout
  implementation. The restructuring acknowledged savings from competitive bidding and replacing an activity
  that was no longer a priority. One PDO-level Indicator was dropped (‘Annual direct investment in Linshui
  ETDZ)’ since the indicator could not be directly attributed to project activities. The additional activities scaled
  up the scope of the project, accompanied by an increase in target values of corresponding indicators (ICR,
  paragraph 28).


                                                                                                       Page 3 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Sichuan Chongqing Cooperation: Guang'an (P133456)




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Context: Guang’an in south-east Sichuan is a poor prefecture with urbanization and income levels below
the national average: 34 percent of its 3.2 million people lived in urban areas with an average disposable
income per capita of RMB 19,973 in 2012 compared to RMB 24,565 nationally. Guang’an on the border
with Chongqing, was to play an important role in the economic cooperation between Sichuan and
Chongqing. Linshui County Town is an urban center with an expanding industrial zone, and a 90-minute
drive from Chongqing’s urban core. Its national vocational school had out-of-date equipment and delivered
short-term industry-based skills training that did not match the needs of surrounding industries. Low-income
neighborhoods were poorly linked to its urban road network and public transport services, which were
concentrated in the town center and urban-industrial expansion areas. Its wastewater treatment plant was
running at full capacity. Migrants and residents received skills training in its vocational school to serve the
needs of industries in its economic and technological development zone. Qianfeng District is
an independent district of Guang’an City. It took stock of its municipal assets, assessed local needs, and
planned to improve basic municipal services, particularly transport and wastewater services. The
town planned to invest in industrial development. The town had limited public transport routes. The old
town was run-down. Heavy-duty freight transport vehicles from the railway station passed through the
downtown area adding to congestion and pollution. Wastewater was discharged into rivers. The riverside
was polluted. The town had no basic pre- or centralized wastewater treatment.

Country Plans: The PDOs remained relevant to China’s 14th Five Year Plan (2021−2025). This
plan focused on developing urban agglomerations and metropolitan regions, reducing poverty, and boosting
growth and productivity in lagging regions. The PDOs and the project supported the focus of the plan
to improve the quality of urban development in these agglomerations by optimizing infrastructure services
and transport networks. The plan emphasized green development along transport corridors. One of three
priority urban agglomerations in the plan was the Chengdu-Chongqing area. The skills training component
of the project was to reduce poverty and boost productivity in these lagging regions.

World Bank Country Partnership Framework: The PDOs and the project supported the development
priorities of the World Bank in China as stated in the Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for
FY2020−2025. The project contributed to achieving the following objectives under engagement areas 1:
Advancing market and fiscal Reforms, 2: Promoting greener development, and 3: Sharing the benefits of
growth. The project directly contributed to Objective 1.1: Improving the environment for competition and
private sector development, through its technical assistance in capital investment and municipal asset
management, bolstering the long-term development outlook for the towns of Linshui County and Qianfeng
District. The project also supported Engagement Area 2’s Objectives 2.2 Reducing air, soil, water, and
marine plastic pollution, through wastewater treatment investments, and 2.5: Promoting low carbon in
cities by investing in roads and public green space. The vocational school skills training program supported
the CPF's engagement area 3’s Objective 3.2: Enhancing the quality of early learning and skills
development programs.

World Bank Experience in the Country and the Sector: The Bank’s operations in China included over $1
billion in lending for urban development in Sichuan and Chongqing since 1999. A study commissioned
during preparation reviewed one of these recent projects to inform design (see Section 8 Assessment of

                                                                                                     Page 4 of 17
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                       Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Sichuan Chongqing Cooperation: Guang'an (P133456)



               Bank Performance below). The World Bank also had numerous projects that involved using
               industrial metropolitan region economy to identify industries with growth potential. In addition, the
               World Bank concluded in a recent study on China’s small and medium towns (2012) that lagging
               cities could bridge the rural-urban divide by adequately spending and maintaining infrastructure services.

               Overall, the relevance of objectives is rated Substantial. The objectives were aligned with the country's
               urban agglomeration plans for the region and the World Bank's engagement areas for the country.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To improve infrastructure investment n the towns of Linshui County and Qianfeng District .

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change (TOC): No TOC was prepared at appraisal. The indicators in the results framework
                             provided the causal link between inputs, outputs, and expected infrastructure outcomes in the towns of
                             Linshui County and Qianfeng District. A TOC was prepared for the ICR.

                             Inputs were to be the financing of the construction and rehabilitation of roads, sewage and drainage system,
                             and the upgrading of urban public space in both towns. Inputs were also to consist of constructing a skills
                             training center in the town of Linshui County. Competitive bidding led to cost savings. The savings were to
                             finance added activities in the towns of Qianfeng District to Linshui County. The February 2022 restructuring
                             also moved US$3 million from Qianfeng District to Linshui County to finance two additional infrastructure
                             activities in Linshui County.

                             Outputs were to consist of a green transport corridor between the urban core and the Economic and
                             Technology Development Zone (ETDZ) in the town of Linshui County, roads and bridges with pedestrian
                             walkways, street lighting, traffic signs, public bus stations, storm water drainage, and treated effluent
                             pipelines, constructing the Number 3 Waste Water Treatment Plan (WWTP) and a skills training center in the
                             Linshui County Vocational High School. Outputs were also to include a skills training program, an assessment
                             of training needs, training curricula, training materials, information technology equipment, and industrial
                             training machinery. The March 2020 restructuring expanded the activities by adding two additional outputs
                             in Linshui County- the rehabilitated roads and sewage networks in the Linshui ETDZ, and construction of
                             the Linshui County Vocational High School (LVS). In Qianfeng District Town, the added activities were to
                             be rehabilitation works along the Luxi River; and construction of Xiejawan Reservoir Park. New intermediate
                             results indicators (IRIs) were added to capture these changes: (i) length of storm water drainage constructed,
                             (ii) the vocational school constructed, and (iii) the area of improved public green space.


                                                                                                                             Page 5 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Sichuan Chongqing Cooperation: Guang'an (P133456)



Outcomes were to consist of improved infrastructure in the towns of Linshui County and Qianfeng District.
measured in the volume of daily traffic on corridors between the town center and the ETDZ, increased
floodwater drainage capacity. The TOC noted that the long-term outcomes were to be greener and more
inclusive development in the two towns. An outcome indicator measured the number of trainees securing jobs
after skills training but no measure of how this matched the needs of the industries. The March 2020
restructuring replaced the outcome indicator regarding the "daily green traffic on corridors between Linshui
town center and Linshui ETDZ"’ with ‘travel time between the town center and ETDZ." The share
of wastewater collected and treated in ETDZ was added as a new outcome indicator. No other indicators
were added to address the impact of the completed infrastructure on improved lives or livelihoods of
beneficiaries. The March 2020 restructuring modified the PDO-level Indicator for wastewater collected and
treated in Qianfeng District Town to simply Qianfeng.

The critical assumptions in the TOC, which when actualized would increase the likelihood that the outcomes
would be achieved were: (i) implementing agencies had the capacity to manage and supervise activities; (ii)
government priorities and local needs remain unchanged; (iii) availability of adequate funding for operations
and maintenance (O&M) of completed infrastructure assets; and (iv) agglomeration of economies from
surrounding cities and towns were facilitated. The lack of capacity of the implementing entities to manage and
supervise the activities led to some delays, but improved over time as corrective measures were
adopted during implementation. The TOC was clear and logical.

OUTPUTS: The following outputs were achieved:

      40.51 km of sewers were constructed, exceeding the target of 30 km.
           o 27.91 km of sewer lines were constructed in Linshui County, exceeding the target of 14.3 km
           o 12.60 km of sewer lines were constructed in Qianfeng District, not achieving the target of 15.70
              km
      23.58 km of non-rural roads were constructed, achieving the 23 km target.
           o 16.1 km of non-rural roads were constructed in Linshui County, exceeding the target of 15.5
              km
            o 7.5 km of non-rural roads were constructed in Qianfeng District Town, meeting the target.
      38 km of storm water drainage was constructed, achieving the target of 38 km.
           o 28.7 km of storm water drainage was constructed in Linshui County Town, exceeding the
              target of 27.8 km This indicator was introduced in the March 2020 restructuring.
            o 9.30 km of storm water drainage was constructed in Qianfeng District Town, almost achieving
               the target of 10.92 km.
      An area of 39,694.5 m2 of the vocational school was constructed, almost achieving the target of
       41,321 m2. The target area was not met, but the new facility was completed and delivered for use at
       closing. The March 2020 restructuring added this indicator.
      7,068 trainees completed their short-term skills training, exceeding the target of 6,500 trainees. 3,430
       of these were women (or 48.5 percent), the target was 3,250 or 50 percent was almost achieved).
       1,615 were poor or 22.8 percent. exceeding the target of 20 percent. The target was defined as a
       percentage, but the unit of measure was expressed as a number. Short-term skills training consisted
       of computer courses, machine operation, automobile repair, accounting, and bookkeeping.
      There was a 50 percent reduction in heavy goods vehicles travelling along Guangqian Avenue in
       Qianfeng Town Center to and from the railway station, achieving the target.



                                                                                                  Page 6 of 17
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  Sichuan Chongqing Cooperation: Guang'an (P133456)



OUTCOMES:

    Volume of Chemical Oxygen Demand (COD) pollution load reduction achieved overall was 1,900.32
       tons per year, not meeting the original target of 4,800 tons per year. This indicator measured the
       volume (mass) of Chemical Oxygen Demand (COD) pollution load reduction through process
       modification to reduce a load of pollutants requiring treatment, and/or through the application of
       wastewater treatment techniques to reduce a load of contaminants before discharge. The baseline for
       this indicator was zero.
             o Linshui County contributed a reduction of 1,250.32 tons per year, exceeding the original target
                of 900 tons yearly.
             o Qianfeng District contributed a reduction of 650 tons per year, meeting the target.
      220,000 people were provided with access to sewage connections and the wastewater treatment plant
       exceeding the target of 200,000 people. This number did not include those benefiting from
       rehabilitated facilities.109,000 of them or 50 percent were female, meeting the target.
      Wastewater collected and treated in Qianfeng 82.00 m3/day, exceeded the original target of 70.00
       m3/day. The result was based on 16,670 m3/d wastewater collected and treated by the Qianfeng
       WWTP out of 20,329 m3/d of wastewater generated.
      Wastewater collected and treated in Linshui ETDZ reached 80 percent, meeting the target. The result
       is based on 18,644 m3/d and 1,018 m3/d of wastewater collected and treated by Numbers 2 and 3
       WWTP out of 24,577 m3/d of wastewater generated. The indicator was introduced under the March
       2020 restructuring.
      6,248 trainees secured jobs after skills training, exceeding the original target of 5,956 trainees.. 474
       were low income and poor did not achieve the 20 percent of the 5,956 target or 1,191 trainees. 3,090
       of the trainees (almost half) were female but there was no original target to be met. The 3,090
       women trainees exceeded the target of 2,382 women. The March 2020 restructuring added the
       targets for female trainees.
      235,957 m2 of public green space was improved, exceeding the target of 235,000 m2. Improvements
       included landscaping, pedestrian and cycling infrastructure, and street lighting. This indicator was
       added at the March 2020 restructuring.
      Travel time between Linshui town center and Linshui Economic Industrial Zone was reduced by 7.14
       minutes exceeding the target of 10.00 minutes. The baseline was 30 minutes, reflecting travel time on
       Xinlin Avenue. This indicator measured the travel time between Linshui town center and the Linshui
       ETDZ rather than the original indicator that was to measure volume. After the completion of the
       construction of Number 1 Road on September 20, 2022 the travel time was measured by dividing the
       distance of Number 1 Road by an average vehicle traveling speed of 40km/hr. The indicator was
       introduced under the March 2020 restructuring, replacing an indicator that measured daily traffic on
       the road corridor. There remained a lack of information on how the reduced travel time improved the
       lives or livelihoods of end users.
      Daily traffic on the road corridor between Linshui town center and the ETDZ. The original target of 600
       persons between 7 am and 7 pm was not achieved because this indicator was replaced (see
       below) and not monitored.
      The ICR also notes that beneficiary surveys conducted by the Linshui County Town and Qianfeng
       District Town Project Implementation Units (PIUs) in August and September 2022 interviewed 800
       residents of Linshui County Town and 700 of Qianfeng District Town. The questions related to
       beneficiary awareness of the project, urban infrastructure conditions before the project, project
       outputs, other indirect benefits, sustainability, and overall satisfaction levels. The survey noted that 84


                                                                                                    Page 7 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Sichuan Chongqing Cooperation: Guang'an (P133456)



       percent of Linshui County Town’s respondents and 90 percent of Qianfeng District Townfelt
       respondents were satisfied or highly satisfied with the project.

       Overall, the efficacy of the project to achieve this objective is rated Substantial. Most of the targets of
       the revised indicators were exceeded or achieved.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To support Linshui County and Qianfeng District to improve investment support services.

Rationale
Theory of Change: As noted above, no TOC was prepared at appraisal. The indicators in the results
framework provided the causal link between inputs, outputs, and expected outcomes in improving investment
services in the towns of Linshui County and Qianfeng District. A TOC was prepared for the ICR.

Inputs were to be the financing of technical assistance to assist both towns in preparing environmental and
social impact assessments, industrial value chain analyses, a private sector demand survey, and design
marketing and investment promotion services.

Outputs were to be the completed social and environmental impact assessments for both towns, capital
investment plans, and municipal asset management plans for both towns. Another set of outputs was to be
value chain assessments, private sector demand surveys, and recommendations to improve Linshui ETDZ’s
existing branding and investment promotion strategy. The output documents were to guide the industrial zone
management committees on how to integrate their local economies into the Sichuan Chongqing (Cheng-Yu)
economic zone that the government identified as a strategic metropolitan cluster.

Outcomes were to be the value of new investments generated in the ETDZ, and the number of trainees from
the vocational school who secured jobs, disaggregated by gender and income levels. The plans and tools
generated by the project were to attract investors to the ETDZ, but with no indicators to monitor how this was
to be achieved or how the skills training and improved plans would integrate their respective economies into
the strategic metropolitan cluster of the Sichuan Chongqing (Cheng-Yu) economic zone. According to the
TOC prepared at closing, the expected long-term outcome would reduce regional disparity by improving the
Cheng-Yu economic zone represented by the increase in the number of industries in the ETDZ. This outcome
indicator, mentioned but not monitored, was more at an intermediate rather than outcome level. Another
outcome mentioned was that those trained by LVS would supply competent labor for local industries with no
corresponding surveys to be conducted mentioned to obtain data for this outcome.

OUTPUTS: The following targets were achieved as targeted:

      Social and environmental impact assessments were completed.
      Capital investment plans and municipal asset management plans were completed.


                                                                                                     Page 8 of 17
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               Sichuan Chongqing Cooperation: Guang'an (P133456)




                                  Value chain assessments, private sector demand surveys, and investment promotion services were
                                   completed. These documents were to guide the two industrial zone management committees on how
                                   to integrate their local economies into the Sichuan Chongqing (Cheng-Yu) economic zone that the
                                   government identified as a strategic metropolitan cluster.

                            OUTCOMES:

                                  Improved asset management by the two towns was to enhance their attractiveness to investors. This
                                   was to be measured by the value of the annual direct investment in Linshui ETDZ with an original
                                   target of CNY 3.33 billion. This indicator was not monitored, dropped at restructuring because
                                   resulting investments could not be attributed to the project (ICR, paragraph 25), and was not replaced.
                                   The ICR notes that since project completion, the Linshui ETDZ Committee and the Guang’an High-
                                   Tech Zone Management Committee have utilized the TA outputs to negotiate with potential ETDZ
                                   investors.

                            Overall, the efficacy of the project to achieve this objective is rated as Modest. The targets achieved were at
                            the output level, and there was no outcome indicator to measure the project’s impact on investment support
                            services.



                            Rating
                            Modest


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Efficacy is rated Substantial with moderate shortcomings. While the objective of improving infrastructure
                            in Linshui County Town and Qianfeng District Town was substantially achieved, there was a lack of adequate
                            outcome evidence to demonstrate the improvements in investment support services.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   Economic Analysis: At appraisal, the benefit-cost analysis included a macroeconomic assessment
   using incremental capital output ratios (ICORs) of the project area. Benefits included (i) expansion of urban
   economic activities within each project area, (ii) improved connectivity between built-up areas and new
   development, (iii) enhanced regional connectivity between the project areas and their regional markets, (iv)
   environmental and health benefits from the access to wastewater treatment facilities, and (v) enhanced overall
   livability. Costs included (i) investment costs in urban infrastructure and revitalization, (ii) opportunity cost of land

                                                                                                                               Page 9 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Sichuan Chongqing Cooperation: Guang'an (P133456)



and capital, and (iii) ongoing operation and maintenance (O&M) costs of the completed infrastructure.
The economic internal rate of return (EIRR) was estimated at 19.3 percent in Linshui County Town and 26.1
percent in Qianfeng District Town (ICR, paragraph 36). At appraisal, a break-even analysis was used for the
Linshui County Town Number 3 WWTP. A full cost recovery tariff was estimated at CNY1.58 (US$0.23) per
cubic meter, the wastewater treatment surcharge was estimated at around CNY0.50 (US$0.07) per cubic meter,
to cover O&M cost, not full cost recovery.

At closing, the team applied the same benefit cost methodology used at appraisal. The EIRR was estimated at
15 percent in Linshui County Town and 12 percent in Qianfeng District Town. These EIRR estimates were lower
than the appraisal estimates but still above the 10 percent discount rate. Low EIRR estimates at closing were
due to the slowdown in the economy. The end-user tariff was closer to the estimated full cost recovery level by
2016 when the wastewater treatment surcharge reached CNY0.95 (US$0.14) per cubic meter for residential and
CNY1.40 (US$0.21) per cubic meter for non-residential customers. Human capital developed under the skills
training component was estimated to have contributed to a 5 percent increase in regional economic productivity
(ICR, paragraph 37).

Administrative and Operational Efficiency: The loan closing date was extended by almost two years to
complete the activities that were added and financed by cost savings. Delays were due to lengthy internal
approval processes, steep learning curves for implementing agency staff experiencing high turnover, response
to the COVID-19 pandemic, the resulting economic slowdown, and heavy rainfall during the May-September
rainy season. The economic slowdown affected the expected population growth in the western region of
Sichuan-Chongqing. This led to fewer industries relocating to Linshui than projected by the Linshui ETDZ.
Nevertheless, Linshui County and Qianfeng District completed several competitively bid investments before the
slowdown that led to savings. A road project in Qianfeng District was dropped because it was no longer a
priority. Land disputes proved challenging, but all land acquisition was completed by 2020. Land
acquisition, relocating ancestral tombs and affected households, complex coordination processes
to relocate power grid towers owned by other government agencies, or cables owned by the military contributed
to the delays in road construction in Linshui County. To avoid further implementation slowdown due to COVID-
19, the PIUs ensured medical screening and occupational, health and safety (OHS) training for workers,
distributing personal protection equipment, frequent site disinfection, and contingency action plans.

Overall, the efficiency of the project is rated Substantial. While there were minor implementation inefficiencies,
the project was completed within an additional two years amidst the COVID-19 pandemic, and the economic
efficiency was bolstered by the expanded project scope arising from cost savings.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      0
 Appraisal                                                   0
                                                                                       Not Applicable


                                                                                                      Page 10 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Sichuan Chongqing Cooperation: Guang'an (P133456)



                                                                                    0
ICR Estimate                                               0
                                                                                     Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The relevance of the objective is rated Substantial. The project remained relevant to the World Bank CPF and
local development strategies. The efficacy of the project to achieve the first objective is rated Substantial. The
efficacy of the project to achieve the second objective is rated Modest due to the lack of outcome indicators to
demonstrate the improvement in investment support services. The overall efficacy of the project to achieve both
objectives is rated Substantial with moderate shortcomings. Efficiency is rated Substantial even as minor
operational inefficiencies were noted. The overall outcome is rated as Moderately Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The following pose risks to development outcomes:

      Financial risk and government commitment to meet the O&M needs of completed
       assets. O&M plans governed the use of each completed asset. The project introduced geo-
       technology to manage underground municipal assets. Linshui County Town used the inventory to
       complement its existing asset management system. Qianfeng District Town adopted the entire
       system as its management platform. The local government would allocate budgets for O&M
       according to the maintenance plan. The local Housing and Construction
       Bureau/Department maintained roadworks according to Chinese law. Local utility companies
       operated and maintained all underground assets (sewers and pipelines) according to the plans
       financed by the project. A private competitively selected operator under a public-private partnership
       model operated the Number 3 wastewater treatment plant. Current wastewater treatment tariffs were
       reported to be adequate to cover O&M costs. The Bank task team confirmed in August 2023 that the
       PIU investment companies were operating the public spaces (greening, landscaping, park, reservoir)
       as planned. The Bank task team also noted that local governments and neighboring property
       developments have raised maintenance funds, supplemented by a local government subsidy. With
       fewer industries and fewer migrants to the area, the Number 3 WWTP in Linshui County Town,
       experienced a lower-than-expected quantity of wastewater. The operational capacity of the plant is
       expected to improve as additional connections of wastewater discharges are added to the system;
       however, this is dependent on the local economy.
      Retaining recipients of the skills training. In this project, vocational education benefited Linshui
       County Town residents. The curriculum targeted marginalized groups and was calibrated to meet the
       demands of the ETDZ. The LVS completion report noted that employers in Linshui County Town were
       now willing to sign longer-term labor contracts, accompanied by higher wages for LVS trainees.
       Linshui County Town has raised CNY400 million (US$57.5 million) to construct the second and third

                                                                                                    Page 11 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Sichuan Chongqing Cooperation: Guang'an (P133456)



      phases of the LVS campus. The LVS was to maintain the center’s building and equipment using the
      annual financing plans and budgets established by the project.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The World Bank team designed the project aligned with the country's priorities for the region and the
  Bank's urbanization strategy for the country. Lessons from the Bank’s past operations in China, including
  15 years of support for urban development in Sichuan and Chongqing, informed design. Among these
  was a need for regional analysis to direct investments to cities and towns with growth potential and
  support for critical investments to link urban and industrial areas within these towns while also building
  capacity for them to tap into growing sectors of the regional economy. There were two rounds of public
  consultations, and stakeholders’ concerns were incorporated into the project design, The Project design
  was simple because of the risks posed by the limited local governments' capacity. The project design
  also incorporated human development activities, noting the importance of targeted skills and education
  programs. The World Bank conducted financial management, procurement, and environmental
  safeguards training during preparation. The implementation arrangements were adequate (PAD,
  paragraph 49).

  There were some weaknesses in the Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) design (see Section 9 below),
  with a lack of adequate outcome level indicators especially for the second objective (ICR, para 61), that
  could be attributed to the project. Not all risks were adequately provided with mitigating measures. Some
  risks, such as the lengthy land acquisition and resettlement processes, the complexities associated with
  land use permits, and crossing multiple administrative boundaries, were not fully examined during project
  preparation, and resulted in delays (ICR, paragraph 50). Other risks were met with appropriate
  measures. For example, the PMO's lack of World Bank experience was mitigated by a simplified design
  and the technical assistance component of the project. The impact of natural disasters on
  implementation, the towns’ capacity to absorb new skills, and the environmental and social impacts of the
  project were to be supported by experts, regular review of TA activities, and skills training.

  Overall, the Bank team's performance at entry is rated Moderately Satisfactory. There were shortcomings
  in M&E design and assessing the risks from the highly regulated policies of land acquisition and
  resettlement management that led to implementation delays.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The World Bank team conducted 14 implementation support missions over the seven years, including
 virtual ones during travel restrictions brought by COVID-19. The task team leader changed only once. Core
 team members were based in-country, and conducted training as needs arose to address implementation

                                                                                                  Page 12 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Sichuan Chongqing Cooperation: Guang'an (P133456)



 challenges, such as safeguards, financial management, and technical issues. The team held regular
 meetings with implementing agencies and offered measures to reduce risks, provide technical experts,
 train new staff, and manage the transition as the project experienced high staff turnover in the
 implementing agencies. The World Bank team conducted its Mid Term Review that informed measures
 adopted in the restructuring of the project to address implementation bottlenecks. Minor shortcomings were
 noted in revising the results framework. At closing, the Bank team secured a commitment to complete the
 Linxidongcheng resettlement housing. The project benefited from loan savings, which were re-invested into
 the project. The Bank team provided additional training in the last year of project implementation that
 improved the quality of data collected to substantiate the results of the results framework indicators.

 Overall, the quality of the Bank performance at supervision is rated as Satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The objectives were clear and specific. M&E reporting arrangements were adequately designed. The
 Theory of Change documented the causal link between inputs and outcomes. The intermediate results
 captured the contribution of the components and the activities to the expected outcomes. The output
 indicators were specific, measurable, time-bound, and achievable. All indicators had targets, but the target
 values of the sub-indicators under outputs measuring stormwater drainage did not equal the overall
 indicator., The ICR acknowledged that the results framework lacked outcome indicators that could be
 directly attributed to the project’s impact on investment support services —several reflected outputs rather
 than outcomes (ICR, paragraph 61).



b. M&E Implementation
  M&E implementation was conducted as planned with some weaknesses (ICR, paragraph 63). Insufficient
  M&E capacities were noted in the Project Implementation Units (PIUs) and the Project Management
  Offices (PMOs) of the towns of Qianfeng District and Linshui County. and the Guang’an Prefecture
  PMO. Progress reports were delayed, lacked data to support the results reported, and did not track land
  acquisition and resettlement progress. LVS monitored the implementation of the training program.
  Capacity and reporting issues were resolved in the last year of the project with World Bank support and
  training. Restructuring aligned indicators and targets in the results framework. The PDO-level indicator
  measuring the annual direct investment in Linshui ETDZ was dropped, but not replaced. Several aide
  memoires, as late as 2021, reported some inconsistencies in the progress reports and lack of supporting
  documents. Throughout project implementation, the World Bank emphasized the importance of timely
  data collection and detailed analyses. With more hands-on support and additional training, the last year

                                                                                                  Page 13 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Sichuan Chongqing Cooperation: Guang'an (P133456)



  of project implementation demonstrated significant improvement in data collection and the Results
  Framework. (ICR, paragraph 55).



c. M&E Utilization
  M&E data and progress reports tracked progress and informed implementation risks. M&E data
  and reports were used to resolve implementation delays caused by land acquisition, resettlement, funds
  allocation, disbursement, and contract processing. The Bank team implemented monthly progress
  reporting and work plans. The Bank team also supported the implementing agencies with training and
  advice to improve data collection to improve the evidence for reported results.

  Overall, the quality of M&E is rated Modest given the shortcomings in design which were only partially
  addressed during implemention, as well as issues noted in data collection and reporting..



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Environmental Safeguards: The project was classified as Environmental Assessment Category A (Full
   Assessment) and triggered the following five World Bank environmental and social safeguards policies:
   OP/BP 4.01 Environmental Assessment, OP/BP 4.04 Natural Habitats, OP/BP 4.11 Physical Cultural
   Resources, and OP/BP 4.12 Involuntary Resettlement. In addition, the March 2020 restructuring triggered
   OP/BP 4.37 on Safety of Dams. An Environmental Assessment was conducted. To mitigate the impact from
   construction, soil erosion and disturbance, vegetation clearance, and surface water/river pollution due to
   earthworks, generation of wastewater, noise, dust, and solid waste, both towns prepared Environmental
   Impact Assessments (EIAs) and Environmental Management Plans (EMPs). The Chinese versions of the
   drafts were disclosed locally on the Guang’an Development and Reform Commission (DRC) website on
   August 22, 2014, a newspaper announcement in the Guang’an Daily, and the final Environmental
   Assessment documents were disclosed on November 24, 2014. They were also disclosed at the World
   Bank’s InfoShop on September 10, 2014, and November 25 and 27, 2014. Following the MTR, the
   documents were updated and redisclosed on the World Bank’s Document and Reports site on August 1,
   September 1, and October 1, 2018. External monitoring consultants confirmed that environmental
   safeguards were appropriately conducted, with no Occupational, Health, and Safety (OHS) incidents or
   COVID-19 cases reported. In accordance with OP/BP 4.11, chance finds procedures were included in the
   Linshui County Town EMP because of the sewage interceptor’s proximity to the Lingbaoshan Stone Carving
   and Bridge Relics Site (ICR, paragraph 69). The project relocated 1,694 graves scattered in the farmland
   within the project area of both towns. To address OP/BP 4.37, a dam safety assessment was conducted
   during the EIA process, and an independent dam safety specialist was hired by the PMO to inspect and
   monitor the implementation of its findings. The prescribed mitigation measures were adequately
   implemented, and safety monitoring of the dam was institutionalized and routinized by the local water
   authority. The dam was recorded as ‘safe status’ at the time of project closing.


                                                                                                 Page 14 of 17
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Sichuan Chongqing Cooperation: Guang'an (P133456)



  Social safeguards. The project complied with the social safeguards policy (ICR, paragraph 68).
  Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) were prepared. The RAPs were disclosed locally in Chinese on October
  16, 2014. The English versions were disclosed at the World Bank’s InfoShop on November 25, 2014. The
  RAPs were updated twice due to changes in the project area, new impacts on land acquisition, and
  demolition. They were disclosed locally and on the World Bank’s Document and Reports site on June 1,
  2018 and November 1, 2019. The Project Management Offices (PMOs), assisted by an experienced
  consulting company familiar with Bank-financed projects conducted resettlement management and
  grievance recording. Substantial delays in the resettlement process were reported, leading
  to implementation delays. A total of 242 people were resettled. The families were compensated in
  accordance with the RAP. At the time of writing of the ICR, 69 households displaced by Road Number 1
  were yet to be resettled, because the affected households preferred to wait for the completion of the
  Linxidongcheng resettlement site in Linshui County Town. The Linshui Government committed to fully
  resettle the 69 households in the Linxidongcheng housing resettlement by the end of 2023. The Bank team
  confirmed on August 23, 2023 that all units have been completed and awaiting the completion of ancillary
  facilities and decorations before the end of 2023. The local government extended the contract of the
  external monitoring consultant with agreement by the World Bank to monitor continued compliance with
  safeguards. The Bank team confirmed on August 23, 2023 that the project had indeed closed and that the
  external monitoring agency was expected to submit a progress report by September 15, 2023 with a final
  one after resettling the last 69 households as agreed.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management: The 2019 and 2020 audit reports noted ineligible expenditures in a total amount
  of US$1.26 million due to contract variations. The amount was refunded to the World Bank in December
  2020 and August 2021. The 2021 audit report noted another US$277,141 in ineligible expenditures. The
  audit reports, the World Bank’s follow-up, and meetings with the auditor identified a lack of oversight by the
  implementing agencies because COVID-19 measures restricted their ability to conduct regular field visits
  and high turnover of fiduciary staff. Corrective measures included improved coordination between the
  accounting and engineering departments and the financial management staff. Audits and interim unaudited
  financial reports were submitted on time (ICR, paragraph 71).

  Procurement: The project complied with the World Bank procurement procedures (ICR, paragraph 72).
  The World Bank team trained PMO staff during project preparation since the initial procurement capacity
  assessment indicated a lack of experience with World Bank procurement procedures. After the training, the
  PMO developed a Procurement Plan updated throughout implementation. Procurement efficiencies
  resulted in loan savings. Funds were used to finance additional activities. Several complaints related
  to contract negotiation and award were lodged and resolved.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

                                                                                                   Page 15 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Sichuan Chongqing Cooperation: Guang'an (P133456)




11. Ratings
                                                                              Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                   IEG
                                                                              Disagreements/Comment
                                                                              Lack of adequate outcome
                                                                              evidence to demonstrate the
Outcome                        Satisfactory         Moderately Satisfactory
                                                                              achievement of the second
                                                                              objective.
                                                                              Moderate shortcomings in
Bank Performance               Satisfactory         Moderately Satisfactory   Quality at Entry related to M&E
                                                                              and risk assessment.
Quality of M&E                 Modest               Modest

Quality of ICR                 ---                  High


12. Lessons

The operations led to four lessons with slight modifications below (ICR, paragraphs 79-82)

      Towns may bridge the rural-urban divide by adopting area-based economic policies
       and urbanization strategies. This project used adequate infrastructure and other urban
       services as a springboard to show how local governments may address the urban-rural
       divide. Regional disparities, smaller cities, and towns within metropolitan areas may be
       effective links. Improved service delivery, transportation networks, and educational and
       employment opportunities may facilitate better connectivity and more livable urban areas
       and, with the skills training, lend itself to addressing poverty.
      Technical assistance may complement infrastructure investments to provide a
       comprehensive urbanization and city planning approach. Long-term planning and
       infrastructure are interlinked as increased livability is made possible by improved service
       delivery, attracting additional investment and opportunity. The project designed its TA to
       maintain and operate the current infrastructure investments and support the long-term
       objectives of attracting investors and tapping into growing sectors of the regional economy.
       This has been strengthened by building capacity for project delivery, asset management,
       capital investment planning, private sector participation, and investment promotion and
       branding, which will benefit the towns beyond the project completion.
      Projects in China that require land acquisition and resettlement may benefit from
       securing permits early, designating staff to monitor progress, or reducing
       resettlement needs. In this project, implementation delays were due to land acquisition and
       resettlement needs. Lengthy government approval processes following Chinese law.
       coordination needs because of different agencies managing various affected structures, such
       as fiber optic lines and power grid towers that would be affected by road construction. To
       mitigate resettlement and compensation-related delays, necessary permits may benefit from
       advance planning. design Investments may benefit from avoiding or reducing relocation
       needs. Designating key personnel in the respective local governments and focal points to
       coordinate the processes across various agencies may help avoid implementation
       challenges.

                                                                                                Page 16 of 17
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Sichuan Chongqing Cooperation: Guang'an (P133456)



        Multi-city projects may offer knowledge-sharing opportunities. In this project, two towns
         implemented two similar activities. Promoting their coordination allowed for opportunities to
         exchange ideas and learn from each other on effective measures to improve service delivery
         and factors to increase efficiency. The implementation arrangement, with an umbrella Project
         Management Office PMO, and active participation in the World Bank supervision missions
         led to practical capacity-building activities. These joint efforts facilitated opportunities to gain
         experience from each other and increased vertical and horizontal coordination between
         government agencies. Multi-sectoral coordination also improved the LVS training curriculum
         and calibrated the courses to respond to regional industry employment needs.




13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR followed the guidelines and presented a complete picture of the operation. The report was internally
consistent. Annexes provided additional information to support the results of the operation, particularly the
discussion on efficiency in Annex 4 and the photos in Annex 7. Lessons were based on project experience. The
report was candid, pointing out the modest design and implementation of the M&E system. The report
acknowledged the weakness of the results framework because of the lack of adequate outcome indicators.
Overall, the report is rated Substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       High




                                                                                                         Page 17 of 17
