     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LS-Second Pvt. Sector Competitiveness (P144933)



                                                                                    Report Number: ICRR0023451

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P144933                                     LS-Second Pvt. Sector Competitiveness

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Lesotho                                     Finance, Competitiveness and Innovation


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)                 Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-53090,IDA-59610                         30-Apr-2019                                            25,939,007.34

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 31-Oct-2013                                 30-Jun-2022

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                       Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                             13,100,000.00                                                 0.00

 Revised Commitment                              26,500,000.00                                                 0.00

 Actual                                          25,939,007.34                                                 0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator           Group
 Antonio M. Ollero           Christopher David             Avjeet Singh                     IEGSD (Unit 4)
                             Nelson




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Lesotho Second Private Sector Competitiveness and Economic Diversification Project succeeded the
   Lesotho Private Sector Competitiveness and Economic Diversification Project (2007-2012) which aimed
   to facilitate increased private sector investment by improving the business environment and diversifying
   sources of growth.

   The original project development objective of the Lesotho Second Private Sector Competitiveness and
   Economic Diversification Project (at appraisal and retained at the first restructuring) was "to contribute to the

                                                                                                      Page 1 of 28
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LS-Second Pvt. Sector Competitiveness (P144933)



   development of selected non-textile sectors resulting in increased private sector investment, firm growth, and
   job creation."

   The revised project development objective (revised at the second restructuring and additional financing) was
   "to improve the business environment for firms, strengthen select government institutions, and further diversify
   the economy."

   This ICR Review, which conducts a split evaluation (because the results framework changed at the first
   restructuring and because the project development objective and the results framework changed at the
   second restructuring and had additional financing), parses the project development objectives as:

          Objective 1 and Objective 1 Revision 1 - To contribute to the development of selected non-textile
           sectors resulting in increased private sector investment, firm growth, and job creation.
          Objective 2 Revision 2 - To improve the business environment for firms.
          Objective 3 Revision 2 - To strengthen select government institutions.
          Objective 4 Revision 2 - To further diversify the economy.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  01-Jul-2017

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   Project Components at Appraisal. The original project had three components.

          1 – Improving the Business Climate (US$3.56 million estimated at appraisal, inclusive of US$0.4
           million in cost funded by the Government) aimed to facilitate business operations and greater access
           to finance: (1A) Reforming Business Regulation, Industrial Licensing, and Construction
           Permits supported the enactment of the Business Registration and Licensing Bill (to replace the
           Trading Enterprise Act of 1993), implementation of automated business licensing and e-payment
           gateway services at the One Stop Business Facilitation Center, and automation of the construction
           permit system; (1B) Improving Access to Finance supported the finalization of the Credit Reporting
           Act of 2012 implementing rules, establishment of the Credit Information Bureau, establishment of the
           Movable Asset Collateral Registry (under the Security Interest in Movable Property Bill),
           development of a leasing industry, and modernization of insolvency laws.
          2 – Supporting Economic Diversification (US$8.95 million estimated at appraisal, inclusive of
           US1.5 million in cost funded by the Government) aimed to decrease reliance on textile exports and
           instead develop new growth sectors: (2A) Supporting Investment Promotion and Increasing

                                                                                                      Page 2 of 28
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  LS-Second Pvt. Sector Competitiveness (P144933)



       Linkages to the Local Economy supported the pilot commercialization of factory shells, and
       facilitation of linkages between foreign investors and domestic small and medium enterprises;
       (2B) Supporting the Tourism Sector supported the implementation of the Quality Star Grading
       System, development of an artisan enterprise training program, and the construction of a handicraft
       marketplace in Maseru; (2C) Expanding Commercial Horticulture supported the development of a
       horticulture value chain; and (2D) Lesotho Enterprise Assistance Program provided matching grants
       to enable micro, small, and medium enterprises to obtain business development services.
      3 – Project Implementation Support (US$2.04 million estimated at appraisal) financed the costs of
       the Project Management Unit, including for monitoring and evaluation and the implementation
       of Environment and Social Management Plans.

Project Components at First Restructuring. The three project components and activities remained
unchanged at the first restructuring, although several output and outcome indicators were revised (see
Section 4).

Project Components at Second Restructuring and Additional Financing. Apart from original activities
(see Section 2.D - Project Components at Appraisal), the following new project activities were added:

      1– Improving the Business Environment (US$8.7 million estimated at second restructuring and
       additional financing, including US$0.4 million in cost funded by the Government) (US$8.7 disbursed
       by closing): (1A) Reforming Business Regulation and Industrial Licensing supported capacity
       building at the One Stop Business Facilitation Center, the integration of the business registration and
       the tax identifier systems, and the reform of business inspections; (1B) Reforming Business
       Construction Permits supported an e-payment system for permits; (1C) Improving Access to Finance
       supported the expansion of the Credit Information Bureau (to include businesses), capacity building
       for credit providers, technical assistance on financing leasing, the implementation of insolvency
       reform (under the Insolvency Reform Bill) focused on the Office of the Master of the High Court, the
       judiciary, and insolvency practitioners, and capacity building at the Office of Parliamentary
       Counsel; and (1D) Strengthening Trade Facilitation and Logistics supported an upgrade to the
       UNCTAD Automated System for Customs Data (electronic data interchange between customs and
       traders) and the development of a single window connecting all agencies involved in trade.
      2 – Supporting Economic Diversification (US$18.2 million estimated at second restructuring and
       additional financing, including US$1.5 million in cost funded by the Government)
       (US$14.9 disbursed by closing): (2A) Supporting Investment Promotion and Increasing Linkages to
       the Local Economy supported the reorganization of the Lesotho National Development Corporation,
       preparation of a Private Sector Development Strategy, and scaling up of a linkages program (from
       the program pilots); (2B) Supporting the Tourism Sector supported the construction of the Tourism
       and Handicraft Information Center and the preparation of a business plan for the handicrafts sector;
       and (2C) Expanding Commercial Horticulture supported the commercialization of horticulture plots,
       development of a research and training center, development of international quality standards,
       integration of horticulture suitability maps with the master irrigation plans, preparation of an
       investment promotion program, and post-harvest trade logistics; and (2D) Lesotho Enterprise
       Assistance Program expanded matching grants to include the financing of machinery and
       equipment.
      3 – Project Implementation Support (US$4.6 million estimated at second restructuring and
       additional financing) (US$4.6 million disbursed by closing) required the Project Management Unit to



                                                                                                 Page 3 of 28
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LS-Second Pvt. Sector Competitiveness (P144933)



          employ a horticulture coordinator, an investment climate and business environment officer, and a
          communications specialist.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project Cost. The project was estimated to cost US$15.1 million at appraisal (inclusive of the US$1.9
   million cost of the first and second project components to be borne by the Government) and US$28.4 million
   at the second restructuring (also inclusive of the unchanged US$1.9 million cost to be borne by the
   Government).

   Financing. The project was financed by an International Development Association (IDA) credit of SDR 8.7
   million (US$13.1 million equivalent), of which US$12.3 million was disbursed by closing, and an additional
   IDA credit of SDR 10 million (US$13.4 million equivalent), of which US$13.6 million was disbursed by
   closing. Altogether, the total IDA credit was US$26.5 million, of which US$25.9 million was disbursed by
   closing.

   Borrower Contribution. The Government contributed US$1.9 million, of which US$1.5 million was
   disbursed by closing.

   Dates. The project was approved on October 31, 2013, became effective on January 9, 2014, underwent a
   mid-term review on February 8, 2016, and closed on June 30, 2022, two years and three months after the
   original closing date of April 30, 2019.

   Restructuring. The project was restructured twice.

         The first restructuring on March 14, 2015, with US$5.9 million disbursed (23 percent of the final
          disbursed IDA credit), changed the results framework and changed the risk assessment.
         The second restructuring on July 1, 2017, with US$9.2 million disbursed (35 percent of the final
          disbursed IDA credit), changed the project development objective, changed the components and
          costs, changed he results framework, and changed the implementation schedule and closing date.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Binding Constraints to Development. The project aimed to address three key constraints to
development that confronted Lesotho, a small (2.3 million population), landlocked (completely surrounded
by South Africa), lower middle-income (US$1,260 GNI per capita) economy (US$2.6 billion GDP) growing
at a modest rate (3.5 percent in GDP per capita terms) comparable to those in the Southern African
Customs Union (of which Lesotho was a member state).

      For a country that sought to power economic growth through private enterprise, private sector
       development was hampered by an "uncompetitive business environment," reflected in low levels of
       foreign direct investment and poor performance by small and medium enterprises. All quantitative

                                                                                                   Page 4 of 28
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    LS-Second Pvt. Sector Competitiveness (P144933)



       measures (Global Trade Reports, Doing Business Indicators, and Enterprise Surveys)
       concluded that constrictive business regulation was a binding constraint to private activity. Lesotho
       ranked 136th of 185 countries in the Bank Doing Business Report in 2013 (at the time of appraisal),
       performing even more poorly on many constituent aspects of doing business – starting a business
       (79th), dealing with construction permits (140th), registering property (157th), getting credit (154th),
       protecting investors (100th), and trading across borders (144th). The objective to improve the
       business environment for firms was relevant to this constraint and, through select interventions in
       reforming business regulation, streamlining construction permits, registering property, improving
       access to finance, strengthening trade facilitation, and resolving insolvency (see Section 2.D -
       Improving the Business Environment), would help private enterprise generate new jobs (see Section
       4 - Objective 2 Revision 2).
      Additionally, the public institutions responsible for private sector development were either weak or
       altogether non-existent. There was not a credit bureau or a collateral registry to support efforts to
       expand access to finance. The objective to strengthen select government institutions was relevant
       to this constraint and, through select interventions – institutional capacity building, technical
       assistance, advisory services, technological upgrading – in creating new institutions or strengthening
       existing ones involved in business regulation, construction permits, property registration, access to
       finance, trade logistics, and insolvency resolution (see Section 2.D - Improving the Business
       Environment), would help support private business activity (see Section 4 - Objective 3 Revision 2).
      The country's economic base was narrow and economic growth relied heavily on exports (almost
       half of GDP), principally of textiles and apparel (over half of exports) and rough diamonds (a third of
       exports), as well as remittances from workers employed mostly in South Africa ( a fifth of
       GDP). Agriculture, the principal source of livelihood for 75-80 percent of the population, remained
       small (under 5 percent of GDP). Constrained by a lack of productive land (only a tenth was arable),
       agriculture focused on rain-fed subsistence production of maize, sorghum, and wheat. Industry
       (under a third of GDP) focused on textile and apparel manufacturing, spurred by Lesotho's
       inclusion in the African Growth and Opportunity Act in 2000 but since dented by the expiry of
       protections and competition from Asian producers. Services dominated the economy (almost two
       thirds of GDP), but, like industry, failed to absorb the labor force into productive employment (the
       unemployment rate was 25 percent in 2013), with the government acting as the largest employer
       outside of agriculture. The objective to further diversify the economy was relevant to this constraint
       and, through select interventions in developing three industries – horticulture (in agriculture),
       handicraft (industry), and tourism (services) – and strengthening the SME sector (see Section 2.D -
       Supporting Economic Diversification), would help generate jobs in these new sectors (see Section 4
       - Objective 4 Revision 2).
      While the three project development objectives adopted at the second restructuring (final objectives)
       were relevant to the foregoing key binding constraints to development, the original project
       development objective "to contribute to the development of selected non-textile sectors resulting in
       increased private sector investment, firm growth, and job creation" was less compelling and overly
       general. The original project development objective did not convincingly articulate the goal of the
       operation even though the project components – Improving the Business Environment and
       Supporting Economic Diversification – were specific as to the areas (i.e., aspects of doing business
       and sectors of the economy) and the project interventions that would enhance the business climate
       and activate economic diversification (see Section 2.D).

Country Priorities. As restructured, the project development objectives were aligned with the
government priorities. The National Strategic Development Plan II 2018/19 to 2022/23 - In Pursuit of
Economic and Institutional Transformation for Private Sector-Led Jobs and Inclusive Growth (NSDP II)

                                                                                                    Page 5 of 28
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      LS-Second Pvt. Sector Competitiveness (P144933)



               advanced four key priority areas – Enhancing inclusive and sustainable economic growth and
               private sector-led job creation; Strengthening human capital; Building enabling infrastructure;
               and Strengthening national governance and accountability systems. The project objective to improve the
               business environment for firms was aligned with the first NSDP II key priority area, specifically with the
               NSDP II strategic objectives to "improve regulatory framework to create competitive business environment,"
               "improve access to finance," "strengthen business and trade facilitation for export promotion". The project
               objective to strengthen select government institutions were aligned with the first NSDP II key priority area,
               specifically with the NSDP II strategic objectives to "strengthen institutions for public service delivery," and
               "deliver services to the public effectively and efficiently." The project objective to further diversify the
               economy was also aligned with the first NSDP II key priority area, specifically with NSDP II strategic
               objectives to "increase tourism investment," "develop value chains in agri-food systems and enhance
               agricultural markets," and "promote integrated supply chain", though without sufficient specificity in terms of
               priority engagement, the intention of the project to make significant progress on this seems like a stretch.

               Bank Group Strategy. As restructured, the project development objectives were aligned with the Bank
               Group strategy in Lesotho at closing. The Country Partnership Framework for the Kingdom of Lesotho for
               the Period FY23-28 (CPF) committed Bank Group support for the country's development strategy organized
               around the overarching objective "to promote a private sector driven, export-oriented economy for job
               creation and support an efficient and effective public sector" and three high level outcomes – Increased
               employment in the private sector; Improved human capital outcomes; and Improved climate resilience. The
               project objective to improve the business environment for firms and the project objective to strengthen
               select government institutions were aligned with the first CPF high level outcome, specifically with the CPF
               objective "to improve business regulations for better business environment." The project objective to further
               diversify the economy was also aligned with the first CPF high level outcome, specifically with CPF
               objective "to enhance opportunities for firms and for macro, small, and medium enterprises", though again
               where and how the interventions were likely to succeed remained elusive in strategy documents.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To contribute to the development of selected non-textile sectors resulting in increased private sector
                             investment, firm growth, and job creation.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change. Private enterprises in Lesotho faced considerable impediments to conducting business
                             due to outdated laws, burdensome regulations, and inefficient government processes that constrained
                             formality and due to the lack of financial market infrastructures that limited access to finance. More
                             significantly, at the macro level, the economic base was narrow and focused largely on a textile and apparel

                                                                                                                               Page 6 of 28
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   LS-Second Pvt. Sector Competitiveness (P144933)



industry, which, although it spurred growth two decades earlier from favorable trade arrangements, now faced
decline from the expiry of trade protections and from intense competition from Asian manufacturers. The
project adopted a two-pronged approach to address these binding constraints to economic activity and
growth. Legal reform through the enactment of modern laws, regulatory reform through the establishment of
One Stop Shops, and administrative improvements through automation would reduce the impediments to
doing business, facilitating processes, including, for example, obtaining construction permits in the
capital. Creating new financial market infrastructures (where none previously existed) including a credit
bureau, a movable collateral registry, and a leasing industry, would help unlock access to finance, allowing,
for example, the use of movable assets (apart from fixed capital) as collateral for bank credit. On a macro
scale, three industries could potentially help diversify the economy – commercial horticulture, handicraft
manufacturing, and tourism services. Selective interventions, including the development of tree farm value
chains, the introduction of handicraft artisans to the international market, and the quality upgrading of hotels
and lodgings would help begin the process of nurturing and developing these nascent sectors as new sources
of economic growth in the long run. In encouraging investment in these new sectors, it would be helpful if
small and medium enterprises, were supported with business development services enabled by a matching
grant scheme that had been used in more than 100 Bank projects globally and of which some 75 percent (of
an evaluation sample) "were deemed to have some degree of success" (World Bank, 2016, How to Make
Grants a Better Match for Private Sector Development - Review of World Bank Matching Grants Projects).

Outputs

      Doing Business: The number of days to obtain a construction permit from the Maseru City Council
         was reduced from 106 days in the baseline to 95 days, failing to achieve the original target reduction
         to 65 days, the first revised target reduction to 85 days, and the second revised target reduction to 30
         days.
        Access to Finance: The Credit Information Bureau was established in 2014 and operational by 2016,
         achieving the original target that the Credit Bureau be established by the fifth year (2018).
        Commercial Horticulture: The increase in incomes of participating farmers, with an original target of
         30 percent from the baseline (not available at appraisal), could not be measured.
        Handicraft Manufacturing: There was no output indicator defined for the handicrafts sector, only that
         the Tourism Information Center was both a tourism and handicraft information facility.
        Tourism Services: The Tourism Information Center was established but not operational by closing,
         partially achieving the target that the Tourism Information Center be established and operational at
         closing.
        The coverage of registered lodging operations under the Quality Star Grading System, with a target of
         50 percent was not measured.
        SMEs: The share of firms supported by the Lesotho Enterprise Assistance Program that increased
         sales by greater than 10 percent after a year of support, with an original target of 30 percent, could not
         be measured.
        The increase in non-textile investments in the industrial estates, with a target of 40 percent increase
         from a baseline number of M 418.5 million, could not be measured.

Outcomes

      Investment: The number of direct project beneficiaries, for which target was 75,000, could not be
         measured.


                                                                                                     Page 7 of 28
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   LS-Second Pvt. Sector Competitiveness (P144933)




      Firm Growth: The increase in domestic enterprises created/registered in non-textile sectors, for which
       the target was a 30 percent increase from a baseline number of 11,382 enterprises, could not be
       measured.
      Job Creation: The increase in jobs created in selected non-textile sectors was 14 percent by 2017,
       partially achieving the target of a 40 percent increase from a baseline of 6,058 jobs.

While a number of the project activities were completed, it is unclear what impact these have had on the
intended project development objective. The output indicators were either too limited (e.g., the number of
days to obtain a construction permit from the Maseru City Council) to measure the impact of an otherwise
wide range of doing business reforms or too indirect (e.g., the Credit Information Bureau is established)
to reflect the degree of achievement of the stated project development objective (i.e. to contribute to the
development of selected non-textile sectors). While some gains were reported on job creation, the majority of
the outcome targets were not met or did not have sufficient evidence to support them. Thus, the rating for
this objective is negligible.



Rating
Negligible


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
To contribute to the development of selected non-textile sectors resulting in increased private sector
investment, firm growth and job creation.

Revised Rationale
Theory of Change. The theory of change at the first restructuring was the same as at appraisal (see Section
4 - Objective 1).

Outputs

      Doing Business: The number of days to obtain a construction permit from the Maseru City Council
       was reduced from 106 days in the baseline to 95 days, failing to achieve the original target reduction
       to 65 days, the first revised target reduction to 85 days, and the second revised target reduction to 30
       days.
      Access to Finance: The percentage of the adult population covered by the Credit Information Bureau
       was 15.8 percent (i.e., 202,723 persons were registered with the Credit Information Bureau) by
       closing, exceeding the original target of 5 percent and the revised target of 13 percent.
      Commercial Horticulture: The revenue generated by commercial horticulture farms increased from
       Maloti (M) 38,606 in the baseline to M 5,197,408 by closing, exceeding the original target of M
       1,000,000, but only partially achieving the revised target of M 8,227,545.
      Tourism Services: The Tourism Information Center was established and but not operational by
       closing, partially achieving the target that the Tourism Information Center be established and
       operational at closing. The Ministry of Trade and Industry was still in the process of selecting an
       operator Tourism Information Center in June 2022.


                                                                                                  Page 8 of 28
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   LS-Second Pvt. Sector Competitiveness (P144933)




       The number registered lodging operations under the Quality Star Grading System was 48 by closing
        (the total number of lodging operations was 202), partially achieving the original target of 50, but
        exceeding the revised target of 40.
       SMEs: The percentage increase in sales of LEAP supported firms, with a target of 20 percent could
        not be measured.

Outcomes

       Investment: The number of non-textile investment projects facilitated over the five-year project
        duration was three by 2017 (according to data from the Lesotho National Development Company),
        partially achieving the target of six.
       Firm Growth: The increase in domestic enterprises registered and operational in non-textile sectors
        was 52 percent by 2017, partially achieving the target of 60 percent.
       Job Creation: The number of jobs in selected non-textile sectors (full-time, part-time, and seasonal
        jobs created in new foreign and domestic non-textile firms attracted to the industrial estates, created
        under the horticulture and tourism components of this project, and jobs of those directly
        employed by the project other than consultants and project management staff), was 6,906 (increase of
        848 from the baseline of 6,058) by 2017, partially achieving the target of 7,088 (increase of 1,030).

Using the new indicators and revised targets defined at the second restructuring, the project achieved partial
gains on new investment, firm growth, and job creation outcomes in the non-textile sectors. Thus, in contrast
to the rating for Objective 1, the rating for this Objective1 Revision 1 is modest.



Revised Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 2
Revised Objective
The objective was dropped at the second restructure when the PDO was changed.

Revised Rationale
N/A



Revised Rating
Not Rated/Not Applicable


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
The objective did not exist in the original design.

Rationale

                                                                                                  Page 9 of 28
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   LS-Second Pvt. Sector Competitiveness (P144933)



N/A



Rating
Not Rated/Not Applicable


OBJECTIVE 2 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
The objective did not exist in the first restructured design.

Revised Rationale
N/A



Revised Rating
Not Rated/Not Applicable


OBJECTIVE 2 REVISION 2
Revised Objective
To improve the business environment for firms.

Revised Rationale
Theory of Change. The business environment for private enterprises was unfriendly and not conducive to
private activity. Business laws were outdated or did not exist to provide the enabling legal framework for new
activities in trade and finance. Licensing, registration, permitting, and inspection services administered by
the Government were cumbersome and not automated. In many cases, governmental responsibility over
these processes were widely diffused and uncoordinated. Business legal and regulatory reform – covering
business registration (enactment of the Business Registration and Licensing Law), industrial licensing
(enactment of the Industrial Licensing Law), construction permits (automation of the construction permit
system at Maseru City), and trade facilitation and logistics (upgrade of the ASCYCUDA system, introduction
of e-wallets, and establishment of the Lesotho National Single Window) – would improve the business
environment in Lesotho, which suffered from a poor investment climate. In addition, measures to enable
financial intermediation (establishment of the first Credit Information Bureau, launch of the Electronic Credit
Reporting System, enactment of the Security Interest in Movable Property Law, and launch of the Lesotho
Electronic Registry in Movable Assets) would improve access to finance, which remained limited in
Lesotho. Overall, the outcome of these inventions would be measured by the number of policy and structural
reforms implemented by the Government that supported private sector development. The official data to
evidence the achievement of this outcome would be derived from the Bank Doing Business Reports for 2013-
2020, the implementation period for this project.

Outputs

       Starting a Business: There was no output indicator to measure the result of reforms to starting a
        business. Lesotho enacted the Industrial Licensing Law in 2014 and the Business Licensing and

                                                                                                 Page 10 of 28
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
LS-Second Pvt. Sector Competitiveness (P144933)



     Registration Law in 2019, the latter adopting a risk-based approach to business registration
     (businesses that posed risks to humans and the environment needed to be licensed by the
     Government, otherwise they would only need to register with the Government).
    Dealing with Construction Permits: The number of days to obtain a construction permit from the
     Maseru City Council was reduced from 106 days in the baseline to 95 days, failing to achieve the
     original target reduction to 65 days, the first revised target reduction to 85 days, and the second
     revised target reduction to 30 days. The Maseru City Council streamlined the permit process, creating
     an online automated permit system in 2019 and supporting the permit process with an e-payment
     system. The Maseru City Council was also in the process of developing an e-regulation portal at
     closing. Altogether, some 1,588 permits were issued using the new system since 2019. Moreover,
     the city government had completed the Maseru City Master Plan, which would also help to improve
     the construction permit system moving forward. Following the completion of this project, the
     Government admitted that more regulatory and institutional reforms (e.g., change management) were
     needed, gaps in which likely hindered the full achievement of the project target.
    Registering Property: There was no output indicator to measure the result of reforms to registering
     property.
    Getting Credit: The percentage of the adult population covered by the Credit Information Bureau was
     15.8 percent (i.e., 202,723 persons were registered with the Credit Information Bureau) by closing,
     exceeding the original target of 5 percent and the revised target of 13 percent. The Credit Information
     Bureau, Lesotho's first, was established in 2014 and the Electronic Credit Reporting System was
     launched in 2016. Public awareness campaigns and staff training at the Central Bank of Lesotho
     helped with the results. Separately (there was no output indicator associated with these reforms), the
     Security Interest in Movable Property Law was passed in 2020 and the Lesotho Electronic Registry in
     Movable Assets was launched in 2021. Henceforth, MSMEs could offer movable assets – stock,
     livestock, equipment, accounts receivables – as collateral for bank loans. Meanwhile, although
     regulations governing leasing were issued in 2013 and an industry action plan was completed also in
     2013, controversy over the taxation of leasing (the Lesotho Revenue Authority did not agree to a
     proposed amendment to the Tax Law) hampered progress with developing the industry.
    Trading Across Borders: The number of agencies connected to the Trade Automation System was five
     by closing, exceeding the target of four. The five agencies were the Lesotho Revenue Authority (fully
     connected), One Stop Business Facilitation Center (fully connected), South Africa Revenue Services
     (fully connected), Department of Livestock (connected but not fully switched on), and Department of
     Marketing (connected but not fully switched on). The Automated System for Customs Data was
     upgraded in 2019, together with the associated e-payment system. At the Lesotho Revenue
     Authority, four modules were upgraded and deployed – Post Clearance Audit, Valuation, ASYPM, and
     Preferred Trader – while another two were freshly developed – Private Shopper and Exit Gate
     Management Solution. Additionally, the Lesotho National Single Window was launched in 2022 as the
     single-entry platform providing all required certificates, licenses, and permits for international
     trade and was subsequently connected to the Automated System for Customs Data.
    Resolving Insolvency: There was no output indicator to measure the result of reforms to resolving
     insolvency. The Insolvency Act was passed in 2022 (to replace the old Insolvency Proclamation of
     1957), modernizing the framework for business rescue and restructuring, harmonizing personal and
     business insolvency processes, and setting qualification and registration requirements for insolvency
     practitioners. The Office of the Master of the High Court, the judiciary, and practitioners were also
     trained on the new law.



                                                                                             Page 11 of 28
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   LS-Second Pvt. Sector Competitiveness (P144933)



Outcomes

According to the Bank Doing Business Reports from 2013 to 2020, Lesotho completed six doing business
reforms during the implementation period of this project (the Bank ceased publication of the report in 2021, a
year ahead of the project closing date in 2022). Lesotho finished two other doing business reforms that were
not cited in the Doing Business reports, according to the ICR, taking the total number of doing business
reforms to eight. The project had aimed to complete five doing business reforms by closing.

      Starting a Business: (a) "Lesotho made starting a business easier by creating a one-stop shop for
         company incorporation and by eliminating the requirements for paid-in minimum capital and
         for notarization of the articles of association" (DB 2013, page 139); and (b) "Lesotho made starting a
         business easier by removing the requirement for a health certificate and the inspection of the
         premises for all businesses" (DB 2020, page 109); (c) in addition, Lesotho completed the automation
         of processes at the Land Administration Authority, according to the ICR (page 38).
        Dealing with Construction Permits: The Doing Business Reports did not cite any reform enacted on
         dealing with construction permits.
        Registering Property: (a) "Lesotho made transferring property easier by streamlining procedures and
         increasing administrative efficiency" (DB 2014, page 165).
        Getting Credit: (a) "Lesotho improved access to credit information by establishing its first credit
         bureau" (DB 2016, page 176); and (b) "Lesotho improved access to credit information by expanding
         the coverage of its credit bureau" (DB 2017, page 179).
        Protecting Investors: (a) "Lesotho strengthened investor protections by increasing the disclosure
         requirements for related-party transactions and improving the liability regime for company directors in
         cases of abusive related-party transactions" (DB 2013, page 139-140).
        Trading Across Borders: (a) "Lesotho made exporting and importing easier by implementing an
         automated customs data management system ASYCUDA" (DB 2019, page 142); and (b) in addition,
         Lesotho established the Lesotho National Single Window which allowed traders to access a single
         portal to prepare and submit applications for various regulatory certificates, licenses, and permits
         required for international trade, according to the ICR (page 38).
        Resolving Insolvency: The Doing Business Reports did not cite any reform enacted on dealing with
         resolving insolvency.

Although the project design did not stipulate that Lesotho advance its rank on the Doing Business
indicators as part of the project results framework, this ICR Review tallied the Doing Business data in 2013
and 2020. Lesotho improved its overall rank on doing business from 136th (of 185 countries) in 2013 to
122nd (of 190 countries) in 2020. However, details show mixed results across seven aspects of doing
business.

      Starting a Business: Lesotho slid on starting a business from 79th in 2013 to 84th in 2020. The
       number of procedures was trimmed from seven to six, the time was slashed from 29 to 15 days, and
       the cost was halved from 13.5 to 6.3 percent of income per capita.
      Dealing with Construction Permits: Lesotho lost on dealing with construction permits from 140th in
       2013 to 165th in 2020. The number of procedures was trimmed from 11 to 10. The time remained
       constant at 183 days. The cost, however, was reduced from 18.9 to 11.3 percent of warehouse cost.




                                                                                                  Page 12 of 28
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   LS-Second Pvt. Sector Competitiveness (P144933)




       Registering Property: Lesotho improved on registering property from 157th in 2013 to 147th in
          2020. The number of procedures was reduced from six in 2013 to four in 2020 and the time from 101
          to 43 days, although the cost rose slightly from 7.9 to 8.2 percent of property value.
         Getting Credit: Lesotho gained significantly on getting credit from 154th in 2013 to 94th in 2020. The
          strength of legal rights index (using the DB15-20 methodology) remained at 5 in 2020 as in 2014. The
          credit bureau coverage, which was 0 percent of adults in 2013, rose to 15.8 percent of adults in 2020,
          and the depth of credit information index (using the DB15-20 methodology) rose from 0 in 2013 to 6 in
          2020, reflecting the creation and the operationalization of the country's first credit bureau.
         Protecting Minority Investors: Lesotho also improved on protecting investors from 154th in 2013 to
          114th in 2020. Measured on a scale of 0-10, the extent of disclosure index remained the same at 3 in
          2013 and 2020, and the extent of directors' liability index, at 4. The ease of shareholders suit index (at
          8 in 2013 and 9 in 2020) were not comparable as they were based on different DB methodologies.
         Trading Across Borders: Lesotho gained substantially on trading across borders from 144th in 2013
          to 40th in 2020. The time to export was reduced from 3 hours in 2015 to 1 hour in 2020 for
          documentary compliance but remained the same at 4 hours for border compliance.
         Resolving Insolvency: Lesotho deteriorated markedly on resolving insolvency from 75th in 2013 to
          126th in 2020. The time remained unchanged at 2.6 years, but the cost ballooned from 8 to 20
          percent of the estate. The recovery rate worsened from 37.6 to 27.9 cents to the dollar.

Lesotho completed more business reforms in 2013-19 than the project had planned. On balance and based
on the details that can be gleaned from the Doing Business Reports, it appears that business environment for
firms had improved overall and on several aspects of doing business. The country's performance (country
rank) improved on registering property, getting credit, protecting investors, and trading across borders,
although it slipped on starting a business (slightly), dealing with construction permits, and resolving
insolvency. The rating for this objective is substantial.



Revised Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
The objective did not exist in the original design.

Rationale
N/A



Rating
Not Rated/Not Applicable


OBJECTIVE 3 REVISION 1
Revised Objective

                                                                                                     Page 13 of 28
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   LS-Second Pvt. Sector Competitiveness (P144933)



The objective did not exist in the first restructured design.

Revised Rationale
N/A



Revised Rating
Not Rated/Not Applicable


OBJECTIVE 3 REVISION 2
Revised Objective
To strengthen select government institutions.

Revised Rationale
Theory of Change. Business laws, regulations, and procedures were not only outdated, unfriendly, and
burdensome in Lesotho. Additionally, the government institutions that administered these business
regulations and the market infrastructure that would support private activity were institutionally weak or
altogether non-existent. Institutional capacity building at existing institutions and technological upgrades to
their operating systems – the One Stop Business Facilitation Center (for business registration, licensing, and
inspection), the Maseru City Council (for construction permits), the Revenue Services Lesotho (for trade
facilitation and logistics), the Lesotho National Development Corporation (for investment promotion and
business linkages), and the Office of Parliamentary Counsel (for overall legislation) – would strengthen
government institutions dealing with private business. In addition, developing the "missing" institutional
infrastructure – the Credit Information Bureau and the Movable Collateral Registry (for access to finance) –
would further strengthen government institutions involved in private sector development. The results would
be measured by the same set of output indicators associated with improving the business environment – a
reduction in the number of days to obtain a construction permit in Maseru City, the percentage of the adult
population covered by the Credit Information Bureau, and the number of agencies connected to the Trade
Automation System which aimed to facilitate international trade. Overall, according to the results framework,
the outcome of these project interventions would be reflected in the level of "client satisfaction" with the
services provided by these institutions.

Outputs

The output indicators defined for the objective to improve the business environment for firms were selected as
the same indicators to measure the achievement of the objective to strengthen select government institutions
(see Section 4 - Objective 2 Revision 2 for the results).

Outcomes

       Starting a Business: Client satisfaction with business registration and licensing services provided by
        the One Stop Business Facilitation Center was 73 percent by closing (according to the survey in fall
        2022), exceeding the target of 69.2 percent. The One Stop Business Facilitation Center was
        connected to the Lesotho National Single Window. An E-Regulations Portal; a world class One Stop
        Shop for information on registration, licensing and permits has been established. automated
        processes (including e-payments) at OBFC, automated business licensing and e-payment services at

                                                                                                 Page 14 of 28
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   LS-Second Pvt. Sector Competitiveness (P144933)



          One Stop Business Facilitation Center (OBFC). strengthening of OBFC, reforms of business
          inspections
         Dealing with Construction Permits: There was no outcome indicator to measure institutional capacity
          enhancement at the Maseru City Council. The staff at the Maseru City Council received training on
          the new construction permit system. The Maseru City Council was also equipped with new hardware
          and software to operate the online automated construction permit system and the associated e-
          payment system.
         Registering Property: There was no outcome indicator to measure institutional capacity enhancement
          at registering property.
         Getting Credit: There was no outcome indicator to measure institutional capacity enhancement at the
          Credit Information Bureau. Staff at the Central Bank of Lesotho were trained on credit information
          reporting and on movable collateral registration. Hardware and software were also purchased for the
          Lesotho Electronic Registry in Movable Assets.
         Trading Across Borders: Client satisfaction with customs and export and import services provided by
          Revenue Services Lesotho (formerly the Lesotho Revenue Authority) was 85 percent by closing,
          exceeding the target of 69.2 percent.
         Resolving Insolvency: There was no outcome indicator to measure institutional capacity
          enhancement at the Office of the Master of the High Court or the judiciary. The Office of the Master of
          the High Court, the Office of the Parliamentary Counsel, and the Ministry of Trade and Industry were
          trained ion insolvency law. Additionally, the Office of the Master of the High Court, the judiciary, and
          insolvency practitioners were trained on the implementation of the new Insolvency Act of 2022.

There is little evidence to determine whether the government institutions involved in business regulation were
strengthened with the capacity building, technical assistance, and technological upgrading activities
supported by this project, all of which were completed. The Restructuring Paper of 2017 defined only one
type of outcome indicator for this objective – "client satisfaction" with the relevant government services – and
the indicator applied to only two of the five agencies involved in business regulation. Even then, "client
satisfaction" was less than a solid measure of institutional capacity enhancement.



Revised Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 4
Objective
The objective did not exist in the original design.

Rationale
N/A



Rating
Not Rated/Not Applicable


                                                                                                   Page 15 of 28
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   LS-Second Pvt. Sector Competitiveness (P144933)




OBJECTIVE 4 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
The objective did not exist in the first restructured design.

Revised Rationale
N/A



Revised Rating
Not Rated/Not Applicable


OBJECTIVE 4 REVISION 2
Revised Objective
To further diversify the economy.

Revised Rationale
Theory of Change. To diversify a small economy highly reliant on exports of textiles and apparel and rough
diamonds, Lesotho looked to four sectors for new sources of growth. In agriculture,
commercial horticulture (fruit orchards and high value tree crops) was more suitable to the country's terrain
(two thirds of the land area was mountains) and could provide more jobs and more household income
(US$30,500 per hectare per year by the fifth season) than the smallholder subsistence cultivation of maize,
sorghum, or wheat (US$220 per hectare per year). In industry, Lesotho had a vibrant handicraft sector, albeit
a small segment of industry, with local artisans producing woven baskets, pottery, jewelry, and textiles that
showcased the local Basotho culture and which typically drew foreign visitors and buyers to craft markets and
workshops across the country. In services, tourism offered opportunities to exploit the country's natural
landscape of high peak mountain ranges (the Maluti Mountains and the Sani Pass), a diverse wildlife
(Sehlabathebe National Park), a rich history (Thaba Bosiu) and culture (Basotho culture), and attractive
festivals (Morija Arts and Cultural Festival) to draw new investment, create new jobs, and earn additional
foreign receipts in a sector that, however, lacked basic infrastructure, faced market failures, and
needed adequate governance (World Bank, 2014, Tourism in Africa: Harnessing Tourism for Growth and
Improved Livelihoods). Selective interventions, headlined by the commercialization of horticulture value
chains (from the development of deciduous fruit tree nurseries to the construction of pack houses and the
Global Good Agricultural Practices certification of produce), the entrepreneurial training and exposure of
artisan groups to the international markets, and quality grading of hotels and lodgings (combined with
vigorous destination campaigns), would jumpstart activity in these sectors. Overall, the outcome of these
inventions would be measured by the number jobs created in these new sectors. This results chain assumed
that the domestic private sector could and would respond positively to the project initiatives (e.g., that
farmers would venture into block farming of tree orchards rather than persist with smallholder cultivation of
maize). Apart from substantive amounts of technical assistance, a matching grant program that would help
SMEs obtain business development services as well as machinery and equipment would help the private
sector respond to the business opportunities offered by the project interventions.

Outputs.



                                                                                               Page 16 of 28
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  LS-Second Pvt. Sector Competitiveness (P144933)




    Horticulture: The revenue generated by commercial horticulture farms increased from Maloti (M)
       38,606 in the baseline to M 5,197,408 by closing, exceeding the original target of M 1,000,000, but
       only partially achieving the revised target of M 8,227,545. Three commercial fruit production farms,
       registered as companies, were established – in Likhothola in 2012 (10.7 hectares, 9 farmers, with
       15,877 trees planted), in Likhetlane in 2015 (15.2 hectares, 10 farmers, with 17,258 trees planted),
       and in Maoamafubelu in 2015 (15.6 hectares, 17 farmers, 16,163 trees planted). Likhothola started to
       harvest in 2015, and Likhetlane and Maoamafubelu, in 2018, with the produce certified by Global GAP
       and sold to Pick and Pay, Shoprite Stores, Usave Stores, Fruits and Veg, and Game, with some part
       exported to South Africa. Meanwhile, Land Administration Authority issued land titles for 344 fields
       (587 hectares) in Leribe, the project completed plans for the development of tree nurseries, the
       Lesotho Post Bank offered eight new agriculture finance products, and the Lesotho National
       Development Company started negotiations for a fruit production project with a potential investor from
       South Africa. A Government project report disclosed the following additional information: (a) extreme
       weather – droughts in 2015-16 and 2018-19, excessive precipitation, and a late frost – affected
       horticulture; (b) unavailability of technical experts delayed the pilot tree nursery project; and (c) delays
       with the pilot nursery project also delayed the launch of the National Training and Research Centre for
       Deciduous Fruit Production.
      Handicrafts: There was no separate output indicator defined for the handicrafts sector, only that the
       Tourism Information Center was both a tourism and handicraft information facility. The Government
       launched the Creative Industries Empowerment Program in 2015, which hired three designers to
       mentor artisans, trained five agents to link producers and buyers (five international buyers visited
       Lesotho and issued wholesale orders), and extended technical assistance to 30 artisan groups.
      Tourism; The Tourism Information Center was established and but not operational by closing,
       partially achieving the target that the Tourism Information Center be established and operational at
       closing. The Ministry of Tourism, Environment, and Culture was in the process of hiring an operator
       for the Tourism Information Center at closing.
      The number registered lodging operations under the grading system was 48 by closing (the total
       number of lodging operations was 202), partially achieving the original target of 50, but exceeding the
       revised target of 40. The Lesotho Tourism Development Corporation had supported the
       implementation of the Quality Star Grading Program.
      SMEs. The amount of funds disbursed to businesses through the Lesotho Enterprise Assistance
       Program rose from M 56,422 in the baseline to M 6,242,138 by closing, exceeding the target of
       M 5,969,182. Some 299 companies (48 percent female-owned) employing 3,064 and 48 associations
       employing 1,291 received matching grants. The Lesotho Enterprise Assistance Program shouldered
       80 percent of the costs of business development services to MSMEs and 75 percent to associations.

Outcomes

    The project defined the number of jobs in the horticulture and handicrafts sectors (jobs in domestic
     and foreign horticulture and handicraft firms and jobs in this project) increased from 1,160 in the
     baseline to 1,722 by closing, exceeding the target of 1,315.
    Horticulture: The number of jobs in horticulture reached 1,722 by closing.
    Handicrafts: The number of jobs in handicrafts reached 923 by closing.
    Tourism: There was no equivalent job gain indicator for the tourism sector. According to the ICR,
     macro factors would have influenced international travel to Lesotho (and hence the number of foreign
     visitors to the country and the number of jobs in the tourism industry), more than any of the


                                                                                                    Page 17 of 28
                                 Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                 LS-Second Pvt. Sector Competitiveness (P144933)



                                     interventions supported by this project. Hence, because of attribution problems, there was no target
                                     set for job gains in tourism.
                                    SMEs. There was no equivalent job gain indicator for the Lesotho Enterprise Assistance
                                     Program. According to the Government, the COVID-19 pandemic affected demand for business
                                     development services, which would have been financed by matching grants. Some businesses
                                     ceased operations and had to lay off employees during the pandemic.

                              Job gains in commercial horticulture and handicraft manufacturing were greater than expected. At the output
                              level, three commercial horticulture farms were established by 36 farmers, covering 41.5 hectares, planted to
                              29,298 deciduous fruit frees, and earning M 5.2 million by closing. The Tourism Information and Handicraft
                              Center was established in Maseru and the Creative Industries Empowerment Program trained 30 artisan
                              groups and drew five foreign buyers of handicrafts. The Lesotho Enterprise Assistance Program disbursed
                              M 6.2 million in matching grants to 299 SMEs (48 percent female-owned) employing 3,064 and 48
                              associations employing 1,291. The rating for this objective is substantial.



                              Revised Rating
                              Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The degree of achievement of the objective (at appraisal) to contribute to the development of selected non-
                            textile sectors resulting in increased private sector investment, firm growth, and job creation is rated
                            negligible.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating                                   Primary Reason
                            Negligible                                                Low achievement
                  OBJR1_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
                            The degree of achievement of the objective (at the first restructuring) to contribute to the development of
                            selected non-textile sectors resulting in increased private sector investment, firm growth, and job creation is
                            rated modest.



                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating                        Primary Reason
                            Modest                                                    Low achievement
                  OBJR2_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 2

                                                                                                                               Page 18 of 28
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      LS-Second Pvt. Sector Competitiveness (P144933)




  Overall Efficacy Revision 2 Rationale
  The degree of achievement of the objective to improve the business environment for firms is rated
  substantial, to strengthen select government institutions, modest, and to further diversify the economy,
  substantial. Thus, the overall efficacy is rated substantial with moderate shortcomings.



  Overall Efficacy Revision 2 Rating
  Substantial



5. Efficiency
Economic Efficiency

     The Project Appraisal Document (pages 99-115 and Annex 7, pages 99-115) estimated the economic
      rate of return (ERR), ex-ante, of the second component of the project, Supporting Economic
      Diversification (59 percent of the estimated project cost), at 27 percent. (a) The identification of benefits
      was well founded and supported by references to the economic literature. For example, for the Lesotho
      Enterprise Assistance Program (ERR of 30 percent ), productivity gains, incremental employment gains,
      and wage growth were identified as project benefits following studies of similar matching grant schemes
      elsewhere (among others, Sarder, 1997, The Importance of Support Services to Small Enterprises in
      Bangladesh and Lopez-Acevedo and Tan, 2010, Impact Evaluation of SME Programs in Latin
      America and Caribbean).
     The ICR (pages 49-51) also estimated the ERR (using a similar methodology), ex-post (i.e., the actual
      number of beneficiaries and actual project cost), of the same second component (64 percent of the
      actual project cost), at 50 percent over a 15-year period. The ICR valuation estimate is based on actual
      revenues reported for beneficiaries of project investments in horticulture, tourism, and companies
      assisted as part of the project. The key assumptions were: (i) For horticulture, without the project,
      revenue figures would have grown at 3 percent per year relative to the 7 to 200 percent observed
      following the project’s support; (ii) For tourism, it was assumed that the "average nightly rates would
      increase from US$80 per night to US$150 per night following the implementation of the grading
      program"). The ICR team clarified that the room rate increase assumptions used in the analysis were
      substantiated by discussions with companies participating in the Star Grading program.; (iii) For the
      companies assisted, it was estimated that these companies would have grown at an average rate of 2
      percent annually without the project’s support, relative to the 6 percent observed following the project's
      support.

Operational Efficiency

     Around 98 percent of the IDA credit was disbursed, and 79 percent of the Government contribution. By
      the time the additional financing of US$13.4 million was provided with the second restructuring in 2017,
      the project had disbursed 70 percent of the original financing of US$13.1 million (see Section 2.E),
      reflecting operational efficiency.
     The second restructuring and additional financing, which doubled the IDA credit, extended the project
      implementation period by two years and three months. The extension was justified on account of scaling
      up of select activities, expanding the scope of successfully implemented activities, and consolidating their

                                                                                                     Page 19 of 28
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      LS-Second Pvt. Sector Competitiveness (P144933)



       impact. The project closed as rescheduled at the second restructuring, notwithstanding disruptions
       caused by the COVID-19 pandemic over 2020-22. There were no major issues with procurement or
       financial management, both of which were rated satisfactory (see Section 10.B).

Given the ex-post EIRR exceeded the ex-ante EIRR, and the implementation efficiency, overall efficiency is
rated as Substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                              Rate Available?             Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                   59.00
 Appraisal                                               27.00
                                                                                    Not Applicable
                                                                                   64.00
 ICR Estimate                                            50.00
                                                                                    Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome



                                                              Original        First         Second
                                                                              Restructuring Restructuring
Relevance of Objectives                                       Substantial
Efficacy
Objective 1 - To contribute to the development of selected    Negligible      Modest        n.a.
non-textile sectors resulting in increased private sector
investment, firm growth, and job creation
Objective 2 - To improve the business environment for firms   n.a.           n.a.           Substantial
Objective 3 - To strengthen select government institutions    n.a.           n.a.           Modest
Objective 4 - To further diversify the economy                n.a.           n.a.           Substantial
Overall Efficacy                                              Negligible     Modest         Substantial
Efficiency                                                    Substantial
Outcome Rating                                                Unsatisfactory Moderately     Moderately
                                                                             Unsatisfactory Satisfactory
Outcome Rating Value                                          2              3              4
Amount Disbursed, Cumulative, US$ million                     5.92           9.18           25.94
Amount Disbursed, Period, US$ million                         5.92           3.26           16.76

                                                                                                   Page 20 of 28
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      LS-Second Pvt. Sector Competitiveness (P144933)



Disbursement, percent                                           5.92 / 25.94 = 3.26 / 25.94 = 16.72 / 25.94
                                                                22.8%          12.6%          = 64.5%
Weight Value                                                    0.46           0.50           2.6
Total Weights                                                   3.56
Overall Outcome Rating                                          Moderately Satisfactory

Based on a split evaluation, the overall outcome of the project is rated moderately satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The risks to the sustainability of the development outcomes are substantial.

Political Risk. A plan by the new Government, installed after project closing in November 2022, to reduce
ministries by more than 50 percent would pose a political risk to the development outcomes of this project if
the associated change in leadership and staff would affect those agencies that implemented the reforms
supported by this project. The same implementing agencies are expected to secure the reforms with follow
up actions.

Governance Risk. This project supported the enactment of new laws, rules, and regulations to improve the
business environment. The efficacy of these legal and regulatory reforms in the near to medium term would
eventually be tested by the ability of the Government to enforce the new laws and regulations. With Lesotho
facing multiple and severe economic and social challenges – domestic political uncertainty, external shocks,
and high inequality (poverty remains at a third of the population) – the focus and institutional capacity of the
Government will likely be stretched over several pressing problems (World Bank, April 20213, Macro Poverty
Outlook - Sub Saharan Africa).

Fiscal Risk. The information technology systems procured, installed, and activated under this project to
digitalize the services offered by the One-Stop Business Facilitation Center, the Revenue Services Lesotho,
and the Maseru City Council, to businesses and the public will need regular funding for operating and
maintenance costs. Tight budgetary conditions in the near term (Lesotho, which posted a fiscal deficit of 7.5
percent of GDP in 2022, is forecast to incur a fiscal deficit of around 1 percent of GDP in 2024) may make
the upkeep of the new systems difficult.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry




                                                                                                     Page 21 of 28
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   LS-Second Pvt. Sector Competitiveness (P144933)



Analytic Underpinnings. The design of various project activities was informed by analytic work
produced by the Bank and other sources. For example,

      On the construction permit reform – Good Practices for Construction Regulation and Enforcement
         Reform (international Finance Corporation, 2013) explained that construction regulation reform
         would: turn unrecognized assets into productive capital, help create a level playing field for
         businesses, and contribute to enforcing increased safety and improved resource management.
        On the movable collateral registry – Lesotho Financial Sector Development Strategy (Andrews et
         al., 2013) argued that a law that allowed small and medium enterprises to offer a bundle of assets
         comprising of stock, receivables, and equipment as loan collateral would unlock credit flows
         and improve access to credit.
        On insolvency reform – Creditor Rights and Insolvency Standard (World Bank, 2015) asserted
         that the protection of creditor rights included an effective debt enforcement regime for individual
         creditors to recover their debt, and a robust and efficient insolvency regime, which
         regulated collective creditor recovery.
        On commercial horticulture – Lesotho - Sharing Growth by Reducing Inequality and Vulnerability:
         Choices for Change. A Poverty, Gender, and Social Assessment (World Bank, 2010)
         emphasized that support for horticulture was crucial as farmers had been unable to shift to higher
         value crops because of associated risks and lack of development of market linkages.
        On matching grants for business enterprises – Workshop on Export Assistance Instruments for
         Small and Medium Enterprise in East Africa (Phillips, 2006) recommended that, based on Bank
         experience in East Africa, matching grants schemes should: make grants conditional on the
         beneficiary firm paying a proportion of total costs (to ensure "real commitment" and prepare the
         beneficiary for "eventual graduation”); have the grants and business growth mentoring ("hand-
         holding") delivered by an independent unit; and place the delivery unit outside the public service
         (to be regarded as independent and commercial in its approach).

Project Design. Although the project components (Improving the Business Environment and Supporting
Economic Diversification) and the associated interventions, backed by analytical work, were relevant to
the binding constraints to development (burdensome business regulations and a narrow economic base),
the original project design lacked coherence. The original project development objective was overly
general and vague (see Section 3). The results framework could not measure the impact of the specific
interventions on the achievement of the stated objective (see Section 9.A). The project development
objective would have to be radically reformulated, and the results indicators and targets would be revised
twice to establish an elemental congruence among the project objective, the project interventions, and
the measures of project performance and efficacy.

Institutional and Implementation Arrangements. Considering the multi-sector nature of the project
and the large number of implementing agencies (the Ministry of Trade and Industry, Cooperatives, and
Marketing, Central Bank of Lesotho, Maseru City Council, Ministry of Agriculture and Food Security,
Ministry of Forestry and Land Reclamation, Ministry of Tourism, Environment and Culture, Lesotho
National Development Corporation, Lesotho Tourism Development Corporation), the Bank provided for
institutional coordination mechanisms to more effectively implement the project. The project would have
a Project Steering Committee, composed of all implementing agencies, which would meet monthly
to review implementation progress and to resolve technical and implementation problems. A Project
Management Unit would be responsible for day-to-day operations of the project. Meanwhile, project
implementation would be guided by an Annual Work Plan, a Project Implementation Manual (for the


                                                                                                  Page 22 of 28
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LS-Second Pvt. Sector Competitiveness (P144933)



  Project Management Unit), and a LEAP Operational Manual (for the Lesotho Enterprise Assistance
  Program).

  Operational Risks and Mitigation Measures. The Project Appraisal Document assessed the
  operational risk of the project to be moderate overall, although it cited stakeholder risks arising from the
  project having multiple implementing agencies and multiple stakeholders. The Bank argued that support
  for capacity building among the implementing agencies, including training of the staff and their exposure
  to international good practices, would help strengthen the institutional and technical capacities of the
  implementing agencies.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Supervision. The Bank supervised the implementation of the project regularly through bi-annual
 implementation support missions. The Bank filed 17 Implementation Status and Results Reports (ISRs)
 over eight years (December 2013 - November 2021), or two a year, the average for Bank investment
 project financing operations. The ISR of June 2015 covered the first restructuring of March 2015, and the
 ISR of October 2017, the second restructuring and additional financing of July 2017. The Bank also filed
 nine Aide Memoires.

 Bank supervision of the project activities were adequately diligent, as evidenced by the Aide
 Memoires. Bank monitoring and reporting of the results indicators were also fairly detailed, as evidenced
 by the ISRs.

 Adaptation. The first restructuring in 2015 was justified ostensibly by "changed economic circumstances"
 in Lesotho (i.e., the slowdown of growth in South Africa, imminent decline of South African Customs
 Unions revenues, recent disinvestment in manufacturing, and a severe drought). The focus on external
 factors grossly overlooked and failed to comprehend the underlying defect with the project design. The
 second restructuring in 2017 finally corrected for the major design flaw. The Bank completely changed the
 project development objective and revised the output and outcome indicators and targets.




  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

                                                                                                    Page 23 of 28
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LS-Second Pvt. Sector Competitiveness (P144933)




a. M&E Design
 The Project Appraisal Document defined seven output indicators and three outcome indicators to measure
 the achievement of the objective to contribute to the development of selected non-textile sectors resulting
 in increased private sector investment, firm growth, and job creation.

 The M&E plan called for the conduct of project monitoring by the Project Management Unit, including the
 preparation of a quarterly Project Report to be submitted to the Bank within 45 days after the end of each
 calendar quarter.

 The original results framework was flawed: (a) the original project development objective was overly
 general and did not match the scope and scale of the project activities (see Section 8.A); (b) many results
 indicators could not be measured (see Section 4 - Objective 1); (c) many activities lacked output indicators;
 (d) one output indicator was poorly worded; and (e) one of three outcome indicators "did not measure any
 aspect of the PDO" (according to the ICR itself).



b. M&E Implementation
  The first restructuring dropped four and revised of the original seven output indicators and dropped one
  and revised two of the original outcome indicators. The diagnosis advanced by Restructuring Paper of
  2016 – that "the targets for the project development objectives [had] become unrealistic" considering the
  "the changing economic and political circumstances in Lesotho" – missed recognizing the underlying flaw
  with the original M&E design.

  The second restructuring revised the project development objective, dropped several output and outcome
  indicators, and added new ones. The intent of the changes – "to better capture the expected impact of
  project activities," according to the Restructuring Paper of 2017 – was more discerning.

  Nonetheless, some gaps remained deficiencies remained. For example: (a) for the objective to improve
  the business environment for firms, there were no results indicators, output, or outcomes, to measure the
  impact of the enactment of the Security Interest in Movable Property Law and the launch of the Lesotho
  Electronic Registry in Movable Assets; (b) there were no output indicators defined for the objective to
  strengthen government institutions – the ICR had to use the output indicators for the objective to improve
  the business environment for firms as the same output indicators for the objective to strengthen select
  government institutions; and (c) although M&E data was collected methodically during project
  implementation, there were also some problems with M&E implementation toward the end of the project –
  there were inconsistencies with the data on disbursements for the Lesotho Enterprise Assistance
  Program. The ICR team clarified that for (a) and (b) the Doing Business indicators intended to capture the
  outputs and outcomes of the reforms and capacity-building support in the project. Also, the LEAP
  disbursement reporting inconsistencies were addressed before project closure.



c. M&E Utilization
  M&E data helped inform a review of the operating processes and procedures of the project, according to
  the ICR. The review recommended a simplification and streamlining of matching grant application
  procedures and a broadening of the program funding criteria to include financing of equipment and

                                                                                                   Page 24 of 28
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LS-Second Pvt. Sector Competitiveness (P144933)



  technology products for eligible business enterprises and associations apart from the financing of
  business development services.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Environmental Safeguards. The project was classified as an environmental assessment category "B"
   project ("partial assessment for environmental assessment") at appraisal and triggered safeguards
   policies OP/BP 4.01 - Environmental Assessment and OP/BP 4.09 - Pest Management. An Environmental
   and Social Management Plan was prepared for the proposed development of a combined central handicraft
   marketplace, artisan resource center and tourism information center (impacts from construction noise, air
   pollution due to dust and emissions from heavy vehicles, accumulation of solid and liquid wastes, and
   disruption of traffic), and an Environmental and Social Management Framework and an Integrated Pest
   Management Plan for the commercial horticulture (impacts from excessive use of water, tilling of land, and
   minor to moderate use of pesticides). The documents were disclosed in-country and at the Bank’s InfoShop
   in August 2013.

   Environmental Safeguards (OP/BP 4.01 and OP/BP 4.09) was rated satisfactory, including in the last ISR of
   November 2021.

   Social Safeguards. The project drew complaints, during preparation, from stakeholders near the
   horticulture farms. After full consultation with farm shareholders and project stakeholders, a project-level
   grievance redress mechanism was established in 2017, with detailed written processes for accepting and
   dealing with grievances. A Grievance Redress Committee was organized, composed of the village chief
   (serving as the chair), the local counsellor, a physical planner, two representatives from the village, two
   representatives from each farm, and an area extension officer (managers of the farms were also ex–officio
   members of the committee).

   Feedback on the grievance address mechanism was positive during project implementation: (a) the
   mechanism was transparent and efficient; (b) the composition of the Grievance Redress Committee was
   broad and community-based; (c) the project invested in training and capacity building of stakeholders,
   including local authorities and owners of the horticulture fields; (d) the number of complaints at the farms
   was reduced.

   Overall Safeguards was rated satisfactory, including in the last ISR of November 2021.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Procurement. Procurement would follow standard Bank guidelines and methods for the procurement of
   goods, works, non-consulting services, and consultant services. A Procurement Plan would set forth

                                                                                                    Page 25 of 28
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LS-Second Pvt. Sector Competitiveness (P144933)



   contracts subject to the
   prior review by the Bank and all other contracts subject to post review.

   No major issues with procurement were reported during project implementation.

   Procurement was rated satisfactory, including in the last ISR of November 2021.

   Financial Management. Financial management would follow standard Bank loan conditions. The
   Government would submit to the Bank interim unaudited financial reports for the project (part of the Project
   Report) within 45 days after the end of each calendar quarter, have its annual financial statements
   (covering one fiscal year) audited, and submit the audited financial statement within six months after the
   end of each year.

   No major issues with financial management were reported during project implementation.

   Financial Management was rated satisfactory, including in the last ISR of November 2021.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
                                                                                 Shortcomings in the
Outcome                         Satisfactory           Moderately Satisfactory   achievement of the original and
                                                                                 revised objectives
Bank Performance                Satisfactory           Moderately Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                  Modest                 Modest

Quality of ICR                  ---                    Substantial


12. Lessons

Two lessons are drawn from the ICR, with some adaptation.

Although enacting new laws and creating new institutions take considerable time and effort,
governments must nonetheless persevere with legal and institutional reform if they are to
develop the enabling environment for private business activity and private sector
development. In this project, The Government was able to establish the Credit Information Bureau
in the first year of project implementation in 2014, but only after the International Monetary Fund and

                                                                                                   Page 26 of 28
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       LS-Second Pvt. Sector Competitiveness (P144933)



the multi-donor Financial Sector Reform and Strengthening Initiative had helped the Central Bank of
Lesotho with preparatory work in creating a credit bureau starting before the preceding Lesotho
Private Sector Competitiveness and Economic Diversification Project was approved in 2007. After
the creation of the Credit Information Bureau, it would take another six to seven years to enact
the Security Interest in Movable Property Law in 2020 and establish the associated Lesotho
Electronic Registry of Movable Assets in 2021. The two sets of reforms were vital to improving
access to finance in Lesotho, where it been historically limited.

Programs to diversify an economy and its export structure require a discerning search for,
and a rigorous assessment of, those sectors and industries in which the economy enjoys
comparative advantage. In this project, commercial horticulture, handicraft manufacturing for
export, and tourism, offered viable opportunities to diversify the economy away from an excessive
reliance on textile and apparel and rough diamonds. Commercial deciduous fruit farming was 150
times more productive than smallholder subsistence wheat cultivation. Handicrafts could leverage
robust foreign interest in the country's Basotho culture. Tourism offered opportunities to exploit the
country's natural landscape and wildlife, rich history and culture, and colorful festivals for business
advantage over competing destinations. Select strategic interventions would help nudge the
development of these sectors as new sources of growth in the long term.




13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR document was concise and the account of the implementation of the project activities was candid. The
efficacy assessment was outcome-oriented and based on the degree of achievement of the results
targets. However, the ICR did not conduct a split evaluation. Changes to the results framework at first
restructuring, and to the project development objective, project components, and the results framework, at the
second restructuring and additional financing required a split assessment following Bank Operations Policy and
Country Services guidelines. The ICR presented sufficient evidence to assess the project's efficiency, the
Bank’s performance at design and implementation, and the project's M&E design and implementation.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                     Page 27 of 28
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
LS-Second Pvt. Sector Competitiveness (P144933)




                                                                               Page 28 of 28
