     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Afghanistan Gas Project (AGASP) (P172109)



                                                                                   Report Number: ICRR0023430

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P172109                                    Afghanistan Gas Project (AGASP)

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Afghanistan                                Energy & Extractives


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                    Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-D5210                                  31-Oct-2024                                             4,368,777.24

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 26-Nov-2019                                31-Oct-2024

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                       Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                             52,500,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                              52,500,000.00                                               0.00

 Actual                                           4,368,777.24                                               0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator            Group
 Maria Shkaratan             Christopher David            Ramachandra Jammi                 IEGSD (Unit 4)
                             Nelson




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) was "to facilitate a sustainable supply of gas through targeted
   investments in gas infrastructure and enhanced gas sector governance".

   For the purposes of this ICR review, the objective will be broken into two parts:

   PDO1: To facilitate a sustainable supply of gas through targeted investments in gas infrastructure.


                                                                                                    Page 1 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Afghanistan Gas Project (AGASP) (P172109)



   PDO2: To facilitate a sustainable supply of gas through enhanced gas sector governance.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   1. Original components:

   Components 1 and 2 were designed to support enhanced gas infrastructure and improved gas sector
   governance. They addressed impediments to investment across the gas value chain, specifically: (i) a weak
   legal, regulatory and contractual framework, and (ii) low capacity of relevant government agencies,
   including the Ministry of Mines and Petroleum (MoMP) and the Afghan Gas Enterprise (AGE), to manage
   the sector and minimize investor risks. In addition, they were to invest in several critical pieces of gas
   infrastructure needed to ensure the delivery of natural gas for power generation by the independent power
   plants (IPPs) set to be commissioned by 2020/2021. Two such plants, supported by separate World Bank
   Group (WBG) projects, one in Sheberghan and one in Mazar-e-Sharif, were expected to create a
   cornerstone of the internal gas market. The functioning of these plants, however, depended on sufficient
   and sustainable gas supply from the productive fields and on sustained investment in the upstream gas
   processing.

   Component A – Sustaining Gas Supply (cost at appraisal: US$35.2 million; actual cost: US$1.03
   million) - comprised two subcomponents:

   Subcomponent A1 financed the following: (i) equipment and related technical assistance (TA) for the
   construction of the new Sheberghan-Mazar Gas Pipeline; (ii) construction of a new amine gas treatment
   plant and related TA; and (iii) capacity building for AGE in relation to natural gas resource development.

   Subcomponent A2 was to provide TA to the MoMP to prepare an international competitive tender for the
   development of the Totimaidan gas field to ensure sustainability of gas supply for the Sheberghan and
   Mazar IPPs and other off-takers.

   Component B – Strengthening Gas Sector Governance (cost at appraisal: US$13.3; actual cost:
   US$0.46 million) - comprised two subcomponents:

   Subcomponent B1 was to support MoMP’s capacity related to the MoMP’s central functions as established
   in the Hydrocarbons Law (2018) and the Government’s Mining Sector Road Map (2018), specifically
   focusing on the following: (i) creating a robust institutional, legal and regulatory, and contractual framework
   for sustainable gas sector development and building capacity to implement the framework; and (ii)
   strengthening the MoMP’s human resources, aiming at gender-balanced staffing, enhanced skills including


                                                                                                      Page 2 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Afghanistan Gas Project (AGASP) (P172109)



   in sector management and environmental and social oversight, and improved capacity for the
   implementation of the Afghanistan Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative (AEITI).

   Subcomponent B2 was to support the operationalization of the Afghanistan Oil and Gas Regulatory
   Authority (AOGRA), including its capacity to perform functions assigned to it by the new Hydrocarbons Law.

   Component C: - Project Implementation and Management (cost at appraisal: US$4.0 million; actual
   cost: US$0.11 million) - financed management and oversight of the Project, including incremental
   operating costs, equipment, training on fiduciary and project management and audits, and engagement of
   technical advisers to support Project performance monitoring and planning.

   2. Changes during implementation:

   There was no Project restructuring. No changes were made to the PDO, outcome targets, Project
   components, Results Framework (RF) indicators, or Project financing.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project Cost: The appraisal estimate was US$52.5 million, and the actual Project cost (the amount
   disbursed at closure) was US$4.37 million (ICR, pages 2-3). This amount includes the total component cost
   of US$1.6 million and the US$2.64 million transferred to the Designated Account (ICR, page 42). The
   Project cost is above the sum of component cost and the amount transferred to the Designated account.
   The difference being US$0.13 million. This is due to insufficient data on disbursement by component at
   closure.

   Project Financing: The Project was financed by an International Development Association (IDA) grant
   (US$52.5 million at appraisal and US$4.37 million at closure).

   Borrower/Recipient contribution: No borrower contribution was planned or received.

   Project Dates: The Project was approved on November 26, 2019 and became effective on January 8,
   2020. The date of the mid-term review (MTR) was yet to be determined at appraisal, and the MTR was not
   undertaken. The original closing date was October 31, 2024. Due to the collapse of the government in
   August 2021 and the following political turmoil, the WBG’s country portfolio, including the Project, was
   suspended on February 17, 2022 and then phased out.

   Reverse Split Evaluation – Due to the collapse of the government in Afghanistan, this evaluation will
   undertake a reverse split evaluation approach as approved by OPCS.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country context. At Project approval, Afghanistan was experiencing economic stagnation and
deterioration, an increasing conflict, and deepening internal political fragmentation. Average annual GDP

                                                                                                  Page 3 of 15
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Afghanistan Gas Project (AGASP) (P172109)



               growth fell to 2.5 percent between 2015-2020, below the rate of population increase. The impact of COVID-
               19 was significant and led to a two-percent economic contraction and a sharp increase in poverty. An
               estimated 60-70 percent of the population lived in poverty at the end of 2020. The collapse of the
               government in August 2021 triggered further economic crisis and a withdrawal of most international aid.

               Relevance to the national priorities at approval. The Afghanistan development strategy, outlined in the
               Afghanistan National Peace and Development Framework 2017 to 2021 (ANPDF), outlines the importance
               of infrastructure investments (ANPDF, page 14) and prioritizes the Mineral and Resource Development
               program, as well as domestic power generation, including based on natural gas, though public-private
               partnerships (PPPs) (ANPDF, pages 22-24).

               Relevance to the WBG’s assistance Strategies at approval. The World Bank country strategy at
               approval was organized around three pillars: (i) building strong and accountable institutions; (ii) supporting
               inclusive growth; and (iii) expanding and deepening social inclusion (Country Partnership Framework (CPF)
               FY2017-20, published in 2016). The Project contributed to the second CPF pillar, which identified extractive
               industry as one of two growth drivers (together with agriculture) and stated that support to the extractive
               industry would help “to improve governance and increase revenues, and to provide a base for more
               diversified growth in the longer term” (CPF 2016, page 14). While finding continued support to the country’s
               development necessary, both the Bank's Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD, 2016) and the CPF pointed
               out the extreme fragility and high risk of operating in Afghanistan.

               Relevance at the time of the government takeover (August 2021). The PDO remained relevant to the
               national priorities and the WBG’s Assistance strategies until the takeover in August 2021. The Project was
               fully consistent with the priorities and approach reflected in the World Bank Group’s Performance and
               Learning Review 2019, which extended the CPF 2016 for two additional years to cover FY21 and FY22.
               The World Bank’s Afghanistan Development Update (2019) outlined that gas production and use would
               support growth through the realization of the extractives potential and as a result of improved energy
               security. These priorities were fully consistent with the Government strategy.

               The relevance of objectives is rated High due to its full alignment with the country strategy and government
               priorities at appraisal and up to the suspension of the WBG’s country program as a result of the August
               2021 government takeover.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To facilitate a sustainable supply of gas through targeted investments in gas infrastructure.


                                                                                                                              Page 4 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Afghanistan Gas Project (AGASP) (P172109)




Rationale
The theory of change (ToC), developed for the PAD, showed how the intended objectives would be achieved
through two results chains, from outputs to PDO outcomes. The first results chain (under Component A)
showed that the delivered equipment, TA, and capacity building outputs would lead to the commissioning of
the new gas pipeline and the new amino gas processing plant, as well as the launch of a tender for the
development of a gas field (outcomes). This would in turn support the achievement of the first PDO level
result of increased capacity to deliver gas to the off-takers in the targeted areas of Sheberghan and Mazar.
The second results chain (under Component B) showed that the delivered capacity building, TA, support to
the gas sector legal framework, and improved gender-balanced staffing (outputs) would lead to a robust gas
sector legal framework, the operationalization of AOGRA, applied AEITI standards, and enhanced
environmental and social (E&S) management (outcomes). This would support the achievement of the second
PDO level result of improved institutional, regulatory, and contractual framework for gas sector management
and oversight.

The ToC is logical, covers all main outputs and intermediate outcomes, and captures all essential elements
necessary to achieve the PDO outcomes. It has, however, a shortcoming: the relationship between outputs
and intermediate outcomes is not described in the text or visualized in the ToC chart; there is nothing to show
how the outputs relate to the outcomes and whether there are interconnections across outputs and across
outcomes. It would be beneficial if the ToC not only included the lists of outputs and outcomes but engaged
more broadly in an overview of the transformation expected. As such, it would fulfill the ToC function of
showing the logic of the Project: the results chain or the expected cause-effect relationships among inputs,
outputs, intermediate results, PDO outcomes, and long-term outcomes.

Note: At the time of its suspension, the Project was under implementation for 11 months only, compared to
the originally planned implementation of almost five years. All original targets were to be achieved by the
planned closure on October 31, 2024, more than three years after the Project was suspended in August 2021
due to the government takeover. Some RF indicators had second-year targets, to be achieved in November
2021, and this allowed some estimation as to whether the Project was on track in reaching its objectives at
the time of the suspension.

Outcomes:

1. By closure, the Project did not achieve its PDO1 indicator’s target: while the physical capacity to deliver
gas to the off-takers was increased by 560,000 m3, the original target of 900,000 m3 was not reached. The
achieved capacity was sufficient to supply one of the two off-takers: the Shebergan’s power plant was
receiving gas from AGE and operating at baseload. However, the resulting capacity would not cover the
operations of the second off-taker, the Mazar’s power plant (ICR, page 14). The ICR comments that while the
PDO1 indicator’s first-year target was exceeded, the second-year target was not met: the commissioning of
the pipeline was rescheduled from Q3/Q4 2021 to Q2/Q3 2022, (ICR, page 14, page 30).

2. The Project did not achieve its target of commissioning of the new amine plant by closure.

3. The Project did not achieve its target of commissioning for new Sheberghan-Mazar Gas Pipeline.

Outputs:




                                                                                                  Page 5 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Afghanistan Gas Project (AGASP) (P172109)



1. By closure, the Project did not achieve the target of an updated field development plan for Yatimtaq gas
field. The related activity was delayed at the time of Project suspension (ICR, page 31).

Overall, none of the outcome and output targets under the Original Project, Objective 1 were achieved by
Project closure. Two targets that had annual sub-targets were behind schedule.

The Original Objective 1 efficacy rating is Negligible due to the non-achievement of all of the targets by
closure and a delayed progress with Project implementation at the time of its suspension.



Rating
Negligible


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
To facilitate a sustainable supply of gas through targeted investments in gas infrastructure (unchanged).

Revised Rationale
Please see the discussion of the ToC under the Objective 1, Original Project.

The progress made under Objective 1 after the takeover was not possible to monitor, but it is likely to be
negligible: specifically, in relation to the PDO1 target, the implementation of the Mazar off-taker power plant,
to which the Project was linked, was still on hold when the ICR was published (ICR, page 14).

The Revised Objective 1 efficacy rating is Negligible because no additional progress was made or
measured after the government takeover.



Revised Rating
Negligible


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To facilitate a sustainable supply of gas through enhanced gas sector governance.

Rationale
Please see the discussion of the ToC under the Objective 1, Original Project.

Outcomes:

1. By closure, the Project did not achieve the PDO2 indicator target of submitting the primary regulatory and
contractual framework for upstream and mid-stream gas sector development to Cabinet. The second-year
target was only partially met: the Cabinet approved administrative regulations addressing institutional and


                                                                                                    Page 6 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Afghanistan Gas Project (AGASP) (P172109)



coordination aspects for sector management, supported by the Project, but not other regulations (ICR, page
14, page 29).

2. By closure, the Project did not achieve its target of preparing the final draft of Prioritized Contractual and
Regulatory Framework for submission to Cabinet. The target was partially met with the approval of several
regulations by Project’s suspension (ICR, page 32).

3. By closure, the Project did not achieve its target of ten percent of female employment in technical and
managerial positions at MoMP and OAGRA. The actual achievement was five percent, and the corresponding
activity was delayed (ICR, page 32).

4. By closure, the Project achieved its target of improved AEITI validation report’s results as compared to the
previous report. This was achieved prior to the Project’s suspension.

5. By closure, the Project did not achieve its target of implementing key recommendations from functional
management review of AOGRA.

Outputs:

1. By closure, the Project did not achieve its target of the development and dissemination of code of conduct
to prevent Gender Based Violence in the extractive sector for investors. The second-year target was not met
either (ICR, page 32).

2. By closure, the Project did not achieve its target of addressing 70 percent of grievances within one month.
The actual achievement was zero.

3. By closure, the Project did not achieve its target of fully staffing the Environmental and Social Unit of the
MoMP and making it operational. The target was partially met: the unit was almost completely staffed but the
organizational chart was not approved yet (ICR, page 35).

Overall, only one intermediate target was met – the AEITI validation report’s results were improved as
compared to the previous year – but neither the PDO2 indicator target, nor the intermediate results targets
were achieved. Three targets that had annual sub-targets were behind the schedule at Project suspension.
The ICR notes that the overall institutional, regulatory, and contractual framework for gas sector management
and oversight was not substantively improved by Project’s suspension: the majority of institutional
development and capacity building under Objective 2 had not begun implementation or remained incomplete,
and AOGRA was still non-operational (ICR, pages 14-15). The Objective 2 was not achieved.

The Objective 2 efficacy rating is Negligible due to the non-achievement of most of the targets by closure
and a delayed progress with Project implementation at the time of its suspension.



Rating
Negligible


OBJECTIVE 2 REVISION 1

                                                                                                      Page 7 of 15
                                 Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                 Afghanistan Gas Project (AGASP) (P172109)




                              Revised Objective
                              To facilitate a sustainable supply of gas through enhanced gas sector governance.

                              Revised Rationale
                              Please see the discussion of the ToC under the Objective 1, Original Project.

                              Overall, the progress made after the takeover was not possible to monitor, but it is likely to be negligible
                              considering the events on the ground and the suspension of many of the activities under Objective 2 since the
                              collapse of the government on August 15, 2021 (ICR, page 15).

                              The Revised Objective 2 efficacy rating is Negligible because no additional progress was made or
                              measured after the government takeover.



                              Revised Rating
                              Negligible


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            For both objectives, efficacy is Negligible: while some progress was made toward outcome targets that were
                            expected to be reached by the originally planned Project closure date, none of those targets except one was
                            achieved by the actual closure date, and the Project was behind schedule in relation to several targets. The
                            overall efficacy is therefore Negligible.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating                                   Primary Reason
                            Negligible                                                External shock
                  OBJR1_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
                            Following the takeover, both objectives remain negligible.



                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating                        Primary Reason
                            Negligible                                                External shock


   5. Efficiency
   Economic analysis



                                                                                                                              Page 8 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Afghanistan Gas Project (AGASP) (P172109)



The economic analysis at appraisal was conducted for the Sustaining Gas Supply component (Component
A). An assessment focused on costs and benefits of providing gas to the two off-taker power plants for their
lifetime (to 2040) and the associated O&M expenditures. Specific investments needed for gas supply include
drilling new wells at the Yatimtaq field, optimizing operations of the existing field facilities and amine plant,
ensuring adequate processing capacity by installing a new amine plant, and completing a pipeline link from the
Sheberghan fields to the off-taker power plant at Mazar-e-Sharif. The economic internal rate of return (EIRR) for
the Mazar power plant was estimated at 11.3 percent, and the net present value (NPV) at US$44.3 million. The
EIRR for the Sheberghan power plant was estimated at 15.5 percent, and the NPV at US$14.5 million.

At closure, no economic analysis was conducted, considering the circumstances under which the Project was
cancelled (government takeover and the phasing out of the WBG portfolio in the country). Given the
considerable limitations of the replacement government, it is unlikely the original expected EIRR for subprojects
will remain. Support is likely to be tempered by fiscal constraints, and operations and maintenance will be
limited. Thus, while the benchmarking exercise would be helpful, it would have limited utility in light of the
considerable political changes.

Administrative efficiency.

In the first 9-months of the Project, implementation was efficient and largely on-schedule. However, this followed
by a period of significant delays, lasting up to the Project’s suspension. The ICR reports that this was caused by
a change in the counterparts, including the Minister of Finance and the Minister of Mines and Petroleum,
resulting in a limited Ministry of Finance’s (MoF’s) engagement in the High-Level Stakeholder Committee and in
the absence of consistent and effective government oversight, weak inter-ministerial coordination, and reduced
efficiency. As both the conflict and the impact of COVID-19 intensified, the Project became a low priority for the
government. By August 2021, implementation had fallen behind schedule for several key activities. (ICR, page
17)

Efficiency is rated Negligible given that the expected EIRR is not likely to remain given multiple constraints and
the administrative efficiency of the Project was low.


Efficiency Rating
Negligible


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      67.00
 Appraisal                                                  13.40
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      0
 ICR Estimate                                                0
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.


                                                                                                      Page 9 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Afghanistan Gas Project (AGASP) (P172109)



6. Outcome

Original Project:

Relevance of objectives: High

Efficacy: Negligible

Efficiency: Negligible

Outcome: Highly Unsatisfactory.

Revision 1:

Relevance of objectives: High

Efficacy: Negligible

Efficiency: Negligible

Outcome: Highly Unsatisfactory.

The relevance of objectives is rated High due to its full alignment with the country strategy and government
priorities at appraisal and up to the suspension of the WBG’s country program due to the August 2021
government takeover. For both Original and the Revised Projects under both Objectives, the efficacy is
Negligible: while some progress was made toward outcome targets that were expected to be reached by the
originally planned Project closure date, none of those targets was achieved by the actual closure date. The
overall efficacy is Negligible. The expected economic benefits of the Project have not materialized; therefore,
the Project efficiency is negligible. Thus, the overall outcome rating is Highly Unsatisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Highly Unsatisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The ICR reports that the risk of the sustainability of Project’s outcomes is significant (ICR, page 25). The
Sheberghan power plant remained operational and was receiving gas from AGE after Project suspension,
but it is unknown for how long this will last. It is also unknown whether the limited improvements in
institutional capacity during Project implementation were sustained after Project suspension. Overall,
considering the abrupt stop to the WBG engagement in Afghanistan after the August 2021 government
takeover and the following cancellation of the Project, the sustainability of the achievements is low.




                                                                                                    Page 10 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Afghanistan Gas Project (AGASP) (P172109)



8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The ICR reports that Project design was strong, with activities linked to the achievement of the PDO,
  most risks were identified, and the Bank had developed a strong relationship with the counterpart. The
  Bank team provided strong technical inputs over the course of Project preparation, including hands-on
  support to guide the client and work closely with consultants. There were 16 E&S documents required at
  appraisal, and the locally based Bank E&S specialists were instrumental in their preparation. However,
  the process of managing E&S risks could have been streamlined better. Also, weaknesses in
  procurement capacity at the MoMP could have been mitigated at Project preparation through recruiting
  dedicated procurement staff and preparing ToRs for priority activities early-on. Implementation
  arrangements were strong and relevant to the Project design, but there were some weaknesses: the
  Project was to be implemented through relevant line ministries and government agencies, rather than
  PIUs, however, the capacity of AOGRA to be an effective counterpart and the institutional stability of the
  implementing agency MoMP were insufficient. Also, the implementation readiness of the Project was not
  fully adequate. First, the Project Management Support Firm should have been recruited earlier to mitigate
  the bottlenecks in Project implementation. Second, the assessment of the AGE’s technical and
  managerial capacity and of the equipment needs for the Sheberghan-Mazar Pipeline, undertaken at
  Project preparation, had deficiencies, resulting in implementation delays. (ICR, page 22-24)



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The ICR reports that the Bank team sought to manage risks as they arose and provided intensive hands-on
 supervision and implementation support. This included the following. First, regular implementation support
 missions and Project team meetings were held, and Aide Memoires were prepared. Second, the Project
 had a strong team of national experts, including a country-based operations officer who provided support to
 the Project team at AGE, MoMP, and AEITI Secretariat, and a country-based fiduciary, environmental and
 social specialist who worked closely with government counterparts. Third, international consultants
 provided the client with specialized advice and capacity-building on critical gas field optimization and
 operations, E&S management, gender, and procurement. Fourth, given the complexity and high-profile
 nature of the Project, the WBG management was actively engaged through the Mazar High-Level
 Stakeholder Committee. This high-level institutional support was critical during the early stages of
 implementation. (ICR, pages 24-25)



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

                                                                                                 Page 11 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Afghanistan Gas Project (AGASP) (P172109)




9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 Overall, the Project's RF adequately reflected the Project interventions and was sufficiently linked to the
 PDO and the ToC. The indicators were quantitative when appropriate (the governance - Component B -
 indicators were often non-quantitative, with a “Yes-No” options for reaching the target), time-bound, and
 attributable to the Project. All of the indicators had baselines and targets (with the exception of two
 indicators with no targets). There were several gender indicators. The RF measured the Project’s outputs
 and outcomes and covered all areas of Project investments. The PDO indicators were reflective of the main
 Project outcomes, while the intermediate indicators reflected both intermediate outcomes and outputs. The
 ICR reported that the indicators and targets were relatively easy to monitor, which was critical given the
 limited capacity of the client (ICR, page 20).



b. M&E Implementation
  The ICR reports that the M&E implementation was adequate. While there were limited data points (with
  three ISRs filed during the life of the Project), the indicators in the RF were adequately monitored by the
  MoMP Project team on a periodic basis (at least twice a year) and upon the request of the Bank team
  (ICR, page 20).



c. M&E Utilization
  The ICR reports that the M&E utilization for decision making by the client was weak. The indicators in
  the RF were regularly monitored, and the team at the MoMP developed an excel-based implementation
  tracking system to enable a regular review and monitoring of the timelines for procurement and
  implementation. However, the M&E findings were not fully used by the MoMP management for decision
  making. (ICR, page 20)



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Environmental and Social Safeguards. The appraisal-stage Environmental and Social Assessment
   classified both the environmental and social risks as Substantial. Project activities per se were expected to
   have limited E&S and Occupational Health and Safety (OHS) impacts. However, the subsequent
   downstream outcomes of the Project, including extractive activities, such as the development of the
   Totimadan gas field by a private investor/operator, could have adverse environmental and social
   implications. (Environmental and Social Review Summary, Appraisal Stage, page 4).



                                                                                                    Page 12 of 15
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Afghanistan Gas Project (AGASP) (P172109)



  The World Bank appraised technical, environmental, social, and OHS information made available by the
  client, including an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF), Resettlement Framework
  (RF), Labor Management Procedure (LMP), Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP), the Environmental and
  Social Audit (ESA) and Ex-post Social Audit (EPSA) for the first 44 km of the Sheberghan-Mazar Gas
  Pipeline, and an assessment of the E&S and OHS capacity of the client. All these documents were cleared
  by the World Bank and disclosed. The Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA), the
  Environmental and Social Management Plan ESMP, and a Resettlement Plan (RP) for the full pipeline and
  new amine plant were submitted to the World Bank for review and clearance and disclosed. The MoMP
  adopted the Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP), which is referenced in the Financing
  Agreement. (PAD, page 43-44)

  The ICR reports that by the time of Project suspension, the performance rating for five of six Environment
  and Social Standards (ESSs) that applied to the Project was Moderately Satisfactory, and the overall rating
  was Moderately Satisfactory in the last ISR. However, at the time of the government collapse, the
  establishment of an E&S Unit in the MoMP was still pending, the E&S instruments were still being prepared
  (albeit some were nearly finalized), and a broader capacity building program for the MoMP to monitor and
  manage E&S risks from the sector had not yet been implemented (to note, the civil works were not
  commenced yet). A Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) was established, including the formation of
  three Grievance Redress Committees (GRCs) and the appointment of three SEP/GRM focal points.
  However, the GRM was not yet fully operationalized in the field. (ICR, page 21)




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Procurement. The ICR reports that procurement was Moderately Unsatisfactory in the last ISR: the
  processes overall were extremely slow, and during the last two quarters of implementation, a number of
  procurement-related challenges occurred, including weak procurement planning, delays in processing,
  irregularities in procurement of individual consultants, and poor contracts management. Several individual
  national consultants were recruited, however, there were significant delays in the procurement of some
  Project staff, such as the Internal Auditor and Social Specialists. In addition, irregularities in some
  recruitment processes in the last 9 months of the Project raised significant concerns. An internal control
  assessment of AGASP, conducted through a Third-Party Monitoring Agent (TPMA), found ‘significant
  deficiencies’ in the procurement/recruitment of Project staff and undeclared conflicts of interest in the
  procurement of two firms. (ICR, page 21)

  Financial Management (FM). The ICR reports that in the final ISR, FM performance of the Project was
  rated Satisfactory, based on the FM supervision review of May 2021. The financial reports were timely,
  satisfactory, and in compliance with the grant agreement. The statements of Expenditures (SoEs) were
  reviewed and certified by the Third-Party monitoring agent, and non-compliance or questionable
  expenditures were reported. Significant progress was reported in completing the pending legal covenants
  related to Financial Management. At the time of the collapse of government, there were outstanding
  payments to Project staff, contractors, and consultants. However, because accounts were immediately
  frozen, those payments remained outstanding. There were also significant concerns associated with the
  delays and irregularities in the procurement of the internal auditor, as mentioned in the Procurement
  section above. (ICR, page 22)



                                                                                                Page 13 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Afghanistan Gas Project (AGASP) (P172109)




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                    IEG
                                                                                Disagreements/Comment
                                                                                There was very limited progress
                                                                                against the designated
Outcome                        Unsatisfactory        Highly Unsatisfactory
                                                                                objectives and thus expected
                                                                                returns are unlikely to eventuate.
                               Moderately
Bank Performance                                     Moderately Satisfactory
                               Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                 Modest                Modest

Quality of ICR                 ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The following lessons are based on the ICR, with minor adjustments. They can be used in the
Fragility, Conflict, and Violence (FCV) context beyond Afghanistan.

1. In low capacity FCV settings, support and efforts to simplify the E&S framework need to be
provided during preparation and early implementation. For the Project, the need to prepare 16 E&S
documents created a significant burden. Moreover, the counterparts were unable to internalize and
fully apply the policies, procedures and recommendations listed as requirements in these
documents. The lesson is that adapting the E&S framework requirements to FCV countries, building
E&S capacity on a systematic basis rather than project by project, ensuring that the documentation
prepared by the project is absorbed and understood by the client, and establishing an approach
similar to Hands-on Expanded Implementation Support (HEIS) currently used for procurement could
be beneficial if applied to future operations.

2. In limited capacity settings, it can be beneficial to use a phased approach to implementing
complex projects. During the early stages of the Project, the focus was on the construction of the
Sheberghan-Mazar Pipeline and optimization of field facilities (Component A), while the human
resource and institutional capacity building activities (Component B) were planned for stage two.
This phased approach allowed the team to utilize limited resources and capacity better.

3. In FCV countries, a preparation-stage realistic assessment of the counterpart’s readiness and
capacity to implement, as well as a plan regarding capacity gaps’ management, is critical. The
experience of the reviewed Project was that the capacity gaps and the insufficient readiness of the
counterparts, including within the implementing agency (MoMP), resulted in implementation delays.
Supplemental implementation support was provided by the World Bank once the issues were

                                                                                                     Page 14 of 15
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Afghanistan Gas Project (AGASP) (P172109)



identified during implementation, but such approach has deficiencies, as it limits the role of the
government in implementation and reduces the sustainability of project outcomes. The lesson is that
planning to address the counterpart’s implementation capacity gaps is a critical step of project
preparation.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provides a good justification of the PDO relevance; robust evidence; a clear linking of evidence to
findings; and sufficient basis for the ratings. The ICR has internal consistency. The lessons learned are linked
to the narrative and the ratings and are useful for operations in the FCV countries.

However, the ICR could have included more (even if limited) information on Project efficacy after the
government takeover and on the sustainability of Project outcomes. In addition, it is unclear why Relevance of
the PDO is rated as Substantial and not High, as no explanation is provided. The ToC also has some
deficiencies, presenting lists of inputs and outputs, but limited engagement with causal links. Despite these
shortcomings, the overall quality of the ICR is substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                    Page 15 of 15
