     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Benin ACCESS (P163560)



                                                                              Report Number: ICRR0023406

1. Project Data



 Project ID                               Project Name
 P163560                                  Benin ACCESS

 Country                                  Practice Area(Lead)
 Benin                                    Social Protection & Jobs


 L/C/TF Number(s)                         Closing Date (Original)              Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-D3430                                30-Jun-2022                                        38,003,085.42

 Bank Approval Date                       Closing Date (Actual)
 06-Jul-2018                              30-Jun-2022

                                          IBRD/IDA (USD)                                    Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            40,000,000.00                                           0.00

 Revised Commitment                             40,000,000.00                                           0.00

 Actual                                         38,003,085.42                                           0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                ICR Review Coordinator        Group
 Judith Hahn Gaubatz         Salim J. Habayeb           Eduardo Fernandez             IEGHC (Unit 2)
                                                        Maldonado




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Financing Agreement (page 4) and the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, page 12), the
   project objectives were as follows:

           To improve access to decentralized basic social services and social safety nets, and to
            strengthen the social protection system.



                                                                                               Page 1 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Benin ACCESS (P163560)




b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   (Note: "Actual" amounts are approximate, as the final amounts were reported in CFA francs).

   1. Improving Decentralized Service Delivery (Appraisal: US$ 23.8 million; Actual: US$ 21.1 million): This
   component aimed to improve the delivery of basic services at the decentralized level. Activities included:
   fiscal transfers to local governments (communes) to be used for investments contained in their Commune
   Development Plans; and technical assistance to national and local institutions, and the communes, to
   implement the investments. 80% of the transfers would fund grants to communes for single-community
   level investments, executed through a community-driven development (CDD) approach; the remaining 20%
   of the transfers would fund grants to communes for multi-village level investments. 10% of the former type
   of grant was to be allocated on a first-come, first-served basis to communes that opt to delegate
   responsibility for execution of an investment to communities on their own initiative. Eligible expenditures
   included projects in the areas of education, health, rural roads, and market infrastructure. There was a
   particular emphasis on education by supporting classroom construction, in collaboration with the Education
   Sector Infrastructure Construction Agency.

   2. Social Safety Nets and Social Protection Systems (Appraisal: US$ 12.8 million; Actual: US$ 9.5 million):
   This component aimed to scale up the safety nets pilot initiated under the prior Bank-supported project and
   strengthen the social protection system. Activities included: unconditional cash transfers to all targeted poor
   households (through community identification); labor-intensive public works for those same households to
   provide an opportunity to earn an additional transfer during the agricultural lean season; training and
   microentrepreneurial support to those households; and development of a National Social Registry.

   3. Project Management (Appraisal: US$ 3.4 million; Actual: US$ 3.9 million): This component supported
   project management and coordination.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project cost

         The project cost at appraisal was US$ 40.0 million. The actual project cost at completion was US$
          38.0 million.

   Financing

         The project was financed entirely by an IDA grant of SDR 27.6 million (US$ 40.0 million equivalent).



                                                                                                    Page 2 of 15
                        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                        Benin ACCESS (P163560)



                       Borrower contribution

                            There was no planned Borrower contribution.

                       Dates

                              July 2018: Project approval.
                              January 2019: Project effectiveness.
                              November 2020: Mid-term review.
                              June 2022: The project closed as planned.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Benin is a small West African country with a per capita income of US$800 (2016) and a total population of
approximately 10 million. Despite political stability, significant agricultural potential, and moderate GDP
growth in the past two decades, Benin remains a low‐income country. According to the National Institute for
Statistics and Economic Analysis (INSAE), national headcount poverty rates have stagnated over the past
decade, moving from 37.5% in 2006, to 35.2% in 2010, and 40.1% in 2015. While progress has been made
in recent years to improve access to basic services, Benin still faces large gaps in service coverage,
especially in poor and remote areas, amidst a context of low capacity at the commune level (including in
budget execution).

The government adopted a decentralization framework, in which the 77 communes have the responsibility
for the delivery of key basic services including primary education, health, water, local roads, and social
assistance. However, other than a small number of urban communes, most communes have low levels of
own revenues with which to finance development activities. Therefore, the government’s mechanism for
transferring resources to communes - FADeC (Fonds d’Appui au Développement des Communes) is a
critical source of financing for decentralized services. The Government Action Plan (GAP) for 2021-26
identified one of three priorities to increase the social welfare of the population in a sustainable way.

Similarly, the Bank's Country Partnership Framework for FY19-23 identified the improvement of social
protection systems as a key objective, with the number of households enrolled in the national social registry
as a key indicator.


Rating Relevance TBL




Rating
High


4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)



                                                                                                         Page 3 of 15
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  Benin ACCESS (P163560)


EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               To improve access to decentralized basic social services

               Rationale
               The theory of change for this objective was clear. Fiscal transfers from the national government to local
               communes were to be used for investments identified in their Commune Development Plans, such as projects
               in the areas of health, education, rural roads, and market infrastructure. All 77 communes were eligible to
               participate, although communities within the communes were selected by means of a poverty map and an
               index measuring access to services and poverty. Utilization of a community driven development approach
               was likely to increase ownership, relevance and sustainability of the projects. Capacity building support was
               also likely to lead to the intended outcome of increased access to basic services.

               Outputs

                     Fiscal transfers to communes to provide grants (maximum of US$S 42,000) for single-community level
                        projects, of low complexity and covering a single village or urban neighborhood.
                       Fiscal transfers to communes to provide grants (average of US$ 51,000 based on an allocation
                        formula) for multi-village level projects, of higher complexity and covering multiple communities.
                       Technical assistance to Ministry of Decentralization and Local Government (MDGL) to support
                        targeting methodology, implementing the CDD approach, and supervising decentralized service
                        delivery.
                       Capacity building to National Commission for Local Finance (CONAFIL) to facilitate fiscal transfers.
                       Capacity building to communes on procurement, CDD, and also the Grassroots Management Training
                        (GMT) program on the entire project cycle (information and communication, community organization,
                        participatory evaluation of poverty, participatory planning, participatory monitoring and evaluation,
                        procurement, financial management, and maintenance). 600 local government officials in all 77
                        communes received training in procurement, which contributed to 51% of communes (target: 20%)
                        showing improvement on their annual procurement audits by the end of the project. 225,370
                        community members were trained in GMT (target: 70,000). These led to the creation of several
                        community associations, of which 51% were led by women (target: 40%).

               Outcomes

                     380 community infrastructure projects were carried out, surpassing the target of 360. These included
                      23 health facilities (target: 20), 515 classrooms (target: 400) and 95 school canteens (target: 80). The
                      ICR (page 24) reported that the government had asked to remove water-related interventions from the
                      project (since it was introducing a national water plan to connect the different villages to
                      water sources), which led to facilities being disconnected from water sources. The ICR did not specify
                      which facilities were disconnected but noted during field visits that the canteens were still not
                      connected to water sources, thereby negatively impacting handwashing and cooking.
                     31,939 students were enrolled in schools constructed/ rehabilitated by the project, surpassing the
                      target of 21,000.
                     2.0% of domestic revenues were transferred by the government to communes through FADeC (on top
                      of the project's financing of fiscal transfers), falling short of the target of 4.6%. The ICR (pages 13-14)

                                                                                                                   Page 4 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Benin ACCESS (P163560)



       reported that this is mainly due to the sharp increase of the denominator from baseline to closing, as
       domestic revenues grew significantly following the efforts to enhance tax collection. Tax revenues
       grew from 6.3% to 7.0% of GDP between 2019 and 2021, and GDP grew from US$12.7 billion in 2017
       to US$17.59 billion in 2021. Although the budget of FADeC decreased relative to revenues, it did
       increase in absolute terms. (Note: The ICR (page 14, footnote 9) reported that official statistics for
       these budget figures were not available at the time of writing of the ICR).

However, there were no outcomes reported for access to other basic services such as health care or markets.

Achievement of this objective is Substantial due to surpassing of targets in subproject implementation and
student enrollment, although the target for percentage of domestic revenues transferred by government to
communes fell short in percentage terms though not in absolute terms.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To improve access to social safety nets

Rationale
The theory of change for this objective was clear. Unconditional cash transfers, conditional cash transfers
based on labor-intensive public works, and accompanying measures (microentrepreneurship training) were
likely to provide a safety net for the poorest households. These programs were a scaling up of activities
piloted in a predecessor Bank-supported operation. These activities were likely to contribute to the intended
outcome to increase access to social safety nets for the poorest households.

The program covered 180 communities in 16 communes across all 12 departments.

Outputs

      Unconditional cash transfers in the amount of 5,000 CFA per month for 24 months. 100% of payments
       were made within five days of due dates.
      Labor-intensive public works (offered to the same households) to provide additional predictable
       transfers (1,000 CFA per day for two years) during the lean agricultural season (to encourage
       beneficiary households to avoid negative coping decisions, such as withdrawing children from school).
       The public works resulted in 1,768.2 km of rehabilitated roads, removal of 145 illegal trash dumps,
       cleaning of 35 public spaces, and upgrading of 170 hectares of community agricultural land. 100% of
       public works schemes were completed with satisfactory technical quality. 81.25% of total cost of the
       public works projects were allocated to wages (target: 70.0%).
      Community identification of poor households and public works projects. 100% of safety net transfers
       were received by households ranked as poor or extremely poor through proxy-means testing.




                                                                                                 Page 5 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Benin ACCESS (P163560)




      Microentrepreneurial training including preparation of a simple business plan with support from
       facilitators, and a grant of CFA 25,000 to launch a business activity or expand an existing activity.

Outcomes

      19,216 households received unconditional cash transfers, surpassing the target of 18,000. This
       represented approximately 100,000 people. Due to the delay in establishing the National Social
       Registry (see Objective 3 below), there was only 18 months before the closing date to complete the
       full 24 months of cash transfers. Therefore, the remaining six months of cash transfers were provided
       in tranches, timed to have a positive effect on the beneficiaries’ productive inclusion activities
       supported by the project. The first tranche coincided with the completion of training on income
       generating activities, to allow for a capital infusion to boost economic activities; the second tranche
       was disbursed after having carried out the income generating activity for a short period. Overall,
       however, the significantly delayed delivery of cash transfers (by more than 24 months) created a
       critical time lag for the targeted poor populations, who still received the cash transfers but likely did not
       realize the full benefits of such support.
      Of the above, 17,812 households participated in the additional labor intensive public works,
       surpassing the target of 16,200.
      Of the above, 12,006 households received microentrepreneurial training, surpassing the target of
       9,000.
      An evaluation of a sample of about 4,000 households of the 12,006 households receiving support for
       income generating activities showed that almost 100% of activities remained operational near the end
       of the project and noted impacts in the short-term on household incomes, food security, and
       households’ savings. Specific evidence of these short-term "impacts" is not reported in the ICR, but it
       was provided later by the project team (report source: Rapport Statistique Suivi N3 IPR _mai_2022 vu
       SE ce 29 JUIN 2022) such as: higher average monthly income for beneficiaries compared to non-
       beneficiaries; and proportion of beneficiary households consuming three meals per day compared to
       non-beneficiary households.

Achievement of this objective is rated Substantial due to achieving of targets in access to safety net programs
and participation in labor activities.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
To strengthen the social protection system.

Rationale
The theory of change for this objective was clear. The main activities to collect household data and to
establish a national social registry were likely to lead to the intended outcome to strengthen the national
social protection sector.


                                                                                                     Page 6 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Benin ACCESS (P163560)



Outputs

      Capacity building to refine the national targeting methodology for poor and extreme poor households,
       as well as information technology and administrative support for the national social registry. This also
       included developing linkages with the national identification system.
      National household data collection for the national registry (including advance financing through a
       project preparation advance). Steps included (i) community pre-identification of likely poor and
       vulnerable households; (ii) verification of the poverty status of pre-identified households through a
       proxy means test; (iii) community validation of PMT results and grievance resolution. The grievance
       redress mechanism included a digital platform which collected 423 complaints over the lifetime of the
       project. All complaints received were followed up, and the results fed back to the complainants

Outcomes

      Development of a National Social Registry, which became operational by project closing and covered
       the entire country. The ICR (page 16) reported that this was considered to be transformative, having
       come to be regarded as a crucial platform across government by the Ministry of Finance and other
       sectoral ministries, such as the energy and water sectors and some donor partners. Compared to
       neighboring countries, Benin’s registry is significantly more advanced in terms of its national
       coverage, usage by multiple programs, country ownership, availability of household GPS coordinates
       for crisis response and outreach, and linkage to the national identification system which assures the
       uniqueness of households in the registry.
      As reported in the ICR (page 26), until the last Implementation Supervision Report, the number of
       households and individuals registered in the social registry was unclear, nor whether ANPS and
       ARCH used the data on the 16 communes as they were collected to develop the National Registry.
       The project team subsequently reported that these data were in fact utilized to identify beneficiaries.

However,

      As reported in the ICR (pages 15-16), institutional changes and capacity constraints led to significant
       delays in the collection of household data. The community pre-identification stage was carried out and
       completed in July 2018, but in early 2019, the government created the Agence Nationale de
       Protection Sociale (ANPS), becoming the lead agency for development of the Registry. The National
       Institute for Statistics and Economic Analysis (INStaD), which was the agency charged with carrying
       out the PMT survey, lacked sufficient numbers of staff until two additional consultant statisticians were
       made available to accelerate the survey work. These challenges affected the timeline of the social
       registry, leading to a delay in the cash transfer activities (which had to be disbursed in 18 months
       instead of 24 months) and an overlap with the micro entrepreneurship activities.



The achievement of this objective is rated as Substantial, as several elements of the social protection system
were implemented as planned. However, there were significant delays in some cases that affected the timely
provision of benefits (notably a 29-month delay in delivering the first round of cash transfers).




                                                                                                  Page 7 of 15
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Benin ACCESS (P163560)




                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Achievement of the first objective to increase access to decentralized basic services is Substantial due to
                            surpassing of targets in subproject implementation and student enrollment, although the target for percentage
                            of domestic revenues transferred by government to communes fell short in percentage terms though not in
                            absolute terms. Achievement of this objective is rated Substantial due to achieving of targets in access to
                            safety net programs and participation in labor activities, but with significant implementation delays that likely
                            decreased benefits to beneficiaries. Achievement of the third objective to strengthen the social protection
                            system is rated Substantial as several elements of the social protection system were implemented as
                            planned, albeit sometimes with significant delays.

                            Therefore, the overall Efficacy is rated Substantial.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   The main economic rationale at appraisal (PAD, pages 24-25) referred to prior evidence that the CDD approach
   is the most cost‐effective means of constructing basic infrastructure. Data compared the costs of infrastructure
   built through delegation to communities, versus those built through any other approach.

   At completion (ICR, pages 16-19), the analysis used the same rationale as above to show that the CDD
   approach enabled the construction of 380 infrastructure projects at a lower cost and of higher quality than any
   other alternative available in the country. While cost data for comparable infrastructure were not available for the
   same time period, a ‘natural experiment’ that occurred during the prior Bank-supported project provided
   some idea of the cost-effectiveness of this project (which used an identical approach and same key actors). In
   the course of implementing the prior project, it was found that three communes had incorrectly signed contracts
   for constructing three village schools that were only allowed under community-implemented subprojects. The
   Task Team Leader agreed at the time to allow this one instance of digression to assess costs between the
   commune and community-implemented projects. The findings showed that primary-school classrooms built
   directly by communes cost 11% more than comparable classrooms built by communities, even after taking into
   account the costs of training communities. Also, those built by contract management agencies recruited by the
   Ministry of Education under a separate Global Partnership for Education (GPE) financing cost 63% more.

   Inflation and disrupted global supply chains led to a considerable increase in the cost of construction materials.
   The strengthening of the US dollar against the FCFA offset some of these rising construction costs. There were
   also some delays in the launch of construction projects due to these higher costs, the COVID-19 pandemic, and

                                                                                                                                Page 8 of 15
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Benin ACCESS (P163560)



fiscal tightening by the government which led to a higher Value-Added Tax (VAT). During the pandemic, the
project activity was halted between March and May 2020, and training had to be rearranged to accommodate
social distancing protocols. The cost increase also caused some contracted entrepreneurs to re-evaluate their
finances, run at a loss as prices kept increasing throughout the project lifetime, pay penalties, and/or have their
contracts terminated. However, as clarified by the project team, the Bank was able to make the appropriate
adjustments such that the stretched resources could still achieve the targets.

In addition, the following were indications of cost-effectiveness of project activities: the project delivered a higher
quantity of outputs than planned in key areas (the number of cash transfer beneficiaries, number of labor
intensive works cash transfers, number of microfinance activities, and number of community infrastructure
projects). Also, the share of project administrative costs was lower for this project (11.1%) compared to similar
projects in the region: for example, an IFAD study comparing administrative costs of CDD projects found
average administrative costs of 16%; the Togo Community Development and Safety Nets project (2012–2017)
costs were 15%; the Second Northern Uganda Social Action Fund Project (2009–2016) costs were 16%. The
ICR also suggested that there was high allocative efficiency due to the participatory decision making process, to
ensure responsiveness to local priorities, although no specific data were provided.

However, there were several shortcomings in implementation that decreased efficiency. As mentioned in the
ICR (pages 25-26), the shifting of the government's social protection agenda and social registry timeline, as well
as COVID-19 and floods, led to significant disruptions and delays; also, collaboration between agencies was
sometimes challenging, and it was not clear whether data sharing took place effectively. There were delays in
household data collection (in addition, the costs of the first two phases of the survey exceeded initial estimates,
in part due to the need to finance the biometric registration of households that had not been covered by the
earlier government information campaign) which impacted the timing of payments to beneficiaries although not
the total number of beneficiaries.

Overall, there was a 29-month delay in the delivery of cash transfer benefits, which likely significantly impacted
the ability of poor households to fully realize benefits from the project activities. However, implementation was
largely completed with targets met by the project closing, without a project extension.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                 Rate Available?              Point value (%)            *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                         0
 Appraisal                                                     0
                                                                                          Not Applicable
                                                                                         0
 ICR Estimate                                                  0
                                                                                          Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.


                                                                                                         Page 9 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Benin ACCESS (P163560)



6. Outcome

Relevance of objectives is rated High due to strong alignment with country conditions, country strategy and
Bank strategy. Achievement of objectives is rated Substantial due to Substantial efficacy of the first objective,
Substantial efficacy of the second objective, and Modest efficacy of the third objective. Efficiency is rated
Substantial. Therefore, overall outcome is rated Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The infrastructure built, including roads, schools, and health posts, are under the ownership of communes.
Because they exercise legal ownership of the infrastructure, communes are responsible for their
maintenance. Communities were trained in basic maintenance to enable them to carry out basic
maintenance tasks without requesting support from the commune. The sustainability of the National Social
Registry is also likely given its high level of utilization by multiple agencies. Lastly, the new IDA $100 million
pipeline social safety nets Project for Results (P4R) will build on the National Social Registry (NSR) for a
massive expansion of cash transfer coverage.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project built upon prior ten years of Bank experience in the country, supporting decentralization and
  participatory development projects. The prior Decentralized Community Driven Services Project
  (PSDCC), which ended in December 2017, had modeled FADeC’s fiscal transfers, resulting in the
  completion of over 1,000 basic infrastructures executed by communities and also piloted a cash transfer
  program that built on the CDD approach for identification of beneficiaries and execution of labor intensive
  public works. The project design also drew from a Bank-supported government review of the existing
  safety net program (following severe floods in 2010) which made recommendations on developing a new
  safety net program. Implementation arrangements also built upon the prior operation's institutional
  arrangements.

  The results chain was clear, with the M&E framework providing relevant and measurable indicators.
  Significant risks were identified at appraisal in the areas of governance and fiduciary performance, with
  mitigation measures to strengthen capacity and supervision. However, as noted in the ICR (page 24),
  the risk mitigation measures did not sufficiently account for the risk of delays in data collection for the
  social registry, especially given that it was a prerequisite for the cash transfer component. While project
  components could still be implemented, the 29-month delay in initiating cash transfers may have
  increased the likelihood of targeted households resorting to negative coping strategies during that period.



                                                                                                        Page 10 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Benin ACCESS (P163560)




  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The Bank team provided effective supervision, amidst significant challenges due to COVID and the delays
 in household data collection. The pandemic caused a project slowdown from March to May 2020, when
 the government imposed a strict lockdown. The restrictions were slowly loosened up around summer, and
 the project team was able to get back in the field although some construction activities never resumed and
 the training activities were also disrupted. The key activity of cash transfers to beneficiaries relied on the
 delivery of the National Social Registry; however, even with a project preparation advance of US$2
 million, the cash transfer component experienced a two-year implementation delay until an alternate data
 collection plan could be agreed upon with the government. These two factors were largely outside the
 control of the Bank team (although the project design could have taken more effective measures to ensure
 timely availability and quality of data). Despite these factors, the Bank team persisted in working closely
 with the project stakeholders to resolve issues (in particular related to the social registry), conducted
 physical site visits, produced clear and detailed supervision reports, and followed up with the government
 when required.

 Safeguards were effectively supervised, aided by the use of standardized environmental and social
 safeguard plans for each type of infrastructure. Fiduciary performance was overall satisfactory, utilizing
 arrangements already in place from the prior project.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The project objectives were clearly stated, although the objectives could have reflected more
 ambitious outcomes (i.e. higher income or food consumption level) in view of the prior ten years of Bank
 engagement and development history in the country's social protection undertakings. The overall M&E
 framework was sound, with relevant and measurable indicators identified for each of the project
 objectives. However, the key indicator measuring "improved access to basic services" only measured
 access to education, not other services such as health services or markets, or travel time. Also, as noted
 in the ICR (page 27), the indicator to measure the third objective to "strengthen the social protection
 system" was limited and somewhat unclear, whether referring to: i) the poorest households pre-identified,
 surveyed with the proxy means test, and confirmed by the community being added to the social registry, or
 ii) any household the project collected data on being routinely added to the registry. It was also unclear

                                                                                                    Page 11 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Benin ACCESS (P163560)



 whether the project at design was referring to the National Social Registry or a social registry within the
 Ministry of Social Affairs.

 Monitoring arrangements were clear, with decentralized entities using a smartphone-based monitoring tool
 to regularly report data to the project implementing unit. Planned evaluative activities
 included technical audits of infrastructures built under component 1 (at mid‐term and end of project), audits
 of adherence to environmental and social safeguards (at mid‐term and end of project), and audits of
 procurement performance of communities and local governments (annually).



b. M&E Implementation
  The project implementation unit effectively implemented M&E by regularly collecting key project
  data. It relied on its six regional representatives to report implementation, financial, and procurement
  indicators, as well as on several consultants and volunteers from Community Development Agents (CDA)
  within the communes and communities that provided community training and reporting. Due to COVID-
  19 related travel restrictions and social distancing measures, the project team relied on a smartphone
  geo-referencing tool (GEMS) to collect community level data and monitor project progress.

  The two planned technical audits were conducted to evaluate the soundness and quality of the
  infrastructure built under the project; the annual procurement audit assessed the compliance of
  communes and communities with national standards; and two audits evaluated compliance with the
  environmental and social safeguards. The project implementing unit also produced other reports on
  microfinance viability and a satisfaction survey for capacity-building training.




c. M&E Utilization
  M&E data was used to monitor implementation progress and assess project achievements. Also, as
  noted in the ICR (page 27), the auditing procedures and the preparation of timely monitoring and quality
  check reports kept track of project status and enabled timely identification of issues and appropriate
  responses.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as an Environmental Category "B" project due to small-scale public works
   projects which might cause site-specific environmental impacts. An Environmental and Social Management




                                                                                                     Page 12 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Benin ACCESS (P163560)



   Framework was prepared, building on experience of similar activities in the prior operation, to provide
   environmental screening and risk mitigation tools.

   The infrastructure projects had the possibility to restrict access to assets or sources of livelihood, entail
   acquisition of land/assets, or lead to digging during civil works. Therefore, safeguard policies on Pest
   Management (OP/BP 4.09), Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) and Involuntary Resettlement
   (OP/BP 4.12) were triggered. The Resettlement Policy Framework from the prior operation was to be used
   as a roadmap for preparing Resettlement Action Plans, if necessary.

   The ICR did not report on Environmental or Safeguards performance. The project team clarified that these
   areas were evaluated during each supervision mission by Specialists, with findings reported in Aide-
   Memoires. Implementation Supervision Reports consistently rated both as Satisfactory and the overall
   safeguards rating recorded in the Operations Portal was Satisfactory.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial management: Financial management arrangements were similar to those used for the prior
   Bank-supported operation, with the main project implementing unit deemed to have adequate fiduciary
   capacity. The FM rating in the last Implementation Status Reports (ISR) was Satisfactory, noting overall
   good quality but minor delays in the submission of interim financial reports. Fiduciary staff at decentralized
   levels were hired to ensure fiduciary compliance by communes and communities. Regular internal audit
   missions were completed by the government’s internal audit institutions (IGF and IGAA), which strongly
   focused on activities at decentralized levels. Annual reviews were undertaken of a sample of subgrants
   and disbursements under the social safety net component to monitor the appropriate use of community
   grants. No major misuse of project funds were reported. At the time of the writing of the ICR, the general
   audit report had not yet been received by the Bank team; the team subsequently confirmed that the report
   was received, with no qualifications.

   Procurement: Procurement performance is also reflected as Satisfactory in the latest ISR, although the
   ICR (page 28) noted that not all the steps in the procurement process up to the signing of contracts and
   the payment of certain contracts were recorded.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings



                                                                                                    Page 13 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Benin ACCESS (P163560)



                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Satisfactory          Satisfactory
                                                                                 Quality-at-entry is rated
                                                                                 Moderately Satisfactory due to
Bank Performance                Satisfactory          Moderately Satisfactory    shortcomings in mitigation
                                                                                 measures (risks related to data
                                                                                 collection, institutional capacity).
Quality of M&E                  Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                  ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

Lessons drawn from the ICR (page 30-31) and adapted by IEG:

      Community-driven development (CDD) can have significant social benefits, in addition to
       being cost-efficient. In the case of this project, the capacity building and training at the
       community-level led to strong levels of participation and ownership over community
       subprojects to ensure relevance (and utilization) and to monitor quality of
       infrastructure. Also, with the low complexity subprojects, local procurement led to cost-
       efficiency and higher likelihood of hiring local workers.
      Despite its complexities, the central government can utilize CDD to effectively deliver local
       infrastructure on a broad scale. In the case of this project, the provision of capacity building
       to commune governments and communities, use of standardized training program delivered
       by a broad network of community agents and volunteers, and use of standardized
       architectural plans (i.e. classrooms) and related environmental and safeguard compliance
       plans all contributed to the central government's ability to implement CDD widely.

In addition,

      Tightly sequenced project activities that rely on government actions can be derailed by
        unexpected institutional changes. In the case of this project, one year into the project
        implementation period, the government launched a new agency that became the government
        champion for social protection. This led to a change in timeline for creating the national
        social registry, which was a critical project activity to the cash transfer component, and
        caused delays and compressed delivery of the cash transfers.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  Yes
  ASSESSMENT_TABLE



                                                                                                     Page 14 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Benin ACCESS (P163560)



  Please Explain
  To verify that the CDD approach, the community infrastructure subprojects, and the National Social Registry
  are being sustained and continuing to have impact.



14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR was internally consistent, concise, and results-oriented (linking project outputs to development
outcomes). The quality of evidence was overall satisfactory, although additional evidence (subsequently
provided by the project team) and more elaborated results framework would have strengthened the findings
reported in the ICR. Lessons were clearly drawn from project experience, particularly for the community-driven
development aspect. The ICR was candid and overall consistent with guidelines, although a shortcoming was
the lack of reporting on Environmental and Safeguards performance (Section B, pages 27-28).



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                 Page 15 of 15
