     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PE: Enhancement of Env. Quality Services (P147342)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0023498

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P147342                                    PE: Enhancement of Env. Quality Services

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Peru                                       Environment, Natural Resources & the Blue Economy


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-86800                                 01-Jun-2022                                           7,618,469.71

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 11-Jan-2017                                15-Oct-2022

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           40,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                              7,618,469.71                                              0.00

 Actual                                          7,618,469.71                                              0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Janis D. Bernstein         Vibecke Dixon                 Avjeet Singh                   IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) was to “to generate and share information for environmental
   quality control at the national level, by supporting the Government of Peru to improve its environmental
   monitoring and analytical capacity, increase public access to environmental quality information, and promote
   informed public participation in environmental quality management” (Loan Agreement, page 5, and Project
   Appraisal Document, page 8).



                                                                                                  Page 1 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PE: Enhancement of Env. Quality Services (P147342)



   For the analysis in this ICRR, the PDO will be parsed as follows:
   Objective 1: to improve national environmental monitoring and analytical capacity;
   Objective 2: to increase public access to environmental quality information; and
   Objective 3: to promote informed public participation in environmental quality management.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   Component 1: Improve Environmental Quality Control (appraisal cost: US$61.42 million, actual cost:
   US$14.16). This component was designed to support the Ministry of Environment (MINAM) and Agency for
   Environmental Assessment and Enforcement (OEFA) in carrying out their responsibilities in air, water, and
   soil monitoring and analysis based on an improved regulatory framework, development of capacities and
   infrastructure for effective environmental monitoring, and strengthened analytical and quality control and
   quality assurance capacities. Component 1 included three subcomponents:

         a. Subcomponent 1.1 (Environmental Quality Standards and Guidelines) would support the
           Department of Environmental Quality (DGCA) within MINAM in strengthening the regulatory
           framework, and in preparing technical standards, protocols, and guidance for ambient monitoring
           and analytical activities, baselines, and pollution source studies for supporting evidence-based
           policy making and environmental quality control.

         b. Subcomponent 1.2 (Monitoring and Analytical Capacity Building) would support OEFA to better
           monitor air and water quality in priority airsheds and watersheds around the country.

         c. Subcomponent 1.3 (Monitoring and Analysis) would support OEFA in designing, constructing,
           equipping, and operating a state-of-art national environmental analysis laboratory to be accredited
           by ISO/IEC 17025:2006. The laboratory would have one section to cover the analytical demand of
           OEFA and another section to cover the need for quality control of public and private laboratories and
           to perform the functions of a reference laboratory. OEFA would also promote the adoption of
           Laboratory Good Practices and oversee compliance with these practices.

   Component 2: Improve Information and Public Participation for Environmental Quality Control
   (appraisal cost: US$4.83 million, actual cost: US$4.35 million) This component was designed to
   support: (Sub-component 2.1) interconnection of existing environmental quality databases; (Subcomponent
   2.2) improvement of SINIA’s capacity to manage environmental quality data; (Sub-component 2.3)
   development and deployment of user-friendly IT platforms accessible to the public but tailored to the
   information needs of different stakeholders/audiences; (Sub-component 2.4) development and deployment
   of communication tools for public inputs on environmental quality management issues; and (Sub-component
   2.5) improvement of stakeholders’ capacity to use the new environmental information tools. Through these

                                                                                                   Page 2 of 21
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    PE: Enhancement of Env. Quality Services (P147342)



  activities, the component would improve SINIA’s capacity to: (a) collect, store, and share environmental
  quality information generated by various agencies at the national and local levels; and (b) facilitate
  dissemination of environmental quality information and public participation in environmental quality
  management.

  Component 3: Project Management (appraisal cost: US$4.16 million financed by the Government of
  Peru; actual cost: US$4.83 million). This component supported MINAM and OEFA in implementing
  project activities by providing technical assistance, goods, consultant services, and operating costs. Special
  attention would be given to the close coordination of project activities under Components 1 and 2 to
  generate the synergies needed to achieve the PDO.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost: The total estimated project cost at appraisal was US$70.41 million. As shown in Annex 3 of
  the ICR, the final cost at closure was US$22.91 million. In the Components section of the ICR, however,
  the actual total cost was initially reported to be US$23.34 million.

  Financing: The IBRD loan was originally US$40 million. The actual loan amount at the end of the project
  was US$7.62 million.

  Borrower Contribution: At appraisal, the borrower contribution was estimated to be US$30.41 million. At
  the end of the project, the actual borrower financing amounted to US$15.3 million.

  Dates: The project loan was approved on January 11, 2017, and became effective on May 10, 2017. The
  date of the mid-term review (MTR) was May 25, 2020. The original closing date was June 1,
  2022. Following a restructuring on May 27, 2022, the closing date was extended by six months. The actual
  closing date was October 15, 2022.

  Additional Financing and Restructuring: The project was restructured two times.

  Restructuring of 2020. The first restructuring in 2020 addressed the findings of the MTR in May 2020. The
  restructuring authorized changes to the results framework (RF), disbursement estimates, and the overall
  risk rating. In addition, the restructuring added two new activities to help the Government respond to
  COVID-19 challenges. The specific changes include:

        Revisions to RF. The RF was revised to better attribute project impacts to the proposed results
         indicators and then re-assess expected project impacts. It corrected inconsistencies between the
         English (official) and Spanish (main working document used by the PCU) versions of the PAD. The
         restructuring also refined descriptions, measurements, target values, and timelines of some results
         indicators, dropped indicators that could not be achieved or attributed to project interventions; and
         added new indicators that could be achieved by the project. Specifically, these changes included the
         following:

  PDO indicators

       o The original PDO Indicator 4 (average user satisfaction with SINIA) was dropped because the
         ministry indicated that such a result could not be attributed only to project interventions;

                                                                                                        Page 3 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PE: Enhancement of Env. Quality Services (P147342)



        o The original PDO Indicator 5 (environmental quality information disclosed through SINIA (target: 100
          percent) was renamed and the target was revised downward. Thus, PDO Indicator 5 became PDO
          Indicator 4 with a new target of 50 percent.
        o A new PDO Indicator 5 (number of visits to project-supported technological tools for public access to
          environmental information – target: 5,600) was introduced. This new indicator would measure public
          access to environmental quality information in terms of the number of user visits to the SINIA
          website and other technological tools developed with project support. The IT tools would
          disseminate environmental quality data to the public and promote public engagement by allowing the
          public to submit photos, text, and voice messages to present their environmental concerns and
          requests.

   Intermediate Indicators

        o The restructuring dropped four out of the original 14 intermediate indicators, and modified the rest
          with changes in wording, definition, targets, data sources, and methodology.
        o A new intermediate indicator #9 (MINAM and SENAMHI data centers in operation with increased
          and secure storage capacity) was added to reflect progress made in the data centers.
        o The original intermediate #10 (public engagement tools deployed) was replaced by a new indicator
          “technical tools implemented for public access to environmental quality information.”
        o In general, targets were revised downward as a result of the implementation delays[1] or because
          the expected level of counterpart financing might not materialize.
        o Adjustments in disbursement estimates. The 2020 restructuring revised the project’s disbursement
          schedule. Considering that most of the loan proceeds would be invested in the last year of project
          implementation for the development of the laboratory and air and water monitoring stations, it was
          estimated that the project would disburse about 73 percent of the total loan amount by its original
          closing date.

   Additional activities. In response to COVID-19, the 2020 restructuring added two new activities: (a)
   development of a new Virtual Environmental Classroom, focusing on environmental health initiatives to
   prevent COVID-19 and other infectious diseases, and (b) studies to improve and expand the Government's
   information system on solid waste management. There were no related intermediate indicators added to the
   RF.

   Restructuring of 2022. The 2022 restructuring extended the original closing date from June 15, 2022, to
   October 15, 2022 to provide additional time to continue project implementation which was viewed as having
   improved during FY2022. The Bank could not extend the closing date further because the Government of
   Peru (GoP) elected to have a final loan repayment date of November 15, 2022. Thus, the GoP and the
   Bank agreed on the new closing date with the Government confirming that it would continue the
   implementation of the remaining project activities using its own resources after the closing of the Bank loan.

   Split Rating. Outcome targets were downscaled during the 2020 restructuring. Thus, a split evaluation will
   be done.




3. Relevance of Objectives



                                                                                                    Page 4 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PE: Enhancement of Env. Quality Services (P147342)



Rationale
Country and Sector Context. At the time of project appraisal in 2016, Peru had achieved an average
annual gross domestic product (GDP) growth of 5.58 percent between 2006 and 2015. Its steady growth
and political stability allowed the country to initiate an Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development (OECD) Country Program. Through its close cooperation with OECD, Peru carried out
numerous policy studies that identified gaps and opportunities for aligning its policies and institutions with
OECD standards, policies, and best practices in key areas, including the environment. The OECD
Environmental Performance Review (EPR) 2016 provided a list of recommendations for enhancing
environmental management that would support Peru’s efforts to become an OECD member. During project
preparation, the GoP faced numerous challenges at all levels of its environmental management system. At
the top level, it lacked emissions limits in some areas; in other areas, the values of these limits needed to
be adjusted, but there was insufficient data and knowledge on sources and levels of pollution. This
knowledge gap resulted from deficiencies in the country’s monitoring networks, in terms of its quality and
analytical capacity . Even when sampling existed, the data would be analyzed by labs unable to run all of
the necessary tests. Institutional barriers prevented their dissemination to the agencies that needed them.
The regulators also could not successfully collect and disseminate data to the public. In this context, the
GoP requested a Bank-financed project to support its efforts to address these challenges.

Alignment with Country Strategy. The project’s development objective (PDO) was aligned with one of
Peru’s Strategic Priorities in the National Plan (2016–2021): Peru in OECD 2021 (Integrity, Environment).
All three PDO objectives relate to Peru’s plan to align its national policies and institutions with OECD
standards, best policies, and best practices in environmental management, and thus support the country’s
efforts to achieve OECD accession and key sustainable development goals. Specifically, the PDO reflects
the Government’s aim to perform better their institutional mandates on environmental monitoring and
information disclosure and promote meaningful public participation in environmental management issues
through timely disclosure of reliable environmental information and active collection and resolution of citizen
feedback and complaints. The PDO continued to be relevant at the end of the project when the Ministry of
Economy and Finance and MINAM expressed their commitment to continue funding the project activities
that were not completed by the end of the Bank project.

Alignment with World Bank Strategy. The PDO aligned fully with the World Bank’s country partnership
priorities. At approval, the PDO formulation aligned with two of the four strategic objectives of the Peru
Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)(FY12–FY16). Strategic Objective 3 (Sustainable Growth and
Productivity) includes strengthening environmental management (CPS, page 25), and Strategic Objective 4
(Public Sector Performance for Greater Inclusion) (CPS, page 26) is relevant to strengthening national
institutional capacity for improved environmental management. By project closing, the PDO remained
relevant to the Peru Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for FY17–FY21. Objective 8 (“strengthen the
management of natural resources”) stated that this project would help to “strengthen the Government’s
capacities for environmental analysis and monitoring” (CPF, page 30), and the expected results would
include “supporting improved collection and availability of reliable environmental information that will lead to
improved transparency and demand for improved environmental governance” (CPF, page 31). The
continued relevancy of the PDO also is reflected in the most recent Peru CPF FY23-FY27, which mentions
that the World Bank Group will support the GoP in strengthening its investment projects by enhancing the
National Environmental Impact Assessment System (SEIA) (CPF, page 29).

Previous sector experience. In 2007, the World Bank’s Country Environmental Analysis (CEA) estimated
the costs of environmental inaction in Peru, and highlighted the need to strengthen its environmental


                                                                                                      Page 5 of 21
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      PE: Enhancement of Env. Quality Services (P147342)



               institutions. Based on the CEA findings, the Bank financed a series of three-tranche environmental
               Development Policy Loans (DPLs) to strengthen the GoP’s institutional framework and tools, including the
               creation of MINAM. However, Peru continued to face deficiencies in environmental management, including:
               (a) inadequate and relaxed environmental standards, (b) limited environmental monitoring, (c) patchy and
               low-quality monitoring data, and (d) constrained environmental enforcement. These deficiencies led to
               Peru’s low ratings on the stringency and enforcement of environmental regulation at the global level. At that
               time, the project was expected to support Peru in implementing the recommendations of OECD’s EPR, thus
               facilitating its efforts on OECD accession. In January 2022, OECD Council decided to open accession
               discussions with Peru, and in June 2022, OECD members adopted the Roadmap for the Accession of
               Peru (ICR, pages 10-11).

               While there is clear alignment between the project’s development objectives and the country and World
               Bank strategies, a shortcoming is the lack of clarity in the PDO formulation around what outcomes would be
               achieved through improved environmental monitoring and analysis without broader improvements in
               environmental compliance and enforcement. The focus on “improved environmental monitoring and
               analytical capacity", “increased public access to environmental quality information,” and “promotion of
               informed public participation in environmental quality management” is relatively less outcome-oriented, and
               does not help in understanding what development results (e.g., improving environmental quality) were
               expected as a consequence of the project.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To improve national environmental monitoring and analytical capacity

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change (ToC) A Theory of Change was created for the ICR, and it delineates the key
                             assumptions, project inputs, and activities.

                             Activities such as (a) preparing air environmental standards (ECAs), (b) proposing maximum allowable limits
                             (LMPs), (c) building a state-of-the-art laboratory, (d) establishing water monitoring stations, and (e)
                             establishing air quality monitoring stations, would produce outputs such as: (a) draft protocols for air emission
                             monitoring and national air quality monitoring, (b) technical regulations for measuring gas and particulate
                             matter, (c) air quality action plans, (d) water quality monitoring stations, and (e) a state-of-the-art testing
                             laboratory. These outputs were expected to lead to the following outcomes, contributing to improving national
                             environmental monitoring and analytical capacity.



                                                                                                                                Page 6 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   PE: Enhancement of Env. Quality Services (P147342)



The objective of improving environmental monitoring and analytical capacity would be achieved by generating
information needed for national environmental management. Generating this information would require
establishing environmental quality standards (ECAs) and maximum allowable limits (LMPs), building a state
of the art laboratory, and establishing water monitoring stations and air quality monitoring stations.
Achievement of this objective would contribute to the longer-term outcomes of improved environmental quality
control, informed public participation in environmental management, and reduced morbidity and mortality
caused by pollution.

Outputs

      One regulatory proposal of the Environmental Quality Standard (ECA) of air for heavy metals was
       produced, achieving the original target of 1.
      Four regulatory proposals for Maximum Allowable Limits (LMPs) for four sectors (steel and foundries,
       mining-metallurgical activities, industrial cauldrons, and brickwork were done, slightly fallig short of the
       original target of five.
      Preparation of technical standards and design report for water quality monitoring network was done,
       as well as a proposal for a guide to air quality action plans (no targets, as these were planned
       activities without specific indicators at output level).

Outcomes

      No analytical parameters were accredited for the OEFA laboratory, not achieving the original target of
       70 percent.
      None of the planned air quality monitoring stations were installed, i.e., no validated air quality
       monitoring networks were installed, not achieving the original target of 7 networks. The technical
       specifications for these stations were still under revision at project closing, and procurement was not
       yet initiated.
      No validated surface water quality monitoring networks were in operation at project closing, not
       achieving the original target of 1. By the end of the project period, the monitoring designs were still
       under review by the MINAM, soil studies for the proposed locations of the stations were ongoing, and
       the procurement process for the stations had not started.

At project closing, the original objective 1 was not achieved. While the outputs were mostly achieved, the
outcomes were not yet realized. The air and water monitoring stations, as well as the environmental analytical
laboratory, are yet to be operational and were still at different stages of procurement at project closing, The
achievement of the objective is rated as 'weak modest'.




Rating
Modest




                                                                                                     Page 7 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   PE: Enhancement of Env. Quality Services (P147342)




OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
To improve national environmental monitoring and analytical capacity

Revised Rationale
The ToC for the original objective is also valid for the restructured objective. The PDO formulation itself was
not revised, however, the targets for the original PDO indicators and most of the intermediate indicators were
revised, and the target values were reduced.

Outputs

      One regulatory proposal of the Environmental Quality Standard (ECA) of air for heavy metals was
       produced, achieving the original target of 1 (target not revised). As noted in the ICR, Annex I, MINAM
       was expected to complete the project-financed analyses to underpin the new or revised ECAs, but the
       approval of such standards did not depend exclusively on MINAM. To better reflect the actions that
       were fully under MINAM’s mandate, the new results indicator was revised to refer only to the drafting
       of a regulatory proposal for new air quality standards for three heavy metals – arsenic, cadmium and
       chromium. One standard for heavy metal was approved and issued.
      Four regulatory proposals for Maximum Allowable Limits (LMP) were developed with the support of
       the project, achieving the revised target of 4.

Outcomes

      No analytical parameters were accredited for the OEFA laboratory, not achieving the revised target of
       6. At the 2020 restructuring, the unit of measurement was changed from a percentage to an actual
       number and reduced to 6. By the end of the project, however, there still were no analytical parameters
       accredited for the OEFA laboratory.
      None of the planned air quality monitoring stations were installed, i.e., no validated air quality
       monitoring networks were installed, not achieving the revised target of 2 networks. The technical
       specifications for these stations were still under revision at project closing, and procurement was not
       yet initiated.
      No validated surface water quality monitoring networks were in operation at project closing, not
       achieving the original target of 1 (the target was not revised). By the end of the project period, the
       monitoring designs were still under review by the MINAM, soil studies for the proposed locations of the
       stations were ongoing, and the procurement process for the stations had not started.

At project closing, the revised objective 1 target were not achieved. While the targeted outputs were
delivered, the outcomes were not yet realized. The air and water monitoring stations, as well as the
environmental analytical laboratory, are yet to be operational and were still at different stages of procurement
at project closing, The achievement of the objective is rated as 'weak modest'.




Revised Rating
Modest

                                                                                                   Page 8 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   PE: Enhancement of Env. Quality Services (P147342)




OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To increase public access to environmental quality information

Rationale
Based on the ToC used for this analysis, the activities required to achieve the second objective included: (a)
developing tools to facilitate communications with the public on environmental management issues, and (b)
developing a platform that would remove technical and geographic barriers to information exchange between
the government and the public. These activities were expected to lead to the following outputs: (a) a software
program that would facilitate interactive communications with the public on environmental quality
management issues, (b) a platform that would remove technical and geographic barriers to exchanging
environmental quality information between the government and the public, and (c) other tools to facilitate the
public’s access to information relating to environmental management issues, including information on specific
issues. These tools would lead to increased public access to environmental quality information.

Outputs

      7 technological tools were implemented for public access to environmental quality information (no
         target). The tools were intended to be used by the public both to send and receive information related
         to environmental quality. They include:
              o Interactive environmental enforcement portal,
              o Google application: trash report,
              o Municipal waste reporting map,
              o Environmental enforcement competence consultation,
              o Check your complaints,
              o Environmental complaints register, and
              o Environmental problem resolution observatory
        No MINAM and SENAMHI data centers with increased and secure storage capacity were in operation,
         not achieving the original target of 2.
        No CSO staff were trained on public engagement tools, not achieving the original target of 200.
        No software engineers or technicians trained on potential uses of open data, not achieving the original
         target of 50.
        No officials trained on the use of environmental quality information for informed, not achieving the
         original target of 110

Outcomes

      4 parameters of environmental quality information were disclosed through SINIA, not achieving the
       original target of 28. At approval, the project aimed at increasing public access to information on 28
       environmental parameters (or 100 percent) disclosed through the SINIA website. By the end of the
       project, the SINIA disclosed only 4 parameters or 14 percent of the original target.
      The average user satisfaction score with SINIA disaggregated by sex was not measured. This
       indicator was dropped during the 2020 restructuring because improvements could not be attributed to
       the project, according to the Government.



                                                                                                  Page 9 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   PE: Enhancement of Env. Quality Services (P147342)




      8 national entities shared environmental quality information through SINIA, exceeding the original
         target of 5.

While there were some achievements under some of the output and outcome indicators, the overall
achievements under the original objective 2 based on the original PDO indicators is rated as weak Modest.




Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 2 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
To increase public access to environmental quality information

Revised Rationale
The ToC for the original objective is valid also for the restructured objective. The PDO formulation itself was
not revised, however, the targets for the original PDO indicators and most of the intermediate indicators were
revised and the target values reduced.

Outputs

      7 technological tools were developed for public access to environmental quality information, (no
         target). The tools were intended to be used by the public both to send and receive information related
         to environmental quality. They include:
              o Interactive environmental enforcement portal,
              o Google application: trash report,
              o Municipal waste reporting map,
              o Environmental enforcement competence consultation,
              o Check your complaints,
              o Environmental complaints register, and
              o Environmental problem resolution observatory
        No MINAM and SENAMHI data centers with increased and secure storage capacity were in operation,
         not achieving the target of 2 (target not revised).
        No CSO staff was trained on public engagement tools, not achieving the revised target of 40.
        No officials were trained on using environmental quality information for informed decision-making, not
         achieving the revised target of 20.
        No software engineers were trained on open data and potential uses of such data, not achieving the
         revised target of 20.

Outcomes

      4 parameters of environmental quality information were disclosed through SINIA, not achieving the
         revised target of 14.

                                                                                                 Page 10 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   PE: Enhancement of Env. Quality Services (P147342)




      8 national entities shared environmental quality information through SINIA, exceeding the original
       target of 5 (target not revised).

Although the project produced tools for engaging with the public, none of the government staff training was
carried out to build capacity using public engagement tools, open data, or environmental quality information.
The revised objective 2 was Modestly achieved.



Revised Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
To promote informed public participation in environmental quality management

Rationale
Based on the ToC used for this analysis, activities such as developing tools for citizens to send and receive
information on environmental issues (photos, text and voice messages) and other two-way information
options, were expected to lead to, among other outputs, apps on issues that would be of special interest to
women (for example, waste disposal practices in different neighborhoods, tap water availability, and risk of
disease due to hygiene and sanitation conditions) and public awareness raising events to inform the public
about the various features of the new systems and tools and how to use them. These outputs would promote
informed public participation in environmental quality management.

Outputs

The outputs that relate to the promotion of informed public participation in environmental quality management
include those under Objective 2:

      7 technological tools were developed for public access to environmental quality information, (no
       target). The tools were intended to be used by the public both to send and receive information related
       to environmental quality. They include:
            o Interactive environmental enforcement portal
            o Google application: trash map
            o Municipal waste reporting map
            o Environmental enforcement competence consultation
            o Check your complaints
            o Environmental complaints register, and
            o Environmental problem resolution observatory

Outcomes

There were no specific original outcome indicators linked to this part of the PDO.

The achievement of the original objective 3 is rated Negligible due to lack of evidence.


                                                                                                Page 11 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   PE: Enhancement of Env. Quality Services (P147342)




Rating
Negligible


OBJECTIVE 3 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
To promote informed public participation in environmental quality management

Revised Rationale
The ToC for the original objective is valid also for the restructured objective. The PDO formulation itself was
not revised, however, the targets for the original PDO indicators and most of the intermediate indicators were
revised and the target values reduced.

Outcomes

The outputs presented under Objective 2 also relate to Objective 3.

      7 technological tools were developed for public access to environmental quality information, (no
       target). The tools were intended to be used by the public both to send and receive information related
       to environmental quality. They include:
            o Interactive environmental enforcement portal,
            o Google application: trash report,
            o Municipal waste reporting map,
            o Environmental enforcement competence consultation,
            o Check your complaints,
            o Environmental complaints register, and
            o Environmental problem resolution observatory

Outcomes

      7,159,000 visits to project-supported technological tools for public access to environmental
       information, exceeding the target of 5,600,000. MINAM requested inclusion of this new indicator to the
       results framework to reflect the increased access of the general public to environmental quality
       information, which is key to participate in controlling and managing environmental quality. This new
       indicator refers to the number of user visits to the SINIA webpage and other technological tools
       developed with the project’s support.

While the target was exceeded, it is not possible to determine the extent to which the public used the
environmental information to participate in environmental management. The achievement of the revised
objective 3 is rated a weak Modest.



Revised Rating
Modest


                                                                                                 Page 12 of 21
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                PE: Enhancement of Env. Quality Services (P147342)




OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The overall rating for efficacy for the original objectives is Negligible, with the achievements of Objective 1
                            and Objective 2 rated weak Modest, and Objective 3 is rated Negligible due to lack of evidence (as a
                            consequence of the lack of relevant outcome indicators). In contrast to the results chain envisioned in the
                            ToC, project inputs and activities under each objective did not produce most of the intended outputs, and the
                            outputs that were produced did not significantly improve capacity in environmental quality monitoring and
                            analysis or promote informed public participation in environmental management.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating                                   Primary Reason
                            Negligible                                                Low achievement
                  OBJR1_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
                            Although some of the indicators were revised and targets were downscaled in the 2020 restructuring, the
                            scope and nature of expected project outcomes did not improve. Most of the PDO indicators were not yet
                            achieved at project closing. The targets for the intermediate indicators that were achieved did not significantly
                            contribute to the three expected project outcomes. At project closing, there were modest advances in the
                            achievement of all the revised Objectives. Thus, the overall efficacy post restructuring is rated as Modest.



                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating                        Primary Reason
                            Modest                                                    Low achievement


    5. Efficiency
   An economic analysis was not performed for the ICR because of the lack of concrete results that would
   guarantee an accurate evaluation. Nonetheless, as noted in the ICR, the project’s efficiency was low and rated
   Negligible for two reasons: (a) the project did not achieve its PDO and had only modest progress under one of
   its objectives, and (b) the project had a disbursement rate of less than 20 percent of the total loan proceeds after
   five years of project implementation (ICR, page 16). Although the PAD included a section on the proposed non-
   quantifiable benefits of the project, this was not done in the ICR.

   Administrative efficiency was not addressed in the ICR. However, the changes in government (there were six
   presidents during the period July 2016 - December 2022, five MINAM ministers, and five OEFA presidents in
   2022 along with frequent changes of national authorities, including those implementing agencies of the project)
   meant that project implementation required frequent reengagements with new administrations to review project
   implementation issues and the actions agreed with their predecessors. Such transitions often caused lengthy
   implementation pauses and sometimes changes in implementation strategies. In all cases, additional time and
   efforts were required to mobilize the support of new authorities. Other administrative impediments included the
   short PIU contracts (three to six months, on average), and high turnover of project staff, politicians, and

                                                                                                                               Page 13 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      PE: Enhancement of Env. Quality Services (P147342)



administrations, all of which contributed to the long delays in procurement, leading to the project’s failure to
complete the proposed investments by the end of the project period. These conditions demonstrate very low
administrative efficiency under the project.


Efficiency Rating
Negligible


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      0
 Appraisal                                                   0
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      0
 ICR Estimate                                                0
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The original overall outcome rating is Highly Unsatisfactory. based on the (a) substantial relevance of
development objectives, (b) negligible achievement of the intended project outcomes, and (c) negligible
efficiency. The revised outcome rating is Unsatisfactory based on a) substantial relevance of development
objectives, (b) modest achievement of the intended project outcomes, and (c) negligible efficiency. Based on the
split evaluation (refer table below), the overall outcome rating is Highly Unsatisfactory.

Indicator                           Before Restructuring                 After Restructuring
Relevance                                                      Substantial
Efficacy                            Negligible                           Modest
Objective 1                         Modest                               Modest
Objective 2                         Modest                               Modest
Objective 3                         Negligible                           Modest
Efficiency                                                    Negligible
Outcome Rating                      Highly Unsatisfactory                Unsatisfactory
Outcome Value                       1                                    2
Disbursement                        US$4.24 million                      US$3.38 million
Disbursement Percentage             56%                                  44%
Weight Value                        0.56                                 0.88
Total Weight                        0.56 + 0.88 = 1.44, rounded to 1
Overall Outcome Rating              Highly Unsatisfactory
a. Outcome Rating
    Highly Unsatisfactory

                                                                                                      Page 14 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      PE: Enhancement of Env. Quality Services (P147342)




7. Risk to Development Outcome

Throughout project implementation, there were six changes in Presidents and associated changes in key
government positions that led to lengthy implementation delays. Implementation was further complicated by
the COVID-19 pandemic, and the 2022 oil spill. The nature of the issues that undermined progress
throughout the project period suggests that there is a high risk that the progress achieved by the time of
project closing will not be sustained, and the remaining activities will not be completed. The specific risks
include the following:

Political Risk. The project only partially addressed OECD’s recommendations for accession, but the
project’s PDO continues to be highly relevant to Peru’s OECD accession and improvement in the country’s
environmental management services and monitoring systems. Nonetheless, political instability led to another
round of government change immediately after project closing. Although at the time of ICR preparation, the
new MINAM and OEFA leadership confirmed its commitment to continue implementing the remaining project
activities, there are remaining doubts that this commitment will be sustained. Although the ICR suggests that
the period of political instability may last only for several months, there still is uncertainty as to how much
longer it actually will last. Coupled with complicated and time-consuming domestic reviews and clearance
processes as well as the associated staff turnover at implementing agencies, political changes may continue
to pose risks to the execution of the remaining project activities.

Institutional Risk. Another risk concerns the substantial staff reduction in the PCU. At project closing, OEFA
concluded its contracts with its project coordinator and then gradually did the same with most of its 16 PCU
staff. Within three months after the project closed, OEFA assigned two officials additional project
management responsibilities. At the time of ICR preparation, OEFA had maintained only two PCU staff (FM
and legal specialists), but was initiating the process to hire new PCU members. The lack of a permanent
project coordinator and a small number of permanent staff members will limit the PCU’s capacity to continue
implementing the remaining project activities.

Procurement Risk. With technical specifications still under revision at the end of the Bank project, the ICR
noted that it was unclear how much time the PCU, MINAM, and OEFA would need to finalize and issue new
procurement packages, such as those for the laboratory and monitoring stations. Without World Bank
support and qualified PCU staff members, there is a further risk that the PCU will have difficulty finalizing
technical specifications and procurement packages, and developing adequate qualification requirements for
bidders. A new project team might not be aware of the lessons learned from previous bidding processes and
able to incorporate them into new bidding processes. The complicated domestic procedures for large civil
works and equipment acquisition, and procurement challenges such limited participation of qualified bidders,
may continue to delay new procurement processes for these critical contracts.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project design was based on the OECD EPR (2016) which provided a complete assessment of the
  country’s needs and gaps related to its environmental quality services. The project’s objectives therefore,

                                                                                                    Page 15 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PE: Enhancement of Env. Quality Services (P147342)



  had strategic relevance and the design addressed the main deficiencies in environmental management
  highlighted in the EPR. Based on international experience, however, the project’s focus on generating,
  sharing, and disseminating environmental information would not guarantee improved environmental
  quality without corresponding government commitment to improving regulatory compliance and
  enforcement.

  Regarding implementation arrangements and capacity, the Bank underestimated the time and effort
  needed for the PCU to go through the complicated domestic review and approval processes for the main
  technical documents. During project preparation, there should have been a detailed analysis of domestic
  review and approval procedures, main decision-making steps, and available technical expertise in the
  principal agencies; measures to mitigate the risks of delay associated with those review processes; and a
  more realistic timeline proposed for project implementation. The team also should have informed the
  government about the risks of using short-term contracts for the PCU. Three-month PCU contracts for a
  five-year project should have been viewed as unacceptable and changed prior to the start of project
  implementation.

  The Bank’s overly optimistic assessment of project risks supported the GoP’s decision to establish a loan
  repayment schedule requiring loan repayment within 5.5 months after the closing date. This requirement
  ultimately prevented the World Bank from continuing its support to the Government in implementing the
  project. The Bank should have informed the Government about its potential implications and urged the
  Government to adopt a more conservative repayment period.

  The project’s identification of safeguard and gender issues were appropriate, although clear measures for
  addressing gender considerations were not provided.

  As reflected in the ToC prepared for the ICR, the PDO, which referred to various objectives, sub-
  objectives, and higher-level objectives within one statement, was not clear. Further, the selection and
  definition of project outcomes and intermediate results indicators did not provide clear targets and had to
  be revised at the MTR.

  Project preparation studies did not assign sufficient attention to prior Bank project experience in Peru,
  which would have alerted the Bank team to issues that would ultimately undermine project
  implementation (for example, government procurement practices and requirements, and PCU
  contracting), and prepare a plan to address them early.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The World Bank provided adequate implementation support to the implementing agencies and the PCU
 through 12 biannual missions and regular review meetings. Bank missions performed detailed reviews of
 the implementation progress of all project activities and associated E&S, FM, and procurement actions;
 identified threats to project implementation; discussed and agreed on actions needed to resolve any threats



                                                                                                    Page 16 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PE: Enhancement of Env. Quality Services (P147342)



 to achieving development outcomes; and reported mission findings to the leadership of MINAM and
 OEFA.

 Although the MTR re-assessed the project design, identified deficiencies, and reached an agreement on
 revisions needed for the RF (that is, indicator definitions and targets), there were notable shortcomings.
 The MTR did not clarify the PDO and failed to address the implications of the short loan repayment period.
 The latter was not even identified as an issue until the second restructuring. In response to COVID-19, the
 MTR allowed exceptions to the Operations Manual and added two new activities to respond to the
 pandemic but did not add related indicators to the RF so progress could be measured.

 Due to the political instability in Peru and frequent government changes, however, the Bank was not able to
 resolve ongoing project implementation challenges. For example, the Bank elevated the PCU staff turnover
 issue to the level of the MINAM and OEFA but could not convince the authorities to stop such practices
 due to the frequent changes in the government and the leadership of both agencies during project
 implementation. When the project closed, the Government indicated it would continue to implement the
 remainder of the project with its own funds, but there were no clear arrangements for ensuring adequate
 supervision of the investments and fully achieving the PDO.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Unsatisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Unsatisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The project’s original RF had shortcomings in terms of its PDO definition and selection of PDO and
 intermediate results indicators. The ICR notes that the third aspect of the PDO regarding "To promote
 informed public participation in environmental quality management" was not clearly defined with no
 outcome indicators. However, the project’s Operations Manual outlined well-defined responsibilities,
 monitoring frequencies, and data requirements and processes for project monitoring.




b. M&E Implementation
  According to the ICR, the M&E system was operational throughout project implementation. The PCU had
  a dedicated team member responsible for M&E tasks, including the project’s safeguards aspects. The
  PCU was able to submit project information regularly and as requested. The PCU also prepared an MTR
  report before the World Bank’s MTR mission and a project completion report at the time of project
  closing.



                                                                                                 Page 17 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PE: Enhancement of Env. Quality Services (P147342)



  The 2020 restructuring included several revisions to the RF, including (a) dropping some indicators that
  could not be achieved with project interventions or for which project attribution could not be demonstrated
  and (b) improving definitions, measurement methodologies, and target values of the remaining indicators.
  The 2020 restructuring partially addressed the attribution problem by adding new indicators to the RF that
  would reflect actual project impacts, considering the serious delays in the initial years of project
  implementation. Nevertheless, any project achievements were still reported mostly at the output level,
  which did not allow an evaluation of the project’s outcomes.



c. M&E Utilization
  M&E data obtained through regular reporting, biannual implementation support missions, and review
  meetings were reported in all 12 Implementation Status and Results Reports (ISRs) to report any
  advances in project implementation, identify implementation issues, and agree on actions to address
  them. The information also supported the implementing agencies in proposing adjustments during the
  project’s MTR, and the World Bank in completing the 2020 restructuring. The PCU’s implementation
  completion report also supported the preparation of the ICR.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was in full compliance with the World Bank’s safeguard policies. The project was classified as
   Category B with two triggered environmental and social (E&S) safeguard policies: OP/BP 4.01 -
   Environmental Assessment and OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources. During project preparation, the
   Government prepared an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) in compliance with
   both national regulations and the two World Bank safeguard policies.

   During project implementation, the dedicated M&E specialist monitored the project’s compliance with ESMF
   requirements during project implementation. The World Bank worked closely with the PCU to ensure that
   the E&S requirements were adequately reflected in procurement documents.

   The ESMF required updating the preliminary stakeholder mapping after identifying project-affected
   stakeholders. With procurement delays in physical investment activities, the PCU deferred the recruitment
   of a social specialist to perform the required social risk management tasks associated with these
   investments.

   The project implemented a grievance redress mechanism (GRM) through a physical book at OEFA’s office
   and on its website. Without the implementation of any physical investments, however, the system did not
   receive any communications or queries at project closing. With these actions, as noted in the ICR, the
   project maintained a safeguard rating of satisfactory throughout project implementation.




                                                                                                  Page 18 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PE: Enhancement of Env. Quality Services (P147342)




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management. The project had adequate financial management (FM) arrangements. According
   to the ICR, loan proceeds were used for the intended purposes, and FM requirements were fulfilled
   throughout most of the implementation period. The PCU submitted the project’s financial statements and
   external audit reports mostly on time. Most of the audit reports provided unqualified opinions, but often with
   some internal control issues. In response to the World Bank’s and the auditors’ recommendations, the
   PCU was able to develop and implement FM action plans agreed with the World Bank. FM performance
   was mostly rated satisfactory, with a moderate FM risk rating during project implementation.

   Notwithstanding the above, the project experienced FM challenges associated with bureaucratic and
   complex domestic procedures and requirements. Further, the high turnover of OEFA leaders and PCU
   members affected the project’s financial execution and reporting due to delayed decision-making in project
   implementation. At project closing, pending FM issues included submission of final statements of
   expenses, a refund of non-executed funds (US$326,142.65), and submission of the final financial audit. At
   the time of ICR preparation, however, all of these issues had been resolved except the submission of the
   final audit report to the World Bank, which was submitted to the Bank through Clientconnection on June 6,
   2023, with a clean opinion.

   Procurement. Although the PCU met the Bank’s procurement procedural requirements, there were
   serious delays due to the lack of readiness of the technical documents (TORs, technical designs, and other
   requirements not foreseen at design) and slow execution of the bidding (for example, delays in the
   evaluation of bids/proposals and lengthy negotiations and cancelling of bids due to the request of new
   authorities after the oil spill). The procurement delays were so serious, that project activities under
   Component 1 did not start before the project ended. At project closing, moreover, there was an active INT
   investigation related to potential corruption practices in the bidding process for the laboratory contract. The
   sole bidder had access to the PIU’s bid evaluation and complained to the Bank about the proposed
   decision of the PIU. This case remains under investigation.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
                                Highly
Outcome                                               Highly Unsatisfactory
                                Unsatisfactory
                                                                                  There were significant
                                Moderately
Bank Performance                                      Unsatisfactory              shortcomings in Quality at Entry
                                Unsatisfactory
                                                                                  and Supervision


                                                                                                    Page 19 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PE: Enhancement of Env. Quality Services (P147342)



Quality of M&E                 Modest                Modest

Quality of ICR                 ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The following lessons are adapted from the ICR with some modifications of language:

Requiring one approach to procurement without first understanding the country’s
operational context can lead to lengthy delays in project implementation. The main contract of
the project, the environmental analytical laboratory, comprises goods and civil works having unique
technical features. Although the Bank initially recommended that the Borrower procure the
laboratory’s goods and civil works separately, an approach commonly used in similar Bank
investments in other countries, the Bank accepted the implementation agency’s proposal of a single-
contract approach under the project’s specific operational context, which included the COVID-19
pandemic, frequent administration changes, the remaining implementation period, and slow and
complicated domestic review procedures.

Pollution control projects that finance improvements in environmental monitoring, analytical
infrastructure, and information sharing and disclosure without corresponding improvements
in regulatory compliance and enforcement may fail to establish the incentive or urgency to
complete the investment. During project preparation, the Bank team presented alternative project
designs, based on successful global experience that would have included improvements in
environmental enforcement and compliance to create a demand for environmental monitoring and
information disclosure and ultimately demonstrate actual improvements in environmental quality.
However, the GoP chose only to focus on environmental monitoring and disclosure in the project
with the expectation that future operations would consider support to enforcement. Such a design
failed to create an urgency for completing the project-financed upgrading of environmental
monitoring and analytical infrastructure. This design also failed to achieve the PDO or have any
significant development impact.

Projects in new sectors that do not have a flexible design may struggle to adjust to
unexpected events during project implementation. In the case of his project, the Bank had
introduced a project in a new sector in the country and did not allow sufficient time for completing
feasibility studies and other national requirements (including processing for domestic approvals) as
part of project implementation. Further, the main project instruments (for example, PAD and
Operations Manual) also lacked flexible designs and clear processes for coping with unexpected
implementation challenges that were beyond the control of the implementing agencies and the
World Bank. When the initial country risk assessment showed high political, institutional, and
macroeconomic stability levels, the project design should have built-in flexibility to cope with
potentially lengthy delays.

An overly optimistic loan repayment period can undermine the completion of a project and
the achievement of project objectives. The Government’s insistence on repaying the loan five-
and-a-half months after project closure meant that the project could not be extended to allow the
Bank support to continue to finance the remaining activities until completion and to provide the
needed technical support for implementing the most important environmental sector actions

                                                                                                  Page 20 of 21
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       PE: Enhancement of Env. Quality Services (P147342)



recommended by the OECD. The project closed at a time when most of the main procurement
documents were still being finalized.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR was concise and consistent with the OPCS guidelines. The ICR is candid and clearly explains the
factors that undermined the achievement of the project objectives, the completion of project components, and
the performance of the Bank. The ICR presented sufficient information in areas such as procurement and
financial management, and the lessons presented in the ICR are useful. The ICR provided adequate analysis
and information to justify the ratings. Nonetheless, there were some inconsistencies in how part of the PDO
referring to informed public participation was addressed. This aspect of the PDO was not explicitly discussed in
the ICR under the Efficacy section and treated as a higher-level objective because the ICR noted that there
were no associated indicators or activities. However, the PAD had descriptions of activities (the development of
software programs for interactive communications with the public on environmental management issues and
public awareness-raising events) (PAD, page 31) designed to promote informed public participation in
environmental management. The Project Paper prepared for the 2022 restructuring also referred to the
promotion of informed public participation as a project objective. Another minor deficiency in the ICR was the
inconsistent reporting of actual component and total project costs.

Overall, the ICR quality is rated as Substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                  Page 21 of 21
