     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ZM:Stengthening Climate Resilience (P127254)



                                                                                   Report Number: ICRR0023575

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P127254                                     ZM:Stengthening Climate Resilience

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Zambia                                      Environment, Natural Resources & the Blue Economy


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-14573,TF-14588,TF-A7482,TF-A7494 31-Dec-2022                                                   50,586,913.91

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 09-May-2013                                 31-Dec-2022

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            50,600,000.00                                     50,600,000.00

 Revised Commitment                             50,600,000.00                                     50,586,913.91

 Actual                                         50,586,913.91                                     50,586,913.91




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Katharina Ferl              Vibecke Dixon                 Avjeet Singh                    IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Project Appraisal Documents (PAD) (p.viii) and the Financing Agreement of June 14, 2013
   (p.5) the objective of the project was “to strengthen Zambia's institutional framework for climate resilience and
   improve the adaptive capacity of vulnerable communities in the Barotse sub-basin”.

   The Project Development Objective will be parsed as follows:



                                                                                                     Page 1 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ZM:Stengthening Climate Resilience (P127254)



   Objective 1: To strengthen Zambia’s institutional framework for climate resilience

   Objective 2: To improve the adaptive capacity of vulnerable communities in the Barotse sub-basin



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project included three components:

   Component 1: Strategic National Program Support (appraisal estimate US$9.60 million, AF US$1.3
   million, actual US$13.01 million): This component included two sub-components:

   Sub-component 1.1: Institutional Support to National Climate Change Program: This sub-component was to
   finance the following activities: i) mainstreaming climate resilience into key national and sectoral policies
   and programs; ii) providing institutional strengthening, through post-graduate and short-term training for
   climate change champions, knowledge sharing, and analysis and dissemination of lessons learned; iii)
   conducting studies on management of external resources and climate risk financing; and iv) providing
   incremental support to the National Climate Change Secretariat.

   Sub-component 1.2: Strengthened climate information: This sub-component was to finance the following
   activities: i) conducting social marketing awareness campaigns; ii) strengthening early warning systems;
   and iii) establishing a pilot open data platform to facilitate sharing climate risk data among decision makers.

   When the project received AF in 2018, the following activities were added: i) evaluating the existing
   information systems in the country; ii) strengthening the government’s agencies in charge of the information
   systems; iii) engaging firms or agencies to disseminate the proposed information at the national level.

   Component 2: Support to Participatory Adaptation (appraisal estimate US$5.60 million, AF US$2.66
   million, actual US$8.60 million): This component was to strengthen the adaptive capacity of vulnerable
   rural communities in the Barotse sub-basin, through: i) facilitating and strengthening community decision-
   making; ii) providing technical support to western province and district councils; and iii) providing
   incremental project management support to western province and district councils.

   When the project received AF in 2018, the following activities were added: i) providing technical assistance
   to develop guidelines for business plans for enterprise grants; ii) providing training to implement business
   plans among selected enterprises; and iii) selecting best enterprise grant proposals to be supported with
   financial resources.

   Component 3: Pilot Participatory Adaptation (appraisal estimate US$31.22 million, AF US$10.42
   million, actual US$28.97 million- these amounts included project management and contingency
   amounts totaling US$2.78 million): This component included three sub-components:



                                                                                                     Page 2 of 17
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    ZM:Stengthening Climate Resilience (P127254)



  Sub-component 3.1: Community adaptation sub-grants: These sub-grants were to finance priority
  adaptation sub-projects identified through the process of climate resilient planning which were to be
  identified through the process of climate resilient planning supported by Component 2.

  Sub-component 3.2: Adaptation contingency fund: The project was to support the establishment and
  operation of an Adaptation Contingency Fund at the subnational level to fund additional sub-projects upon
  early warning of a disaster.

  Sub-component 3.3: Rehabilitation and strengthened management of traditional canals: This sub-
  component was to rehabilitate and strengthen management works of about five priority traditional canals on
  the floodplain, to optimize their use in climate resilience (particularly in the management of floods and
  droughts).

  When the project received AF in 2018, the project provided AF to the enterprise sub-grants to support
  livelihood diversification for key value chains and link producers to markets.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost: The project was estimated to cost US$36.0 million. Actual cost was US$50.58 million since
  the project received Additional Financing (AF) in the amount of US$14.6 million.

  Financing: The project was financed by four Trust Funds (TFs): i) TF-14573 in the amount of US$5.0
  million (which fully disbursed); ii) TF-14588 in the amount of US$31.0 million (of which US$30.98 million
  disbursed); iii) TF-A7494 (AF) in the amount of US$13.5 million (which fully disbursed); and iv) TF-A7482
  (AF) in the amount of US$1.1 million (which completely disbursed).

  Borrower Contribution: It was not planned for the Borrower to make any contributions.

  Dates: The project was restructured twice and received AF:

  ·     On September 1, 2017, the project was restructured to: i) move the Inter-Ministerial National Climate
  Change Secretariat (ICCS), which was mandated with project oversight and coordination of implementation
  agencies, from the Ministry of Finance (MoF) to the new Ministry of National Development Planning; ii)
  change the Results Framework to revise indicator names, units of measure, baselines, data sources and
  methodology to further clarify indicators and better measure all aspects of the PDO. The revisions also
  reflected changes because of the addition of districts and rehabilitated canals not covered in the Results
  Framework nor envisaged during project design; and iii) increase the amount allocated to category 4
  (training and operating costs) from 10 percent to 12 percent to reflect the inclusion of new districts in the
  Barotse sub-basin.

  ·    On May 23, 2018, the project received AF in the amount of US$14.6 million to: i) identify the
  challenges, risks, and opportunities for producers to transform their livelihoods into market-based
  enterprises; ii) develop a service delivery system for an information platform to facilitate the dissemination
  and accessibility of information for producer groups and other users/stakeholders; and iii) support livelihood
  diversification/enterprises (for example, crops, fisheries, livestock, and irrigated high-value crops) under
  targeted value chains linked to strong markets. The project was restructured to: i) extend the closing date of
  the project by 36 months from December 31, 2019 to December 31, 2022 to allow sufficient time to


                                                                                                   Page 3 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ZM:Stengthening Climate Resilience (P127254)



   implement the new activities; ii) amend the Results Framework to add new indicators for monitoring the new
   activities and adjusting existing indicator targets to capture the increase in project beneficiaries; iii) combine
   disbursement categories to avoid the need for future restructuring for disbursement category overruns; and
   iv) add the Zambia Metrological Agency as an additional implementing agency with the Disaster
   Management and Mitigation Unit (currently implementing the climate information sub-component).




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country and sector context. Zambia, a large and landlocked country in southern sub-Saharan Africa, was
heavily dependent on natural resources, particularly mining and increasingly forestry at the time of
appraisal. Even though Zambia experienced favorable macroeconomic conditions, it was still only ranked
164 out of 187 countries United Nations Development Program Human Development Index. According to
the ICR (para. 2), at the time of appraisal, about 61 percent of the population lived under the national
poverty line and 39 percent lived under the national extreme poverty line. Furthermore, up to 80 percent of
Zambia’s poor (and 90 percent of the extreme poor) lived in rural areas. Agriculture and other primary
sectors employed more than 65 percent of the population. However, Zambia was particularly vulnerable to
climate and economic shocks given its reliance on a narrow resource base.

Zambia’s climate was highly variable, with frequent droughts, seasonal and flash floods, extreme
temperatures, and dry spells. The poor were particularly vulnerable to climate change impacts due to their
heavy reliance on climate-sensitive sectors.

Alignment with the Government Strategy. According to the PAD (p. 2), to address these climate change
related challenges, the government mainstreamed climate change into Zambia’s Sixth National
Development Plan (2011-2015) which focused on promoting rural investment, acceleration of poverty
reduction, as well as economic diversification. In particular, the objective of the project was in line with the
Plan’s first objective “reducing poverty and the vulnerability of the poor” and two outcomes: i) “improve crop
and animal productivity” and ii) “improve access to resources for strengthening household resilience and
health in targeted areas”.

Zambia also developed a National Climate Change Response Strategy, which was built on the 2007
National Adaptation Program of Action (NAPA) and provided the institutional basis for its National Climate
Change and Low Carbon Development Program. Phase 1 of the Pilot Program or Climate Resilience
(PPCR) was financed by the Climate Investment Fund (CIF) and facilitated the consolidation of climate
change institutional efforts in the country.

Alignment with the World Bank Strategy. The objective of the project was in line with the Bank’s most
recent Country Partnership Framework (CPF) (2019-2023), and several of its objectives such as: i)
enhancing productivity in the agri-food sector through diversification and building stronger connections with
domestic and international markets; and ii) bolstering the capacity of rural communities to withstand climate
and environmental shocks. Furthermore, the objective of the project is in line with the Bank’s Climate
Change Action Plan (2021-2025), which prioritizes the integration of climate change into countries’ policies
and programs as well as the identification and prioritization of mitigation and adaptation strategies.


                                                                                                       Page 4 of 17
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      ZM:Stengthening Climate Resilience (P127254)



               The objective of the project was pitched at an appropriate level to address a development problem.

               Overall, the relevance of the objective is rated High.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To strengthen Zambia's institutional framework for climate resilience

                             Rationale
                             Theory of change: The project’s theory of change envisioned that project inputs/activities such as
                             incorporating climate resilience into key national and sectoral policies, providing institutional strengthening,
                             conducting studies on management of external resources and climate risk financing, as well as strengthening
                             climate information were to result in outputs such as climate resilience being incorporated into key national
                             and sectoral policies, institutions being strengthened, relevant studies being conducted, and climate
                             information being strengthened. These outputs were to result in the outcome of Zambia’s institutional
                             framework for climate resilience being strengthened.

                             The theory of change was sound and logic.

                             Outputs:

                                        A climate change department and council were established, achieving the target of the council being
                                           fully operational and effectively coordinating climate change funding, programs, and projects.
                                          Four climate resilient programs and policies in key vulnerable sectors were screened for their impact,
                                           achieving the target of four programs and policies.
                                          Four sectoral screening guidelines for climate resilience programs and policies were developed for
                                           key sectors, achieving the target of four sectoral screening guidelines.
                                          The project was not able to achieve its targets for two climate responsive financial instruments being
                                           developed and tested, two climate risks financing instruments being developed, and one climate risk
                                           financing instrument being tested. The project was able to conduct a climate risk financing instrument
                                           study to provide the government with recommendations for further actions in terms of setting out the
                                           instruments.
                                          A social marketing campaign to raise awareness for climate risks was completed, achieving the target
                                           of a campaign being designed and implemented.
                                          A two-way early warning system (EWS) was established and was operational in 30 percent of the
                                           targeted districts, not achieving the target of being operational in 70 percent of targeted districts.

                                                                                                                                    Page 5 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   ZM:Stengthening Climate Resilience (P127254)




      The target of an open climate platform being developed and operational was not achieved since the
       platform design was ongoing when the ICR was written.
      The number of local area plans with climate resilience considerations at the district and ward level
       being mainstreamed increased from 24 plans in 2013 to 30 plans in 2022, exceeding the target of 18
       plans.

Outcomes:

      The national budget allocations to climate resilient programs for climate vulnerable sectors increased
       from US$2.53 million in 2013 to US$931.68 million, substantially surpassing the target of US$3.16
       million.
      The national budget allocations to climate resilient programs for climate vulnerable sectors increased
       from US$1.90 million in 2013 to US$65.36 million in 2022, substantially surpassing the target of
       US$2.37 million.

The ICR (para. 38) stated that even though the targets for these indicators were substantially surpassed,
there were some limitations. First, while the project provided technical assistance to the government to
access different climate change related funding sources, not all budget allocation increases can be directly
attributed to the project. Second, the PDO indicators were subject to external factors such as macroeconomic
conditions and external shocks. Third, the indicator targets were low since they were based on the baseline
data available at project appraisal, which now seemed inaccurate. Given these limitations, it is challenging to
assess to what extent the project contributed to the achievement of these outcomes. However, both outcome
targets were substantially exceeded, and while the full budget increase may not be entirely attributable to the
project, it is plausible that the project has contributed significantly to the results. It is also clear from the
positive achievements at the intermediate results level that they have plausibly contributed to a strengthened
institutional framework for climate resilience. Thus, even though the targets were significantly exceeded,
the achievement of this objective is rated Substantial with moderate shortcomings.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To improve the adaptive capacity of vulnerable communities in the Barotse sub-basin

Rationale
Theory of change: The project’s theory of change envisioned that project inputs/activities such as facilitating
and strengthening community decision-making, providing technical support to western province and district
councils, providing incremental project management support to western province and district councils,
financing community adaptation sub-grants and supporting the adaptation of a contingency fund as well as
rehabilitating and strengthening the management of traditional canals were to result in outputs such as
community decision-making being strengthened, the adaptive capacity of western province and district
councils being increased, priority adaptation sub-projects being financed, a contingency fund being adapted,



                                                                                                   Page 6 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   ZM:Stengthening Climate Resilience (P127254)



and the management of traditional canals being strengthened. These outputs were to result in the outcome of
adaptive capacity of vulnerable communities in the Barotse sub-basin being improved.

The theory of change was sound and logic.

Outputs:

      A climate risk assessment was completed for Barotse sub-basin and incorporated into provincial-level
       planning, achieving the target of completing one climate risk assessment.
      Rehabilitation works on canals were completed to achieve the target of designed slope and cross
       sections maintained to the engineering standard. The seven canals were selected based on their
       potential to provide multiple services including transportation and navigation, extended cultivation
       periods, water sources for domestic activities, fishing, and agricultural purposes. The rehabilitation
       process included the construction of crossing points and sand traps.
      722 targeted priority and secondary/ancillary canals were rehabilitated and maintained, exceeding the
       target of 220 canals.
      5,914 areas had access to reliable canal waters exceeding the target of 400 areas.

      Clear policies and regular Operations & Maintenance (O&M) budget for canals were adopted by
         provincial authorities, achieving the target of policies and budget being adopted.
        Provincial level agreement for optimal canal O&M were adopted and supported by Barotese Royal
         Establishment (BRE), achieving the target of agreement being adopted.
        Seven priority targeted canals had maintenance technical designs in place, achieving the target of
         seven canals.
        A local level climate contingency fund was established with clear and transparent operational
         modalities, achieving the target of a fund being established.
        56 enterprise grants were implemented, not achieving the target of 300 enterprise grants. The grants
         were used by enterprises for providing livelihood and income opportunities for individuals or groups to
         enter into new enterprises that are linked to potentially lucrative value chains such as honey,
         mushroom, rice, fish, sunflower and groundnut production and processing. This was an innovative
         approach by linking small producers, enterprises, and markets. This activity supported private
         enterprises to venture into profitable activities and value addition of selected value chains. According
         to the ICR (p. 40) the project did not achieve the targets due to the COVID-19 pandemic which limited
         monitoring and mobilization of communities. Also, inflationary pressure and increase in commodity
         prices limited the ability of enterprises to purchase what they had budgeted for.
              o 2,233 sub-grants were approved and completed exceeding the target of 1,324 sub-grants.
              o 50 sub-grants at the district-level were approved, exceeding the target of 24 sub-grants.
              o 143 sub-grants at the ward level were approved, exceeding the target of 72 sub-grants.
              o 1,866 sub-grants were approved at the community level, exceeding the target of 1,150 sub-
                 grants.
              o 174 sub-grans to individual champions were approved, exceeding the target of 78 individual
                 champions.
              o 96 sub-grants were approved to female individual champions, exceeding the target of 23
                 female individual champions.




                                                                                                    Page 7 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   ZM:Stengthening Climate Resilience (P127254)




      50,386 person-days of labor were generated, exceeding the target of 3,250 person-days. Out of these
         person-days 25,538 were generated by women, exceeding the target of 1,625 person days generated
         by women.
        53.4 percent of households were considered very vulnerable in target districts, not achieving the target
         of 50 percent.
        The average number of alternative sources of livelihood income per sampled beneficiary female-
         headed household increased from 1.36 alternative sources in 2013 to 2 alternative sources in 2022,
         achieving the target of 2 alternative sources.
        The average number of alternative sources of livelihood income per sampled male-headed beneficiary
         household increased from 1.57 alternative sources in 2013 to 2 alternative sources in 2022, achieving
         the target of 2 alternative sources.
        603 enterprise grants were submitted for evaluation, achieving the target of 600 grants.

Outcomes:

      The average flow velocity of targeted canals decreased from 0.60 meters per second in 2014 to 0.12
         meters per second in 2022, achieving the target of 0.48 meters per second.
      71 percent of targeted councils, wards and community groups were assessed as having developed
       incremental decision-making capacity and applied climate information to adapt to longer-term climate
       change and variability, achieving the target of 70 percent.
      An Impact Evaluation found the following results:
            o Project households had a more diversified agricultural income profile than households that
              were not part of project interventions (non-project households). Agriculture income from
              poultry, livestock, and fish production was slightly higher for project households compared to
              non-project households, in line with the agricultural activities promoted under Component 3.
              Furthermore, project beneficiary households were more likely to implement adaptation
              practices: project- households were 19 percentage points more likely to adopt at least one
              improved crop management strategy and 18 percentage points more likely to adopt improved
              water management strategies, allowing them to strengthen their adaptive capacity to climate
              change risks.

A survey conducted by the PIU found the following:

    o Almost 97 percent of beneficiary households reported having additional sources of income after the
         project interventions with an average of three livelihood activities/sources of income per household.
    o The number of households who reported eating three meals per day increased by approximately 40
         percent between 2015 and 2018.
    o    A greater proportion of beneficiary households reported having the capacity to cope with extreme
         weather events (70 percent beneficiary households versus 40 percent non-beneficiary households).
    o    Almost 70 percent of beneficiary households reported that they received climate information from
         various channels (for example, radio, television, and phone).
    o    Almost 67 percent of beneficiary households indicated that climate information was helpful to prepare
         adequately for the farming season.
    o    The majority of beneficiary households reported the following benefits associated with the project: a)
         less dependency on rainfed activities; b) possibility to plant early maturing seeds and early planting of



                                                                                                     Page 8 of 17
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                ZM:Stengthening Climate Resilience (P127254)



                                    crops; c) improved water access, and d) canal clearing, which helped drain water from waterlogged
                                    land and allowed communities undertake gardening and farming activities.

                            The project also measured the number of beneficiaries it supported:

                                   The project supported 581,028 beneficiaries to adapt to the effects of climate change exceeding the
                                    target of 130,000 beneficiaries.
                                         o A total of 128,169 households benefitted the project, exceeding the original target of 25,800
                                            households and the revised target of 33,300 households.
                                         o A total of 53,783 women-headed households benefitted from the project, exceeding the
                                            original target of 11,000 women-headed households and the revised target of 12,250 women-
                                            headed households.
                                         o A total of 68,446 vulnerable households benefitted from the project, exceeding the target of
                                            14,800 vulnerable households.

                            The project was able to achieve all PDO indicators with the exception of PDO indicator “number of enterprise
                            grants implemented”. Therefore, the achievement of this objective is rated Substantial.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Given the substantial achievement of both objectives, the overall efficacy rating is Substantial.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



   5. Efficiency
   Economic efficiency:

   The PAD (p. 81) included a traditional benefit-cost analysis. Not all benefits of climate resilience were
   tangible. Benefits for the adaptation grants were measured with reference to realistic end of project targets for
   improvement in household cash income and food security as proxies for increased climate resilience. The extent
   to which traditional navigation and drainage canals were to contribute to improved resilience was also difficult to
   know and, in this case, project benefits were estimated with information from a variety of sources including key



                                                                                                                                Page 9 of 17
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       ZM:Stengthening Climate Resilience (P127254)



informant interviews in the project area together with baseline and other survey documentation from Non-
Governmental Organizations (NGOs) currently supporting canal rehabilitation.

The overall Economic Rate of Return (ERR) was calculated at 15.0 percent with a Net Present Value (NPV)
ranging from US$18.3 million (at 3 percent) to US$2.1 million (at 12 percent), indicating that the project was a
worthwhile investment.

The ICR (p. 22) conducted a benefit-cost analysis for component 3 (pilot participatory adaptation) (57.3 percent
of total financing) since components 1 and 2 economic benefits were difficult to quantify. Even though not all
benefits of Component 3 were quantifiable, the Internal Rate of Return (IRR) was estimated at 34 percent, and
NPV ranging from US$61,154,605.53 to US$17,679,278.17 in an optimistic scenario where all Component 3
benefits were sustained over the project life. Even without the transport benefits from navigation canals, the
intervention remained profitable with an estimated IRR of 30 percent and NPV ranging from US$45,798,247.78
to US$12,827,669.49. If households’ benefits were to fade over time, the transport benefits associated with the
rehabilitation of traditional canals still made the project profitable with an estimated IRR of 11 percent and NPV
ranging from US$6,299,277.15 to US$223,683.65.

The ERR in the PAD was lower since it was based on the initial targets for beneficiary households, which were
much lower than the actual numbers achieved at completion.

Operational efficiency:

The project experienced implementation delays due to the lack of clarity in some processes at the sub-national
level, and the Covid-19 pandemic regarding implementing enterprise grants, procuring imported equipment and
inputs and providing technical support to sub-projects. Furthermore, political campaigns during 2021 also
resulted in implementation delays. In total, the project’s implementation period was extended by 36 months.

Overall, the project’s efficiency rating is Substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                 Rate Available?            Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      100.00
 Appraisal                                                 15.00
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      57.30
 ICR Estimate                                              34.00
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.




                                                                                                     Page 10 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      ZM:Stengthening Climate Resilience (P127254)



6. Outcome

The relevance of the objective was High. Both Efficacy and Efficiency were rated Substantial. Taking everything
together, the overall outcome rating is Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The risks to development outcomes can be broadly classified into the following categories:

Financial/political: Since Zambia is facing a debt crisis, climate change efforts could be negatively impacted
by the government’s focus on the debt restructuring process. Also, Zambia’s financial allocations to climate
change policies and programs are highly dependent on international aid. Therefore, the sustainability of
project outcomes will depend on the stabilization of the economy, improvements in the debt situation, and
sustained political will to prioritize climate change adaptation in a fiscally tight environment.

Government ownership/commitment: Even though Zambia is going through a challenging economic
situation, the government is committed to making the country more resilient to climate change as
demonstrated through working with the Bank on a new project. The “Transforming Landscapes for Resilience
and Development” (TRALARD) project aims “to improve natural resource management in select districts to
support sustainable livelihoods, and in the event of an eligible crisis or emergency, to provide immediate and
effective response to the eligible crisis or emergency” (P164764) and has a total financing amount US$100
million.

Technical capacity: While the project supported capacity building at the district level, high staff turnover
poses a threat to the sustainability of capacity built. Given the resource constraints the country is facing, lack
of financing to ensure continuous training to build the capacity of new staff will present a challenge.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  According to the PAD (p. 34), the project built on the first phase of the Pilot Program for Climate
  Resilience and expanded on areas that had been successful, such as the mainstreaming of the Sixth
  National Development Plan, institutional development, and crowdsourcing.

  The ICR (para. 97) stated that the Bank team conducted significant analytical work to inform project
  design and scope, such as a Financial Management assessment, an Environmental and Social
  Management Framework assessment, and a Procurement Capacity Assessment. Furthermore, the Bank
  team conducted stakeholder consultations with sub-national public institutions, local authorities, and


                                                                                                       Page 11 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ZM:Stengthening Climate Resilience (P127254)



  several local organizations. The identification and selection of government institutions involved with the
  project and their respective roles were well-informed and based on the project's needs.

  According to the PAD (p. 15), the Bank team identified relevant risks. For example, the risk of capacity
  challenges due to implementing a multi-sectoral participatory program in a highly sectoral and centralized
  government context was rated High. Also, there was a risk that the effectiveness of the Secretariat could
  be undermined by weak career and salary incentives provided to employees compared to market-level
  salaries provided to contracted fiduciary staff. Furthermore, the risk for project design and delivery
  monitoring was Substantial due to Zambia’s weak disbursement profile, complex procurement and
  approval processes, and relatively weak outcome monitoring capacity. In addition, the Barotse sub-basin
  interventions depended on decentralized institutions, the district councils, which remained weak,
  underfunded, and exposed to political influences. Finally, the risk of traditional canal management in
  Barotse being undermined by unclear responsibilities between government agencies, Barotse Royal
  Establishment (BRE), and local water users was identified. The economic analysis indicated that weak
  operation and maintenance following rehabilitation could pose a substantial risk to the project. The Bank
  team tried to mitigate these risks by providing monitoring and evaluation technical assistance as well as
  specialized evaluations/technical audits. Also, the project design was made sufficiently flexible to
  accommodate local differences. Furthermore, canal rehabilitation work was only to proceed after a clear
  agreement was reached on ensuring adequate operation and maintenance for the canals. A
  disbursement condition to this effect was included in the Loan Agreement. While the risk mitigation
  measures were largely adequate, the large number of sub-grants posed challenges to the decentralized
  procurement process and the high turnover of local staff (ICR para. 78).

  The project’s Results Framework was adequate except for shortcomings in attributing all changes solely
  to the project activities and setting of targets for the first two PDO indicators.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 According to the ICR (para. 98) the Bank team conducted a total of 20 implementation support missions,
 which also included field visits. The project had four different Task Team Leaders of which two were based
 in the country, allowing for continuous interaction with the government. Also, the Bank team included
 members with the required technical expertise. The ICR (para. 88) stated that the PIU and the Bank team
 conducted field missions to provide assistance to provincial and local authorities and assess progress on a
 bi-annual basis.

 The Bank team revised the project’s Results Framework twice to revise indicator names, units of measure,
 baselines, data sources and methodology to further clarify indicators and better measure all aspects of the
 PDO. When the project experienced fiduciary challenges, the Bank team provided technical assistance to
 strengthen capacity.




                                                                                                    Page 12 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ZM:Stengthening Climate Resilience (P127254)




  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The objective of the project was specified. The project’s theory of change and how key activities and
 outputs were to lead to the intended outcomes were sound and reflected in the Results Framework.

 The original M&E design had some shortcomings. The PDO indicators for the first objective (e.g., “changes
 in budget allocations to climate-smart programs in national budgets”) measured outcomes that could not be
 solely attributed to project activities. The ICR (para. 37) stated that the PDO indicators were used as
 proxies since measuring institutional framework improvements is complex and multi-faceted. Nevertheless,
 the intermediate indicators facilitated the measurement of progress towards the objective. In addition, given
 the demand-driven nature of the project activities, calculating realistic targets for outcome 2 (“improve the
 adaptive capacity of vulnerable communities in the Barotse sub-basin”) was challenging during project
 preparation.

 The ICR (para. 86) stated that for component 3, the pilot participatory adaptation component, data on sub-
 grants and sub-projects were collected by community/ward development committees and local staff. The
 data were then aggregated at the district and provincial level. The ICR notes that the project would have
 benefitted from an additional systematic collection of household survey data to measure outcomes
 better. The Inter-ministerial National Climate Change Secretariat and the Provincial level PPIU were
 responsible for regular monitoring and contracting out project evaluation.



b. M&E Implementation
  According to the ICR (para. 87) M&E data was collected on different levels, such as the community and
  district level, given the project’s decentralized nature. The provincial PIU (PPIU) conducted field visits to
  collect M&E data on a quarterly basis. However, the project faced monitoring challenges when the
  project’s wards and districts were expanded since the number of M&E staff did not change. Also, districts
  experienced challenges due to the late release of funds for M&E implementation which resulted in
  districts using other ways of collecting data such as agricultural extension agents, ward development
  committees, and community social welfare committees.

  According to the Bank team (August 11, 2023) the PIU defined clear approaches to measuring each PDO
  indicator and the indicators in the results framework. Qualified firms and consultants were hired to carry
  out specialized studies (reports and data collection) to measure PDO indicators one, two, and three and a
  sub-national level system was put in place to measure PDO indicator four. The methodologies and
  results were shared and reviewed with the Bank team throughout the duration of the project and were
  found to be transparent and of good quality. The project experienced shortcomings to measure PDO

                                                                                                     Page 13 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ZM:Stengthening Climate Resilience (P127254)



  indicator four (number of beneficiaries) due to the decentralized nature of the project and the sub-national
  level system.

  During project implementation, the Results Framework was revised twice to revise indicator names, units
  of measure, baselines, data sources and methodology to further clarify indicators and better measure all
  aspects of the PDO as well as increase targets when the project received AF.



c. M&E Utilization
  According to the ICR (para. 89) the project’s M&E data was used to inform decision making. For
  example, M&E data allowed to identify several implementation bottlenecks such as slow disbursement of
  sub-grants. As a result, the project developed a work plan to accelerate the implementation of
  participatory adaptation initiatives, increase the number of proposals reviewed and approved by the
  Provincial Planning Sub-Committee (PPSC), and accelerate the transfer of funds to sub-projects.
  Furthermore, M&E data helped to identify implementation issues related to the canal rehabilitation due to
  issues with control contractors and certain Climate Risk and Adaptation Facilitators (CRAFs) who did not
  deliver the expected technical support.

  The overall M&E quaity is rated as Subsatntial. Even though there were shortcomings in original design,
  the data collected effectively informed project implementation and allowed the PIU, PPIU, district teams,
  community/ward committees, and World Bank team to make timely decisions to enhance achievement
  of the PDO. The ICR notes that the enhanced M&E capacity at the local level in Zambia enabled the
  GRZ to effectively monitor not only the implementation of this project but also other programs.




  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as category B and triggered the Bank’s safeguard policies OP/BP 4.01
   (Environmental Assessment), OP/BP 4.04 (Natural Habitats), OP/BP 4.09 (Pest Management), OP/BP 4.11
   (Physical Cultural Resources), OP/BP 4.12 (Involuntary Resettlement) and OP/BP 7.50 (International
   Waterways). According to the ICR (para. 91) a conceptual design and environmental and social impact
   assessment (ESIA) were completed before the start of project implementation. Furthermore, the
   government prepared and applied an Environmental and Social Management Framework and a Strategic
   Environmental and Social Assessment to the national program and policies to promote climate resilience.
   Also, a pest management plan was prepared to prevent the use of harmful pesticides.

   According to the ICR (para. 92), the project faced challenges in regard to pesticides, occupational health
   and safety hazards as well as in regard to processing rice and cassava, and waste production. Furthermore,
   there were challenges related to canal rehabilitation. The Bank addressed these challenges by providing

                                                                                                   Page 14 of 17
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    ZM:Stengthening Climate Resilience (P127254)



  technical assistance for the use of organic pesticides and requiring an Integrated Pest Management Plan
  for any project using pesticides. Also, an ESIA was prepared before the seven priority canals were
  rehabilitated, and an Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) was reviewed by the project
  safeguard specialists and the Zambia Environmental Management Agency (ZEMA).

  According to the ICR (para. 93) a safeguard specialist at the district level ensured strengthening of
  environmental and social compliance of several sub-projects. Also, the project regularly conducted
  environmental audits. The project did not face any issues regarding the social safeguards. According to the
  Bank team (August 11, 2023) the project complied with all safeguards and when the project closed, all
  safeguards were rated Satisfactory.

  The ICR (para. 93) stated that the project had a Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) and all grievances
  were recorded and solved.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management:

  According to the ICR (para. 31 the project’s financial management rating was Moderately Satisfactory
  throughout implementation due to several challenges: i) financial management was done manually at the
  beginning of project implementation; ii) deficiencies in internal controls and late submission of interim
  financial reports; and iii) cases of expenses not following appropriate procedures. The project addressed
  these issues by providing training to district officers to improve the reporting process. The PIU and
  provincial authorities addressed the issues related to deficiencies and expenses appropriately. Finally, the
  Office of the Auditor General conducted an annual audit, and all opinions were unqualified.

  Procurement:

  According to the ICR (para.94) the project followed the Bank’s procurement rules, and at the provincial
  level, the project developed a procurement manual. Also, the project implemented a decentralized
  procurement system for the Western Province and districts.

  The ICR (para. 95) stated that procurement at the community level faced challenges in regard to the wide
  geographic scope of the sub-projects and small-scale procurement needs, as well as with canal
  contractors. Local authorities provided support to the communities, and larger procurement values were
  dealt with at the district level. However, the project faced procurement issues. For example, there were
  reports of procured equipment with wrong specifications and low-quality standards. The project addressed
  this issue by strengthening the community-level procurement model, developing clear procurement
  manuals, clarifying the roles between district and provincial teams, and conducting trainings to a high
  number of new staff at the sub-national level due to frequent staff turnover. Also, the Bank team provided
  support to the government and the PIU in addressing canal rehabilitation challenges.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)

                                                                                                  Page 15 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ZM:Stengthening Climate Resilience (P127254)



   NA



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                   IEG
                                                                                Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Bank Performance                Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                  Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                  ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR (p. 33-34) included several lessons learned, which were adapted by IEG:

      Engaging with the private sector in productive initiatives may enhance climate
       resilience efforts. This project piloted an innovative approach by linking small producers,
       enterprises, and markets. This activity supported private enterprises to venture into profitable
       activities and value addition of selected value chains.
      Ensuring appropriate deployment and sustainability of different initiatives requires
       clear mandates and roles. This project supported the integration of climate change
       considerations into district planning, which was supported by the seventh and eighth NDPs
       mandating all districts to mainstreaming climate change into planning and programming.
      If appropriate and measurable PDO indicators are not applied, it may jeopardize the
       measurability of project achievements. The Results Framework included a few PDO
       indicators that measured outcomes that were beyond the project’s influence. This resulted in
       the challenge of attributing the results of the first objective solely to project activities.
      Engaging with high-quality Non-Governmental Organizations (NGOs) and facilitators
       may contribute to successful project implementation. In this project, the PIU prepared
       the Participatory Adaptation Implementation Manual (PAIM) that clearly laid out the
       responsibilities and tasks for NGOs. After NGOs were selected and started to support
       vulnerable communities in the preparation and implementation of sub-grants, the Provincial
       Project Implementation Unit (PPIU) and local staff oversaw their performance. NGOs that
       were not performing appropriately were warned. If their performance did not improve, they
       were replaced by well-performing NGOs.



13. Assessment Recommended?

                                                                                                   Page 16 of 17
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       ZM:Stengthening Climate Resilience (P127254)




  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR followed the guidelines and provided an adequate overview of project preparation and implementation.
The ICR was candid in highlighting the attribution concerns in some of the PDO indicators and provided
adequate explanation to support the project's contribution. The report was internally consistent and provided
Annexes to showcase the sub-projects. The economic analysis was appropriate. The lessons learned were
useful and based on the implementation experience of this project.

The main text of the ICR could have benefitted from being more candid regarding the intermediate results that
were not achieved. For example, in paragraph 41, the ICR did not mention that the project did not achieve its
targets for climate-responsive and climate-risk financing instruments being tested. Also, the ICR did not clarify if
the intermediate outcome indicator “a number of relevant climate information products/services made available
for decision making at various levels” was achieved.

The overall quality of the ICR is rated as Susbatntial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                      Page 17 of 17
