     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     EG: Household Gas Connection Projec (P146007)



                                                                              Report Number: ICRR0023485

1. Project Data



 Project ID                               Project Name
 P146007                                  EG: Household Gas Connection Projec

 Country                                  Practice Area(Lead)
 Egypt, Arab Republic of                  Energy & Extractives


 L/C/TF Number(s)                         Closing Date (Original)              Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-84110                               30-Jun-2019                                       290,873,224.90

 Bank Approval Date                       Closing Date (Actual)
 24-Jul-2014                              30-Jun-2022

                                          IBRD/IDA (USD)                                    Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                         500,000,000.00                                             0.00

 Revised Commitment                          300,000,000.00                                             0.00

 Actual                                      290,873,224.90                                             0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                 ICR Review Coordinator        Group
 Hassan Wally               Stephen Hutton              Ramachandra Jammi             IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) of the Household Natural Gas Connection Project as articulated in
   the Loan Agreement (LA, page 6) was identical to the one stated in the Project Appraisal Document (PAD,
   paragraph 38) and aimed to:

   "assist the Arab Republic of Egypt to increase household access to reliable, lower cost, grid
   connected natural gas supply."


                                                                                               Page 1 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     EG: Household Gas Connection Projec (P146007)



   Parsing the PDO. The PDO will be parsed based on the following three objectives:

   1. To increase household access to natural gas supply.

   2. To provide reliable natural gas supply.

   3. To provide natural gas that is of lower cost (relative to LPG).




b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The PDO was supported by the following three components:

   1. Gas Network Expansion and Household Connections (appraisal cost: US$1,395.00 million, actual
   cost: US$1,496.60 million). This component financed investments necessary to expand the gas networks
   in the project areas and connect 1.5 million households to the distribution networks. The investments
   financed by this component were included in the following four subcomponents:

   1.1. Gas Transmission Connections and Pressure Reduction Stations (PRSs). This sub-component
   financed installation of the high-pressure transmission pipeline network to provide the capacity to supply
   gas to the new project areas.
   1.2. Gas Distribution Network and Connections. This included expansion of the intermediate, medium,
   and low pressure gas distribution networks, installation control systems, main regulators and customer
   connections and conversions of customer appliances to allow connection of, and supply of gas, to 1.5
   million households.
   1.3. Strengthening Capacity for Connection Scale-Up. This sub-component financed the supply and
   delivery of tools, equipment, and service vehicles to improve the capacity of the participating local
   distribution companies (LDCs) in project implementation and scale up connection installations, network
   operations, and service delivery to consumers.
   1.4. Establishment of Customer Service Centers. This sub-component financed the establishment of
   customer service centers in the targeted areas to ensure high-quality gas supply services to consumers
   during the project operation stage.

   2. Financial Support for Household Connection Charges in Disadvantaged Areas (appraisal cost:
   US$61.20 million, actual cost: US$46.80 million). The scale-up of the natural gas connections as
   envisaged under this project expanded the grid to eleven Governorates that included relatively poorer areas
   of Egypt. To ensure access among vulnerable households and no delay in project implementation due to
   consumer affordability, this component provided financial support for connection fees for households in

                                                                                                      Page 2 of 20
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    EG: Household Gas Connection Projec (P146007)



  disadvantaged and poor areas. The component was financed by an EU Grant, managed by the French
  Agency for Development (AFD). The methodology for identifying the disadvantaged households
  that benefited from the financing mechanism for the provision of the financial support was based on socio-
  economic characteristics of the targeted areas developed by an ongoing AFD consultancy assignment.

  3. Institutional Strengthening (appraisal cost: US$17.70 million, actual cost: US$14.00 million). This
  component was financed by the AFD-managed EU Grant and was jointly supervised under the Project. This
  component contributed to the improvement of the governance structure and fiscal transparency and
  accountability at the Egyptian Natural Gas Holding Company (EGAS) and supported the development of the
  gas sector regulations. The institutional strengthening was divided into two sub-components as follows:

  3.1 Development of a Financial Management and Information System (FMIS). The FMIS sought to
  enhance the timeliness and value of financial and accounting reports and improve the performance
  monitoring of EGAS and affiliated distribution companies.

  3.2. Technical Assistance for Gas Sector Regulatory Development. This sub-component supported the
  startup operations of a transitional gas regulator in Egypt including technical assistance for the development
  of enabling gas sector regulations, an assessment of various options for gas market design to be developed
  by the transitional gas regulator once it was established.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost. The total project cost was estimated at US$1,473.90 million. The actual cost was
  US$$1,557.50 million (Project team). The total project cost was marginally higher (106% of the appraisal
  estimate) than expected because of the expanded number of connections.

  Financing. The project was financed through an IBRD loan worth US$500.00 million. This amount was
  revised downwards to US$290.87 million which was fully disbursed (ICR, Data Sheet, page 2). The project
  was co-financed with US$96.00 million equivalent by the French Agency for Development (AFD) to finance
  component 1. The ICR (paragraph 19) noted that "that after the project appraisal, the EU added EUR 10
  million grant blended with the AFD loan of EUR 70 million to contribute to the financing of Component 1."
  Also, the project received an EU Grant worth US$78.90 million equivalent to finance components 2 and 3.
  The exact amount disbursed for the co-financing and the Grant were both not reported by the ICR.

  Borrower Contribution. The borrower was expected to provide US$326 million through consumer
  connection fees and US$473 million by the Egyptian Natural Gas Holding Company (EGAS), totaling
  US$799 million. In a further communication, the project team reported that consumers paid US$642 million
  as connection fees and the borrower provided $458 million.

  Dates. The project was approved on July 24, 2014 and became effective seven months later on February
  11, 2015. The Mid-Term Review (MTR) was conducted on March 22, 2019, which was about four years into
  effectiveness. While the PAD did not specify an MTR date, this Review finds that the MTR was conducted
  slightly late for a seven year implementation period. The project closed on June 30, 2022 which was three
  years beyond the expected closing date on June 30, 2019. The project was restructured twice, both Level 2
  restructuring as follows:




                                                                                                   Page 3 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     EG: Household Gas Connection Projec (P146007)



   1. On November 1, 2017, when the amount disbursed was US$121.68 million, in order to revise the Results
   Framework, change components and costs,
   extend the Loan closing date from June 30, 2019 to June 30, 2021 to complete the work needed for the
   additional expanded scope of the project (ICR, paragraph 19), cancel financing in the amount of US$200
   million of the IBRD Loan due to cost savings, mainly attributed to the project’s economies of scale, the
   global supply chain price changes, and foreign exchange rate (ICR, paragraph 15), reallocate
   funds between disbursement categories, change in disbursements arrangements, change in procurement,
   and change in the implementation schedule.

   2. On March 31, 2021, when the amount disbursed was US$244.01 million, in order to revise the Results
   Framework, extend the Loan closing date from June 30, 2021 to June 30, 2022 to accommodate delays
   caused by the COVID-19 pandemic as the associated restrictions caused delays in the supply chain and
   delays in accessing to households during the time of the lockdown, reallocate funds between disbursement
   categories, and change the implementation schedule.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Context at Appraisal. This project was a follow-up to the successful implementation of the Bank-
financed Egypt Natural Gas Connections Project (ENGCP, P095392, approved 2008- closed October
2014), which financed household gas connections in Greater Cairo. The ENGCP and other interventions
helped scale up the domestic use of natural gas by households, but a large unmet demand remained,
especially in peripheral areas of governorates. At the time of appraisal, the gas sector faced two main
challenges: (i) a weak legal, institutional and regulatory framework; and (ii) low prices to end consumers
which were below the cost of supply. In addition, many customers did not have connections to receive
natural gas, and instead used imported liquified petroleum gas (LPG), which was more expensive than
natural gas and the subsidies needed to satisfy domestic demand were negatively affecting the sector’s
financial standing and the Government’s foreign currency reserves. This project was designed to scale up
and build on the successful implementation of the ENGCP and support the Government’s policies to
expand the use of its domestic natural gas resources replacing the imported, heavily subsidized LPG,
reduce its fiscal deficit as the project was estimated to result in government budgetary savings in LPG
subsidy in the amount of US$210 million per year (PAD, paragraph 41), improve service delivery, and
increase opportunities for economic growth.

Previous Bank Experience. The Bank and Egypt have a long history of cooperation in different sectors
including infrastructure, housing, irrigation and agriculture, among others. Prior to this project the Bank
financed the Egypt Natural Gas Connections Project (ENGCP, P095392) which provided a rich learning
experience for the implementation of this project as reported in the PAD (paragraph 54).

Consistency with the Bank's Strategies. At appraisal, the PDO was in line with the Bank's Interim
Strategy Note (ISN, FY2012-FY2013) for Egypt and supported its three pillars: (i) improving economic
management through control of the fiscal deficit and initiating reforms to enhance transparency in
government operations; and (ii) fostering inclusion, which involves ensuring broader access by
disadvantaged segments of the population. In addition, the project was expected to contribute to the Bank's
twin goals of poverty reduction and achieving shared prosperity, by promoting quality of life, increasing

                                                                                                    Page 4 of 20
                       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                       EG: Household Gas Connection Projec (P146007)



household disposable incomes, contributing to job creation and providing subsidy savings to the
Government of Egypt. The project was expected to reduce the fiscal deficit by switching from LPG to
natural gas and consequently reducing the government expenditure on gas subsidies. Also, institutional
reforms would help the gas sector to function more effectively, and temporary job creation would be
associated with the project implementation and the engagement of private companies in domestic
connections of households to the grid. Finally, establishing gas connections to households was expected to
improve quality of life through providing a more reliable source of energy compared LPG cylinders, which
require time and effort for replacing. Consumers were also expected to benefit from cheaper prices to
natural gas relative to LPG which would increase their disposable income.

At completion, the PDO continued to be in line with the Bank's Country Partnership Framework for
Egypt (CPF, FY2015–FY2019), which was still applied in 2022. The CPF comprised three main focus
areas: 1. Improved Governance, 2. Private Sector Job Creation, and 3. Social Inclusion. The project directly
supported the CPF's Objective 3.5 (Increased household access to natural gas), and Objective 1.5
(Strengthened energy sector governance) and Objective 2.1 (Improved regulatory environment for private
investment) through institutional development for EGAS to enhance its financial management, and by
establishment and operationalization of a gas regulator. Further, the PDO continued to be in line with the
Bank's CPF (FY2023-FY2027). Specifically, it is
aligned with Objective 5 (Enhanced inclusions through more equitable delivery of key services) given that
natural gas supply continues to be an essential service for the comfort and the quality of life of households.
The PDO was also in line with Objective 9 (Strengthened measures to mitigate climate change) because
replacement of Liquefied Petroleum Gas (LPG) with natural gas was expected to reduce greenhouse gas
emissions.

Consistency with the Government Strategies/Priorities. At appraisal, while the project activities were in
line with the Government's aim of pursuing a gas sector reform program encompassing short and medium
term measures to mitigate the challenges constraining sector performance, the PDO lacked reference to
sector reform. The PDO was also in line with Government's national gas connection program.

At completion, the PDO continued to be in line with Government priorities for the gas sector and Egypt’s
Sustainable Development Strategy: Egypt Vision 2030. The PDO also continued to be in line with the
updated National Climate Change Strategy 2050 (issued in 2022). Specifically with Objective (1.b):
Reducing emissions associated with use of fossil fuels including delivery of natural gas to homes as an
alternative to using LPG.

Summary of Relevance of Objectives Assessment. The PDO statement was clear and focused and
pitched at an adequate level of ambition. However, the PDO lacked a reference to sector reform which was
supported by the project. This shortcoming resulted in the lack of indicators to measure the project
contribution to sector reforms. At completion, the PDO remained in line with both the Bank strategies and
the Government priorities for the gas sector in Egypt. Therefore, Relevance of Objectives is rated
Substantial.


Rating Relevance TBL




Rating
Substantial




                                                                                                     Page 5 of 20
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  EG: Household Gas Connection Projec (P146007)



   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               To increase household access to natural gas supply.

               Rationale
               Theory of Change (ToC). To achieve the stated objective, the project supported the expansion of the natural
               gas network and household connections. The expected outputs were: 8,500 km of gas networks installed per
               year, 29 Pressure Reduction Stations (PRSs), establishing 11 customer service centers. The expected
               outcomes included: connecting 1.5 million households to the network that would benefit 6.75 million
               beneficiaries of which 50% would be females. All this would contribute to the achievement of the PDO aimed
               to increase household access to natural gas supply. Anticipated Long-term impacts included: job creation for
               workers involved in system maintenance, improved quality of life by expanding household access to natural
               gas including in poorer governorates, targeting areas where cooking gas is currently in short supply or where
               households have to pay exorbitant prices, increased household disposable income, and reduced government
               subsidies.

               The achievement of the stated objective was underpinned by the following four critical assumptions: 1. Timely
               securing of land and clearance of safeguards instruments for project sites; 2. AFD financing would be
               provided on time since AFD funding would support connections to vulnerable households.; and 3. The
               implementing agency would have no capacity constraints to implement such a large scale project

               Overall, the activities reflected in the ToC were directly connected to the outputs, outcomes and to the PDO in
               a plausible causal chain. Also, the critical assumptions were logical and realistic.

               Outputs/Intermediate Results

               1. 2.25 million natural gas household connections were financed by the project in targeted areas exceeding
               the original target of 1.5 million and achieving about 98% of the revised target of 2.3 million.
               2. 50% of the project beneficiaries were females (target achieved).

               3. 8,594 Kilometers per year of new distribution networks were installed in target areas exceeding the target
               of 8,500 km.
               4. 27 PRSs were developed and operational serving targeted areas exceeding the original target of 25 and
               achieving 96% of the revised target of 28.

               Outcome

               The project supported the installation of gas transmission and distribution networks, and establishing
               household connections. By project completion, 2.25 million natural gas household connections were financed
               by the project in targeted areas exceeding the original target of 1.5 million and achieving about 98% of the
               revised target of 2.3 million. This resulted in 10 million direct beneficiaries (exceeding the original target
               of 6.75 million and achieving 97.5% of the revised target of 10.25 million), 50% of which were estimated to be
               female as confirmed through a third-party verification method adopted by EGAS (ICR, paragraph24). Also, a

                                                                                                                Page 6 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   EG: Household Gas Connection Projec (P146007)



total of 282,812 socially vulnerable beneficiaries (target: 400,000) benefited from financial support
for connection fees. The ICR (paragraph 77) explained that the initial complexity of the subsidy targeting
mechanism resulted in "weak appetite of the customers to apply." This was addressed by introducing a
simpler mechanism by EGAS in the later years of the project. The ICR also noted that "implementation of the
associated component financed by AFD/EU was extended past the World Bank’s Project closing
date (paragraph 77)."

Summary of Efficacy Assessment. The project almost achieved its main outcome indicator (household
connections), but fell short on meeting the target for the outcome indicator on connecting socially vulnerable
beneficiaries. The project also substantially achieved its intermediate target indicators. Based on the evidence
provided in the ICR, the efficacy with which this objective was achieved is rated Substantial, but with
shortcomings.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To provide reliable natural gas supply.

Rationale
Theory of Change (ToC). The achievement of this objective was dependent on the construction of gas
transmission and distribution networks and PRSs under Objective 1, to strengthen the networks. In
addition, the project supported establishing customer service centers, and institutional strengthening.
Customer service improvement was expected to result in faster response time to service calls, and
institutional strengthening would result in better planning, effective execution and improved budget. The
expected outputs included establishing 11 customer service centers and LDC's average response time
reduced to 15 minutes, gas regulation established and EGAS Enterprise Resource Planning system (ERP)
installed and operational, which might improve service quality. The expected outcomes were reduction of gas
leaks to five per year per 1000 customers, and increasing private sector participation. Private companies may
be more efficient and more service oriented than public companies. So attracting private companies to
participate in downstream gas service supply was expected to positively contribute to reliability. All this would
contribute to the achievement of the PDO to provide reliable natural gas supply.

The achieved of the stated objective was underpinned by the following four critical assumptions: 1. Timely
securing of land and clearance of safeguards instruments for project sites; 2. The implementing agency
would have no capacity constraints to implement such a large scale project; and 3. The Government would be
able to advance a comprehensive reform agenda to ensure sustainability of the sector. The GoE stumbled on
the reform agenda, Egypt is currently experiencing electricity shortages with rolling blackouts in effect. This is
mainly due to natural gas supply problems to generation stations. While this did not hit the households yet,
but poor planning can exacerbate the problem and shortages might reach household levels.




                                                                                                    Page 7 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   EG: Household Gas Connection Projec (P146007)



Overall, the activities reflected in the ToC were directly connected to the outputs, outcomes and to the PDO in
a plausible causal chain. Also, the critical assumptions were logical and realistic. However, it was not clear
how the project would increase private sector participation.

Outputs/Intermediate Results

1. 158 EGAS and LDC staff were trained on citizen engagement related activities exceeding both the original
and revised targets of 35 and 100, respectively.
2. Compliance with the Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs) in targeted areas reached
100% (target achieved).

3. EGAS financial reporting was established through the new ERP (target achieved). The ERP system was
supposedly a more effective and efficient tool to handle financial reporting. This would definitely help better
planning and management decisions. When EGAS is efficiently and effectively managed, it is expected that it
would be more capable to provide a reliable service.
4. A Gas Regulator was established (target achieved). The Gas regulator was established per the Law No.
196 of 2017 for Gas Market Activities Regulation, to regulate the Gas downstream sector as part of the
separation of Policy, regulatory, and operation roles of EGAS, and to attract private sector participation. The
regulator has various roles including the licensing of sector players and activities, and stipulating the gas grid
technical and operation codes. This was expected to facilitate the creation of a competitive market structure
with active participation of the private sector in downstream supply.

Outcome

By the first Quarter of 2018, the project achieved its intermediate target of 5 gas leaks per 1,000 consumers
per year of distribution network installed in targeted governorates (ICR, paragraph 25-based on EGAS
reports). This was also in line with global data from well-performing gas distribution
networks that suggested that gas leaks per 1,000 customers per year should not exceed 5. According to the
ICR (paragraph 25), the achievement of this indicator confirmed that "the increase in the rates of connection
in the project areas did not lead to lower quality of service or compromising the safety measures." Also, other
project achievements pointed to long-term reliability of supply to consumers including: (a) LDCs maintaining
an average response time per 1,000 calls per household consumers of not more than 15 minutes (which was
achieved from March 2020 to the closing date), and (b) LDCs resolving at 98% of complaints received at the
project level exceeding the target of 70%.

The ICR (paragraph 25) correctly pointed out to other reliability measures that were not captured by the
project M&E system including: higher safety of using natural gas from a centralized network compared to LPG
in terms of the probability of causing fires or suffocation incidents, less physical effort compared to bringing
LPG cylinders to homes and connecting them, the grid-connected gas supply provided a reliable option
with no interruption/shortage of supply compared to the LPG which could at times experience shortage in
supply.

Summary of Efficacy Assessment. The evidence provided in the ICR point to the success of the project in
providing reliable natural gas supply. The project achieved its main intermediate outcome indicators
pertaining to this objective. It is also worth notion that assessing reliability could have benefited from
measuring other aspects as noted above. Overall, the efficacy with which this objective was achieved is rated
Substantial.


                                                                                                    Page 8 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   EG: Household Gas Connection Projec (P146007)




Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
To provide natural gas that is of lower cost (relative to LPG).

Rationale
Theory of Change (ToC). The achievement of this objective was dependent on the activities under objective
1 and to a lesser extent objective 2. It was also a function of the lower cost of natural gas compared to LPG.
The project would also provide subsidies to support connections for disadvantaged households. The
expected output was the establishment of a system for targeting and disbursement mechanism for the
financial support of connection charges to the poor. The expected outcome was establishing connections to
disadvantaged households. Also, a result of the expansion of the gas network and increasing the number of
households connected, the consumption of LPG in the targeted areas would decrease by 495,000 tons per
year. This was expected to result in government savings in the amount of US$406 million from reduced LPG
imports. All this would contribute to providing natural gas that is of lower cost. This Review finds that the
main outcome should be lower household expenditure and/or government expenditure on energy, from the
whole program, not just the disadvantaged households.

Anticipated Long-term impacts included: improved quality of life, increased household disposable income,
and reduced government subsidies.

The achieved of the stated objective was underpinned by the following four critical assumptions: 1. Timely
securing of land and clearance of safeguards instruments for project sites; 2. AFD financing would be timely
concluded; 3. The implementing agency would have no capacity constraints to implement such a large scale
project; and 4. The Government would be able to advance a comprehensive reform agenda to ensure
sustainability of the sector.

Overall, the ToC the activities were directly connected to the outputs, outcomes a plausible causal chain. That
said, the achievement of the PDO was mainly a function of the cost of natural gas compared to LPG. The
critical assumptions were logical and realistic.

Outputs/Intermediate Results

1. 282,812 direct project beneficiaries who are poor benefited from financial support to connection fees
compared to a revised target of 400,000 (target not achieved). As a relevant result, the project could have
reported the number of households able to achieve cost savings by having natural gas connections rather
than relying on LPG.

2. A system for targeting and disbursement mechanism for the financial support of connection charges to the
poor was in established (target achieved).

Outcome


                                                                                                 Page 9 of 20
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                EG: Household Gas Connection Projec (P146007)



                            The achievement of the outcome for this objective was dependent on the lower cost of gas compared to LPG,
                            which according to the ICR (paragraph 26) "remained significant." According to the PAD (page 85), the value
                            proposition of the project was based on three elements: fiscal benefits, consumer benefits, and environmental
                            premium. The fiscal benefit was to be measured through “Government annual savings from reduction in LPG
                            imports due to reduced LPG consumption in the targeted project areas.” While this indicator was dropped
                            during the restructuring, the project’s financial analysis estimated that the connection of 1.5 million new
                            households would result in fiscal savings of US$210 million per year. The savings from connection of 2.25
                            million households were estimated at US$340 million in 2022. Also, the beneficiary households realized
                            significant savings through switching to natural gas from LPG. On average, in 2021, the households paid
                            EGP 75 for natural gas per month compared to EGP 140 for equivalent amount of LPG, which represented
                            a 46% reduction in cooking fuel costs. Finally, the ICR (paragraph 26) noted that the project generated
                            significant environmental benefits through reduction carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions estimated at 3 million
                            tons of CO2 equivalent.

                            Summary of Efficacy Assessment. According to the discussion ion the ICR (paragraph 26), it is evident that
                            the project provided natural gas that is of lower cost. The financial analysis also supported the argument that
                            significant savings would be realized as a result to households switching to grid connected natural gas
                            compared to using LPG. Finally, households connected to the gas network realized 46% savings in cooking
                            fuel costs compared to relying on LPG. However, the project fell short on achieving its target on establishing
                            connections to vulnerable beneficiaries. Therefore, the efficacy with which this objective was achieved is
                            rated Substantial.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Overall Efficacy is rated Substantial. The project substantially achieved its target on household gas
                            connections and direct beneficiaries. The evidence provided point to the provision of reliable and lower cost
                            alternative to LPG to the project beneficiaries.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



   5. Efficiency
   Economic and Financial Analysis (EFA)



                                                                                                                             Page 10 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      EG: Household Gas Connection Projec (P146007)



ex ante

      The overall Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR) for the project was estimated to be 36% with a Net
       Present Value (NPV of US$1.4 billion and Financial Internal Rate of Return (FIRR) was estimated to be
       11.7% with a Net Present Value (NPV) of US$351 million and at the economic discount rate of 10%.
       The financial cost-benefit analysis took into account subsidies that were available at appraisal.
      The estimation baseline assumed a cost of gas to be US$3.7/mmbtu as the average domestic production
       cost between 2014-2020. The annual subsidy savings was estimated to be US$210 million annually
       when all the 1.5 million connections were implemented.
      Switching to natural gas carried an environmental benefit since the emission factor for LPG is 63.1 ton
       CO2/TJ compared to natural gas at 56.1 ton CO2/TJ. As a result the annual GHG emissions savings
       could amount to as much as 649,915 ton CO2.
      While the appraisal-stage analysis used cost-benefit approach which was methodologically robust, the
       cost for connections might have been substantially overestimated.

ex post

      The ex post EFA followed the same methodology at appraisal to ensure consistency and comparability of
       results. The economic NPV and EIRR were estimated at US$1.2 billion and 25%, respectively. According
       to the ICR (paragraph 29) the relatively lower EIRR and NPV at the completion stage were due to a
       decline in international LPG prices, which meant that the incremental benefit from switching from LPG to
       natural gas was smaller than originally expected.
      The financial NPV and FIRR for EGAS were estimated at US$243 million and 10%, respectively. The
       slightly lower financial return of the project was due to slower implementation of the project in early years
       and lower-than-projected prices of LPG, which affected the savings from subsidy reduction (ICR,
       paragraph 30). The main financial benefits of the project were the increased sale of natural gas to
       consumers and the reduction of LPG subsidies provided by the Government.
      The ICR (Annex 4) reflected a robust EFA that included logical and realistic assumptions. The original
       project loan was reduced by US$200 million (40%) at restructuring and at completion another US$7.4
       million of the IBRD loan was cancelled due to non-utilization before the closing date.

Implementation Efficiency. The project experienced a seven month delay from approval to effectiveness. The
project also experienced initial implementation delays which delayed the expected benefits of the project
investments (mainly avoiding LPG consumption) and partially contributed to a lower EIRR at completion
compared to appraisal. There were delays related to the finalization of environmental and social (E&S)
instruments which resulted in slower progress with connection of households in the first three years of the
project’s implementation (ICR, paragraph 32). There were also delays that stemmed from the COVID-19
restrictions, which according to the ICR (paragraph 33) delayed the project by one year due to procurement
delays and limited working hours combined with difficulty to accessing households to work on
connections. Despite that the project experienced a total of three-year delay, the original scope was exceeded
with a total of 2.3 million connections in eight years compared to 1.5 million connections in five years, and at a
lower cost.

Summary of Efficiency Assessment. The EIRR at completion was lower than at appraisal (25% compared
to 36%), but was still significantly above the discount rate at 10%. While the project experienced a three year
delay, it increased the its scope by 53% in terms of household connections and at a lower cost than estimated at



                                                                                                     Page 11 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      EG: Household Gas Connection Projec (P146007)



appraisal. That said, this Review finds that the project costs were overestimated at appraisal which resulted in
the cancellation of 40% of the IBRD loan. Overall, Efficiency is rated Substantial, with moderate shortcomings.

In a further communication, the project team explained that "the reason for cancellation of IBRD resources was
not substantial over-estimation of project costs during preparation. The main reasons include: (a) intense
competition for works and goods package; and (b) depreciation of both local currency in Egypt and local
currencies of main suppliers of goods for the project. Both of those factors contributed to lower cost in US$."




Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     0
 Appraisal                                                 36.00
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     0
 ICR Estimate                                              25.00
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of Objectives was rated Substantial. Overall Efficacy was rated Substantial. The project substantially
achieved its target on household gas connections and direct beneficiaries. Also, the evidence provided in the
ICR pointed to the provision of reliable and lower cost alternative to LPG to the project beneficiaries. Efficiency
was rated Substantial, with moderate shortcomings. While the EIRR at completion was lower than at appraisal
(25% compared to 36%), it was still significantly above the discount rate at 10%.

Based on the assigned ratings for the three outcome criteria, Outcome is rated Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The ICR (paragraph 83) emphasized one main risk that could potentially impact the development outcome:


                                                                                                     Page 12 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     EG: Household Gas Connection Projec (P146007)



      Financial risk. This relates to the low-cost recovery for natural gas supplied to the electricity and
       residential sectors, which amounts to 50% for the power sector. The ICR noted that the Government
       prices for the gas sold in the domestic market is lower than the export parity price (paragraph 83).
       Despite the lower gas pricing, there is marginal recovery of the cost of gas production, transmission,
       and distribution. While this is not the optimal arrangement for the gas price, it still offers a lower
       burden on the budget compared to importing LPG. This dynamic will change and be more difficult to
       sustain in light of two factors: 1. As more residential consumers connect to the network requiring a
       larger share of gas to be diverted from exports to domestic use; and 2. The uncertainty surrounding
       the Egyptian currency exchange rate where in the past 12 months the Pound exchange rate against
       the US dollar declined from about L.E16 for each dollar to L.E 30.75 for each dollar. This necessitates
       increasing the domestic gas price as the difference between local pricing and export pricing is
       significant.

The following two risk are emphasized by IEG:

      Other stakeholder ownership risk. This risk relates to increasing the participation of the private
       sector in the gas industry. To create a conducive environment for the participation of the private
       sector, it is necessary that price distortions are addressed.
      Economic risk. Natural gas domestic consumption increases with annual growth rate of about 8.5%
       (PAD, paragraph 18). The sustainability of the development outcome is dependent on the availability
       of an abundance of locally produced natural gas to meet rising local demand. This requires the
       support of an active gas drilling and exploration program, which the current Government adopts.
       Aging natural gas wells need to be continuously replaced by new wells to sustain the growing local
       demand for natural gas.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
        Strategic relevance and approach. The project was strategically relevant and in line with Bank
         strategies and Borrower priorities (see section 3 for more details). However, the PDO lacked a
         reference to sector reform which was supported by the project.
        Technical, financial, and economic aspects. This project was designed to scale up and build
         on the successful implementation of the Bank-financed Egypt Natural Gas Connections Project
         (P095392). Overall, the project design was simple with clearly articulated components.
         However, an adequate targeting mechanism for the eligibility to receive the connection support
         subsidy was not in place at the time of approval (ICR, paragraph 49). This contributed to
         implementation delays and missing the outcome target on vulnerable beneficiaries. The PAD
         included a robust economic and financial analysis that justified the project investments.
        Poverty, gender, and social development aspects. The project was expected to result in
         positive social benefits including employment generation and improved safety, health and
         convenience from the elimination of LPG cylinders. Beneficiaries would also benefit from cheaper
         prices of natural gas which would enhance their disposable income. The project was expected to
         benefit the handicapped, elderly and


                                                                                                     Page 13 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     EG: Household Gas Connection Projec (P146007)



           women who are reported to experience difficulty in accessing the LPG cylinders (PAD, paragraph
           87).
          Environmental aspects. The project design included appropriate environmental and social risk
           assessments with adequate mitigation strategies. The extensive geographic coverage of the
           project required close coordination between the Bank and the implementing agency. However,
           environmental and social capacity at EGAS was initially inadequate (ICR, paragraph 76).
          Fiduciary aspects. Financial management and procurement arrangements were adequate.
           However, procurement was complex and included high-value contracts which depleted the
           designated account.
          Implementation arrangements. The project was prepared in a short time (eight months from
           concept review to approval) in response to the Government’s request to support its objective of
           increasing gas connections. While the implementing agency (EGAS) had the technical capacity, it
           required further capacity support due to the scope of the project. EGAS also needed support
           given the Bank's new social and environmental requirements. The project faced challenges with
           the preparation of some of the key infrastructure, especially acquiring the PRS lands for the high-
           pressure pipeline routing. This contributed to implementation delays in the early years of the
           project.
          Risk assessment. Eight risks were identified at the appraisal stage with an overall Substantial
           rating. The identified risks related to three main areas: stakeholders, implementing agency and
           project-related risks. The PAD included relevant risk mitigation measures. However, the social
           and environmental risk was rated moderate and was underestimated. During implementation,
           complying with the Bank's safeguards was more challenging and time consuming than anticipated
           due to the number of Environmental and Social (E&S) instruments combined with the complex
           cycle of clearances within the Bank. This was exacerbated by the limited experience within EGAS
           with the new Bank's E&S requirements.
          M&E arrangements. The Results Framework (RF) was clear, with the intermediate and outcome
           targets aligned with the objectives. The targets were appropriate and adjusted accordingly at
           restructuring. However, the RF could have benefited from including more indicators to assess
           reliability (see section 9 a for more details).

  Summary of QAE Assessment. The project was strategically relevant with a clear PDO. Design was
  simple and based on well-tested gas industry solutions. Design featured adequate environmental and
  fiduciary aspects. Implementation arrangements could have benefited from better attention to prepare the
  implementing agency and build its capacity. While risk assessment was thorough, the risk related to the
  social and environmental aspects was underestimated. Also, the project costs were overestimated which
  resulted in canceling 40% of the IBRD loan at restructuring. Finally, M&E arrangements were adequate.
  Overall, Quality at Entry is rated Moderately Satisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
       The Bank conducted 16 supervision missions. Joint biannual implementation supervision missions
           by the full World Bank team and the co-financiers (AFD/EU) took place. This allowed the World

                                                                                                   Page 14 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     EG: Household Gas Connection Projec (P146007)



        Bank and AFD to be aligned on the two components that were financed by the EU grant and
        managed by AFD. Implementation support missions including site visits were conducted throughout
        the project except for the period of COVID-19. While the MTR was conducted late, it still
        recommended relevant actions that improved implementation (ICR, paragraph 79).
       The project benefited from strong support by the Bank team to address issues that arose during
        implementation, including some delays in procurement, issues due to inadequate E&S capacity
        within EGAS and LDCs, as well as Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) shortcomings. The ICR
        (paragraph 80) noted that since most of the project team was based at the Bank's Cairo office,
        regular support was promptly provided to address implementation bottlenecks.
       According to the ICR (paragraph 80) "the team resolved most of the issues that materialized during
        implementation, especially the increased E&S risk and the procurement difficulties."

 Summary of Quality of Supervision Assessment. The Bank team successfully guided the project and
 resolved implementation challenges to substantially achieve the project outcomes. The Bank team
 provided the needed support to address the E&S, procurement, and implementation issues that arose
 during implementation. However, the Bank team could have worked on conducting the MTR at an earlier
 date and could have addressed some M&E weaknesses to better assess reliability. Overall, Bank
 Supervision is rated Satisfactory.

 Based on the assigned ratings for QAE and Bank Supervision, the overall Bank Performance is rated
 Moderately Satisfactory



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
      The PAD did not include a Theory of Change (ToC) which was not required by the Bank at the time
        of appraisal. Nonetheless, the ICR included a ToC that was constructed based on the project
        activities, outputs, and outcomes as described in the PAD. The ToC also included the underlying
        assumptions that underpinned the achievement of the PDO.
       The PDO was measured through four PDO outcome indicators: 1. The number of natural gas
        household connections financed by the project in the targeted project areas; 2. Government annual
        savings (US$ million) from reduction in LPG imports due to decreased LPG consumption in the
        targeted project areas (US$ million); 3. Gas leaks per 1000 consumers per year in distribution
        networks installed in targeted governorates do not exceed agreed reliability level of 5 (Yes/No); and
        4. Direct project beneficiaries of which (50%) female and of which (percent not determined at
        appraisal) poor benefiting from financial support to connection fees. Indicators 1 and 3 were directly
        linked to the PDO, measurable and had reasonable targets. Indicator 2 was later dropped during
        implementation. Finally, the PDO outcome indicators lacked an indicator to measure the grid-

                                                                                                   Page 15 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     EG: Household Gas Connection Projec (P146007)



        connected supply which was one of the elements of the PDO. This was later addressed through the
        2017 restructuring (see below).
       The RF also included eight intermediate results indicators (IRIs). The IRIs were measurable and
        directly connected to the supported activities. However, the RF could have benefited from the
        inclusion of more indicators to measure reliability of service including measuring lower incidence of
        service interruption. Also, the regulatory reform aspects of the project were not adequately
        captured.
       Overall, M&E design was adequate with an appropriate RF that included relevant indicators to track
        activities and measure the achievement of outcomes. However, there were some shortcoming
        related to the PDO outcome indicators.



b. M&E Implementation
       M&E implementation was carried out by EGAS through a dedicated Project Management Unit
         (PMU) according to agreed arrangements with the Bank. According to the ICR (paragraph 58)
         "quarterly reports containing the required data were submitted as required." The use of a common
         report format facilitated the joint missions by the World Bank and AFD and has helped in focusing
         all parties on the key issues including E&S, project delays, and designing an applicable subsidy
         scheme (ICR, paragraph 62).
        EGAS struggled with the demanding requirements of E&S reporting, which EGAS considered too
         long and complicated. These were later simplified midway through the project implementation.
        EGAS received further support from the Bank through informal direct engagement and ad hoc
         meetings that aimed to receive updates and provide guidance and support on implementation
         issues (ICR, paragraph 61).
        Restructuring and RF revisions. The restructuring in November 2017 added a PDO indicator to
         measure the length of distribution networks constructed per year to demonstrate the scale of gas
         distribution network buildup supported under the Project because “grid-connected supply” was
         one of the elements of the PDO. Also, the PDO outcome indicator 2 “Government annual savings
         from reduction in LPG imports due to
         reduced LPG consumption in the targeted project areas” was dropped. These changes were
         relevant and amended some design weaknesses.



c. M&E Utilization
       The project M&E system generated enough data to measure the achievement of the project
         outcomes and track different activities. Also, the quarterly progress reports provided the basis for
         the implementation support mission discussions with EGAS and LDCs.
        M&E data also helped the project management to identify emerging issues that required attention
         and provided a basis for important decision-making such as the project restructurings (ICR,
         paragraph 62).
        Finally, the ICR (paragraph 62) noted that "the experience accumulated under the Project proved
         to be valuable for M&E of ongoing further scale-up of household connections financed by the
         Government."



                                                                                                   Page 16 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     EG: Household Gas Connection Projec (P146007)



  Summary of the Quality of M&E Assessment. M&E design had some shortcomings that were later
  addressed during implementation. Implementation faced some challenges with regards to E&S aspects.
  Utilization was adequate. Overall, the Quality of M&E is rated Substantial with shortcomings.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as an environmental Category A based on the nature of the activities financed
   such as the expansion of pressure (intermediate and low) gas distribution networks; the construction of
   Pressure Reduction Stations (PRSs) to connect the distribution networks; and the extension of the gas high
   pressure transmission network to supply gas to the new PRSs. These activities may produce adverse and
   significant environmental impacts. The project triggered three Safeguard policies: Environmental
   Assessment (OP/BP 4.01), Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11), and Involuntary Resettlement
   (OP/BP 4.12). An Environmental and Social Impact Assessment Framework (ESIAF) and Resettlement
   Policy Framework (RPF) were prepared. The ESIAF and RPF were prepared, reviewed, approved,
   disclosed in-country and at the Infoshop on March 23, 2014 and March 24, 2014 respectively.

   Compliance with Environmental Safeguards. According to the ICR (paragraph 64) "E&S compliance of
   the project was overall Satisfactory." EGAS worked closely with the ESIA consulting firm to ensure that the
   World Bank requirements were properly addressed. Monitoring compliance by EGAS's environmental,
   social, health, and safety (ESHS) team required extensive efforts given the large geographic areas covered
   by the Project and simultaneous implementation of activities. The Bank supported EGAS to hire a private
   consulting firm to carry out the monitoring and supervision of ESHS mitigation measures in all project sites,
   which according to the ICR (paragraph 64) proved effective.

   Compliance with Social Safeguards. As mentioned above compliance was overall satisfactory. The World
   Bank team worked closely with the
   EGAS ESHS team to establish and enforce a solid GRM. While the project implementation witnessed
   improvements related to the GRM, reporting
   and data segregation remained a challenge until the late stages of the project (ICR, paragraph 68). The
   project had one fatal accident as a worker fell from a scaffold in one of the household installation sites in
   Alexandria. The PMU prepared a safeguard corrective action plan (SCAP) and the Bank provided
   necessary support for its monitoring and implementation. The ICR noted that as a result of this incident,
   EGAS updated its safety manual, and enhanced safety of scaffold designs in all project sites (ICR,
   paragraph 69).




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management (FM). According to the ICR (paragraph 71) FM arrangements were acceptable
   and complied with the reporting and accounting requirements of the Loan Agreement. Quarterly interim

                                                                                                  Page 17 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     EG: Household Gas Connection Projec (P146007)



   financial reports and annual audited financial statements were received on time (with few exceptions), and
   were of acceptable quality.

   Procurement. Procurement was complex and included high-value contracts. The project’s procurement
   plans were not always updated to reflect the actual status of each package, some contract amendments
   were delayed, and the delivery schedule was also delayed in some cases. EGAS and the LDCs faced
   some difficulties due to weaknesses in applying procedures for bid submission, receipt, bid securities, and
   conducting of bid evaluation and contract management which were the main procurement implementation
   challenges. To improve procurement performance, the Bank provided training, capacity building, and
   implementation support to the implementing agencies. According to the ICR (paragraph 70) "overall
   procurement performance of the project was Moderately Satisfactory."




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   The ICR (paragraph 48) noted that the project led to expanded use of World Bank environmental, social,
   procurement standards and procedures by LDCs, improved institutional capacity of LDCs, and replication
   of the system by other companies beyond the project.



d. Other
   The project-financed Enterprise Resource Planning system (ERP) system established in EGAS was
   replicated in other oil and gas companies. This enabled companies to consolidation financial, accounting,
   and resource management between holding companies and their subsidiaries (ICR, paragraph 38). This
   also resulted in connecting of all sector companies and the establishment of a complete digitization program
   across the sector. According to the ICR (paragraph 48) this resulted in improving governance, transparency,
   accountability, and operational performance of the sector.



11. Ratings
                                                                               Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                    IEG
                                                                               Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                        Satisfactory          Satisfactory
                                                                               QAE had moderate
Bank Performance               Satisfactory          Moderately Satisfactory
                                                                               shortcomings.
Quality of M&E                 Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                 ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons




                                                                                                  Page 18 of 20
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       EG: Household Gas Connection Projec (P146007)



The ICR included six lessons. The following three are emphasized with some adaptation of
language:

1. Hiring a specialized consulting firm can be an effective way to ensure dedicated and
specialized supervision of project activities. EGAS utilized the services of a specialized local
consulting firm to monitor, supervise, and report back on the ESHS compliance of the implementing
agencies and their contractors. The project experience demonstrated that this was an effective way
to support the PMU in monitoring compliance and preparation of monitoring reports.

2. To avoid implementation delays, projects with multiple financiers might better
consider parallel financing arrangements where each financier finances specific contract(s),
preferably not interdependent on each other. Parallel financing arrangements would help reduce
the need for frequent adjustments to co-financing percentages in the Loan Agreement due to
changes in exchange rates and nonsynchronous effectiveness of various financing agreements,
which may delay implementation. It is important to coordinate closely, especially on the
effectiveness dates of respective financing agreements and the co-financing solutions. The project
experienced showed that specifications of co-financing percentages for the entire scope of
Component 1 worked well in the early days of the project, but variations in exchange rates among
the different currencies (for example, EUR and USD) and the different closing dates complicated the
prorating of financing sources for Component 1.

3. To ensure smooth implementation and timely disbursements, it is important to
comprehensively assess the capacity of the implementing agency at appraisal to identify
areas that need further support. The project experience showed that EGAS could have benefited
from early-stage focus on strengthening its budgeting and financial planning capacity. The project
administration would have benefited from that and may have allowed meeting the disbursement
targets in a timelier manner.

The following Lessons are emphasized by IEG:

4. To ensure an accurate assessment of achievements, the formulation of the PDO needs to
reflect the core activities supported with a clear connection to Results framework (RF). This
project supported sector reform and private sector participation however, those two aspects were
not reflected in the PDO and not comprehensively captured by the RF.5.

5. It is important to have a realistic ex ante cost estimate through conducting reliable
feasibility studies as part of the appraisal process. This project had to cancel 40% of the IBRD
loan (about US$200 million), which suggests a gross overestimation of costs at the appraisal stage.
An accurate assessment of costs can allow the Bank to allocate adequate funding to a specific
project and at the same time have the flexibility to fund other operations in the same country.




13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

                                                                                                Page 19 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     EG: Household Gas Connection Projec (P146007)




14. Comments on Quality of ICR

Quality of Evidence. The ICR benefited from the data collected by the M&E system, which enabled tracking the
progress of activities and assessing the achievement of the PDO.

Quality of Analysis. The ICR provided clear linking between evidence and findings and used the evidence base
to serve the arguments under the different sections, in particular the discussion on outcomes.

Lessons. Lessons reflected the project experience and were based on evidence and analysis.

Results Orientation. The ICR included a comprehensive discussion on the achievement of the PDO. While the
efficacy discussion was focused, it could have benefited from further details on what the project actually
achieved on the ground.

Consistency with guidelines. The ICR used the available data to justify most of the assigned ratings. However,
the outputs in Annex 1 lacked targets, and at 27 pages the ICR was relatively lengthy.

Conciseness. The ICR provided comprehensive coverage of project activities, and candidly reported on
shortcomings. Reporting on safeguard compliance was thorough.

Summary of the Quality of ICR Assessment. The ICR was well written and benefited from the evidence base
generated through the project's M&E system. It included a clear discussion on the achievement of outcomes
and reflected relevant lessons. Reporting on safeguard compliance was thorough and the ICR provided a
comprehensive assessment on M&E. Overall, the Quality of the ICR is rated Substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                  Page 20 of 20
