     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LR-Accelerated Electricity Exp. (FY13) (P133445)



                                                                                      Report Number: ICRR0023476

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                   Project Name
 P133445                                      LR-Accelerated Electricity Exp. (FY13)

 Country                                      Practice Area(Lead)
 Liberia                                      Energy & Extractives


 L/C/TF Number(s)                             Closing Date (Original)                  Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-52520,IDA-56800                          30-Jun-2018                                             91,923,159.97

 Bank Approval Date                           Closing Date (Actual)
 30-May-2013                                  31-Jul-2022

                                              IBRD/IDA (USD)                                        Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                              35,000,000.00                                                  0.00

 Revised Commitment                               95,000,000.00                                                  0.00

 Actual                                           91,923,159.97                                                  0.00




 Prepared by                  Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator            Group
 Dileep M. Wagle              Christopher David             Ramachandra Jammi                 IEGSD (Unit 4)
                              Nelson




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The project’s development objectives were “to increase access to electricity and strengthen institutional
   capacity in the electricity sector”. This was as per the Financing Agreement, 2013, Schedule 1, p.6, as well
   as the Project Appraisal Document (PAD), p.5.

   In the analysis that follows, the PDO can be parsed as follows: (i) “to increase access to electricity, (ii) to
   strengthen institutional capacity in the electricity sector”.


                                                                                                        Page 1 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LR-Accelerated Electricity Exp. (FY13) (P133445)




b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Component 1: Extension of electricity transmission and distribution systems (Estimated cost at
   appraisal: US$20 million; Additional Financing (AF) of US$53 million; Actual cost at closing: US$70.79
   million). This component was intended to upgrade the Monrovia-Kakata transmission and distribution
   system. Planned activities included: (i) construction of a 66 kV sub- transmission line between the
   Paynesville substation in Monrovia and Kakata; (ii) construction of a 66/22 kV sub-station in Kakata; (iii)
   construction of a 22 kV and low-voltage distribution lines and connections to new consumers in Monrovia
   and Kakata along the Monrovia-Kakata corridor; (iv) for Monrovia city, the construction of infrastructure for
   distribution lines and related connections in Paynesville and environs; (v) provision of analytical support for
   preparatory activities.

   Component 2: Construction of facilities for off-loading, transport and storage of heavy fuel-oil (HFO) and
   support for optimization of HFO procurement (Estimated cost at appraisal: US$11 million; Actual cost at
   closing: US$10.91 million). The component supported the Government’s decision to replace expensive
   diesel-based generation with less costly HFO-based thermal generation. The following activities were to be
   implemented: construction of (a) a pipeline connecting Bong Mining Company (BMC) pier and Bushrod
   Island, (b) a pump station, (c) storage tank at Bushrod Island (capacity: 16,200 m3 capacity); provision of (i)
   support to optimize usage of HFO for electricity generation, and (ii) advisory services to the MLME on
   procurement of HFO in the international market.

   Component 3: Support for expansion of supply options and for strengthening of the sector’s institutional
   capacity (Estimated cost at appraisal: US$4 million; AF of US7 million; Actual cost at closing: US$10.24
   million). This component financed the completion of studies, strengthening of the institutional capacity, and
   provision of advisory services to the MLME to ensure proper management, monitoring and evaluation of the
   project, and preparation of timely audits.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project Cost and Financing

   All of the project’s financing was provided through two IDA credits, an initial credit of US$35 million followed
   by an additional financing amount of US$60 million. No other development partners were involved in the
   financing of the project. Actual project costs at closing were just under US$92 million, or nearly 97 percent
   of the aggregate project cost of US$95 million.


                                                                                                      Page 2 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LR-Accelerated Electricity Exp. (FY13) (P133445)



   Borrower contribution

   No borrower contribution was envisaged at appraisal, nor did any take place subsequently.

   Dates

   The project was approved on May 30, 2013, becoming effective on November 25, 2013. The original
   closing date was June 30, 2018. However, this date was extended – first through the May 19, 2015
   restructuring, which introduced a three-point action plan for management of the Liberia Electricity Company
   (LEC), followed by the June 1, 2015 restructuring, which introduced the AF of US$60 million equivalent, and
   extended the closing date to April 30, 2020. The third restructuring of January 13, 2020, which revised
   some PDO indicators, extended the closing date by a further two years, to April 30, 2022, followed by a
   fourth and final restructuring in April 2022, which extended the closing date to July 31, 2022. The AF
   expanded the scope of the project, thus a split evaluation will not be required in this instance.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country and Sector Context

Liberia is a fragile state striving to overcome the legacy of civil conflict. Liberia’s electricity sector has
suffered on account of two civil wars between 1989 and 2003, during which its sole hydropower plant at Mt.
Coffee was destroyed, along with other transmission and distribution (T&D) infrastructure. At that time, the
country’s electricity utility ceased operations and the population’s access to electricity from the grid fell to
zero. Following the peace treaty and elections in 2006, significant donor resources were mobilized to
implement the Emergency Power Program (2006-12), which led to the reestablishment of operations of
LEC, and supported the installation of up to 22 MW of high-speed diesel generators, along with
reconstruction of some basic T&D infrastructure in some parts of Monrovia. A five-year management
contract, financed by the Government of Norway, was also signed between LEC and the Ministry of Lands,
Mines and Energy (MLME), and Manitoba Hydro International (MHI).

The high cost of electricity from diesel generation, reflected in tariffs that were higher than US$0.50/kWh –
among the highest in the world – was one of the key obstacles to economic recovery. Limited access to
costly electricity affected the competitiveness of Liberian firms and commercial enterprises, which were
forced to rely on expensive private diesel generators. In 2016, as per the Household Income and
Expenditure Survey, only one in six households had access to electricity either from a generator or
LEC. Most of these households were located in urban areas, less than 2 percent of rural households
having access to electricity. For these reasons, investment in the electricity sector was identified as a key
driver of Liberia’s economic recovery and transformation. A five-year Medium Term Economic Growth and
Development Strategy (2012-17) was adopted by the Government, with investment in the electricity sector
being envisaged as a key component. LEC’s Electricity Master Plan (2012) identified two main bottlenecks
to the efficient and sustainable development of a national electric system; namely, (a) the lack of
infrastructure to transmit and distribute electricity, and (b) an electricity utility (LEC) in a precarious financial



                                                                                                           Page 3 of 14
                       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                       LR-Accelerated Electricity Exp. (FY13) (P133445)



and technical situation, capable of serving only the capital city, Monrovia.


Alignment with Country Strategies

Under the second pillar of the Government’s Agenda for Transformation, Liberia’s energy strategy aimed to
shift from emergency management towards development of the electricity sector in a comprehensive and
sustainable way, by expanding electricity services. The strategy aimed at a dramatic increase in electricity
coverage to 70 percent of the population in Monrovia and 35 percent of the country by 2030. In this
context, MLME drew up a short-term investment program for T&D, in addition to which the Government
began to develop a Least-Cost Power Development Plan (LCPDP), completed in 2014, to provide a
roadmap for expansion of the sector over the next two decades. Meanwhile, donors provided considerable
support to efforts to restore the power sector, with the World Bank playing an important role through several
interventions, such as the Liberia Electricity System Enhancement project (LESEP), with a US$10 million
IDA credit in FY11.

The current project’s objectives were fully aligned with the Government’s priorities for the electricity sector,
as articulated in the above-mentioned Agenda for Transformation. The project focused on supporting
implementation of the first phase of the Government’s access agenda, with the objective of contributing to
the strategy of accelerated service expansion by increasing electricity coverage in accordance with the
targets of the LCPDP.

The project’s development objectives were also consistent with the Bank Group’s country strategies at
project appraisal, as reflected in the Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for FY13-17, which had placed a
strong priority on expanding electricity services and making them more affordable to businesses and
households, so as to spur economic growth, job creation and poverty reduction. They were also broadly
consistent with the objectives of the Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for FY19-24- – though not
necessarily among the highest priorities. Pillar III of the CPF aimed at ‘Narrowing the Infrastructure Gap to
Foster More Equitable Development Nationwide’, Objective 7 of which focused on ‘Improved access to
utilities, markets, and community services. Activities under this Objective included road construction,
rehabilitation and maintenance, expansion of access to the internet, and expansion of reliable electricity
services, and included achievement of enhanced access to affordable and reliable electricity among its
various outcomes (such as better access to markets for farmers and entrepreneurs, increased ICT
penetration and improved access to water). Thus, while there was clear demand for amplifying electricity
supply and improving the sector, it is unclear exactly what the institutional capacity needs were and whether
support to this aspect of the sector was the most prescient issue.

Based on this, the relevance of the project’s objectives is assessed as Substantial.


Rating Relevance TBL




Rating
Substantial


4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)



                                                                                                        Page 4 of 14
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  LR-Accelerated Electricity Exp. (FY13) (P133445)


EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               “To increase access to electricity”

               Rationale
               Theory of Change (TOC)

               The project was designed to increase access to electricity and strengthen institutional capacity. Project
               activities aimed to expand the urban and suburban T&D network, including through the completion of new
               connections, addition of sub-stations, improved procurement of HFO (including through new pipeline and
               storage infrastructure, and strengthening of energy management by both Government and the electricity
               utility. These activities were expected to lead to outcomes such as increased access to electricity and
               electricity services, greater reliability and efficiency of the electricity distribution system, increased efficiency
               in the handling of HFO, and improved management ability within the utility and the electricity sector.

               While the activities were broadly appropriate to achieving the desired outcomes, the theory of change (TOC)
               discussion in the ICR does not specifically analyze whether the investments were of adequate scale to create
               a critical mass for change.

               Indicators used to measure the achievement of objectives were consistent with the above results chain. For
               PDO Indicator 1, intermediate outcome indicators measured the length of T&D lines constructed/rehabilitated
               under the operation, the increase in number of household and commercial connections, the construction and
               upgrade of HFO off-loading, transport and storage facilities, and the increase in direct project
               beneficiaries. For PDO2, the indicator measured the increase in LEC customers billed or buying prepayment
               credit using the Customer Management System (CMS). Outcome indicators measured the number of people
               provided with access to electricity by household connections, as well as the number of
               commercial/institutional customers, the number of direct project beneficiaries, and the number of LEC
               customers billed or buying prepaid credit using the CMS.

               Key assumptions underlying the TOC included: (i) the pursuit of the electricity reform agenda, (ii) the need to
               mobilize resources to ensure continued maintenance of T&D infrastructure, and (iii) an increase in the level of
               dialogue between Government and key energy sector stakeholders.

               Outputs

               - Transmission lines constructed or rehabilitated under the project were of the order of 113.2 km, fully
               achieving the (post-restructuring, revised) target of 110 km. About half (54 km) of these lines were
               constructed under the original project, and the other half (59.2 km) post-AF. These included the Paynesville-
               Kakata 66 kV transmission line and the 66/33 kV Kakata substation lines, energized since March 31, 2020.

               - Distribution lines constructed/rehabilitated under the project were of the order of 1,586.7 km, well in excess
               of the formally revised target of 1,200 km (the original target had been 70 km).

               - 85,961 new customer connections were made to the grid in the Monrovia-Kakata corridor by project closing,
               against a target (for January, 2020) 56,450.



                                                                                                                        Page 5 of 14
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   LR-Accelerated Electricity Exp. (FY13) (P133445)



- Construction of 23,500 m3 HFO storage facilities, consisting of three fuel tanks and one water tank, against
a revised target of 16,200 m3.

- The length of pipeline constructed for transportation of HFO was 1.9 km, against a target of 1.5 km.

- Operationalization of the HFO pipeline, pumping station and storage facility was achieved by April 2022 (the
revised target date was however June 2015). Along with this, options for launching the procurement of fuel
on a competitive basis were also assessed: this being completed by April 2022 (though here again the target
date was June 2015). That said, on account of LEC’s precarious financial position, and the need to provide
up-front payment in the international market, the utility was not able to procure any HFO on competitive basis
for storage in the facility constructed. Apart from this, although HFO consumption did increase between 2019
and 2021, the balance of electricity generation underwent a shift away from thermal, towards hydro, with the
operationalization of the rehabilitated Mt. Coffee hydroelectric plant in 2017. As a consequence, the need for
HFO declined, and was relevant mainly in the dry season when the Mt. Coffee hydro plant’s effective
generation capacity fell from 88 MW to as low as 10 MW.

Outcomes

As noted by the ICR (p.17), T&D networks were enhanced by the commissioning of four new, and three
upgraded, substations in Monrovia and the peri-urban counties. Electricity transmission and distribution lines
were expanded in these areas

There was a significant increase recorded in the number of people - by household connection - provided with
access to electricity. Actuals at project closing were of the order of 429,805, as against a revised target of
280,000 (original target had been only 10,300).

Progress recorded was however much more limited in the case of commercial and institutional
customers. Against a revised target of 450 customers (original target, 476), actual achievement was of the
order of only 173 customers by project closing. Commercial and institutional customers needed 3-phase
connections, in which there was limited progress. Part of the reason for this lack of progress was the high
tariff in place for electricity, combined with unreliable supply, making connection to the LEC network relatively
unattractive for large customers, who normally used captive generators. It was expected that with the
reduction in tariff to US$0.22 in January 2022, the number of large customers connected to the grid would
increase over the foreseeable future.

Based on the total number of connections made by end-July, 2022, and assuming 5 household members per
connection, the total number of direct project beneficiaries was assumed to have reached 429,805, against a
revised target of 233,000 (original target of 48,410). The share of female beneficiaries was 51 percent
(target: 49 percent).



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective

                                                                                                    Page 6 of 14
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               LR-Accelerated Electricity Exp. (FY13) (P133445)



                            “To strengthen institutional capacity in the electricity sector”

                            Rationale
                            The theory of change applicable to this objective is the same as for Objective 1. Relevant activities to meet
                            this objective included the hiring of individual utility experts to manage LEC, subsequent to the MHI contract,
                            and completion of studies underpinning energy sector reforms. Achievement was measured by three
                            intermediate indicators and one outcome indicator.

                            Outputs

                            - LEC’s Action Plan for improving commercial management and strengthening local managerial capacity was
                            approved by the LEC’s Board of Directors by project closing.

                            - The Customer Management System (CMS) and the Integrated Management System (IMS) were fully
                            implemented by project closing.

                            - MLME and LEC staff received training through several capacity-building trainings, conducted under the
                            project. Several short-term training courses were attended by LEC staff in such areas as Environmental &
                            Social, Engineering, Project/Contract Management, Procurement and Finance. Consultant experts were also
                            hired under the project, to support implementation. These included a Financial Management (FM) consultant,
                            a senior international procurement expert and an experienced project coordinator.

                            Outcomes

                            The IMS set up in LEC enhanced the prepayment credit system, the main modules becoming operational by
                            project closing. As such, the percentage of LEC customers billed or buying prepayment credit using the CMS
                            reached 100 percent by April 2022 (ICR, p.19), against a revised target of 95 percent. In effect, all customers
                            connected to the grid were integrated into the IMS.

                            The project supported the transition from the Management Services Contract (MSC) to full-time management
                            of LEC – with funds being provided for five full-time utility experts. However, the Government opted for
                            another MSC (financed by the Millenium Challenge Corporation), so these funds were used to finance a
                            contract with Tetra Tech to provide advisory services to the local Interim Management Team (IMT) and
                            support the smooth transition to a long-term sustainable management arrangement. A human resources firm
                            was subsequently hired to assist LEC in the recruitment of a new Chief Executive Officer and Chief Operating
                            Officer, as part of the transition from the MSC to the full-time management model. This transition had not
                            been completed by project closing, however. It remains unclear as to what, if any, transformation has
                            occurred regarding the capacity of LEC’s staff as a consequence of the training programs.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                                                                                                                               Page 7 of 14
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      LR-Accelerated Electricity Exp. (FY13) (P133445)




  Rationale
  As seen from the above, the project substantially achieved its two objectives. Considerable progress was
  achieved in terms of increasing access to electricity, especially in terms of household connections (though
  less so, for commercial and institutional customers). The HFO pipeline and facilities were operationalized,
  although on account of other factors, the full benefit from the increased availability of heavy fuel oil was not
  realized. Substantial progress was also made in strengthening institutional capacity, though the transition
  from MSC to full-time management fell behind schedule. As such, Overall Efficacy is rated Substantial.



  Overall Efficacy Rating
  Substantial



5. Efficiency
Economic efficiency

The economic internal rate of return (EIRR) for the project at closing was estimated at 30 percent, with a Net
Present Value (NPV) of US$129 million (at a 10 percent discount rate), compared to the estimated rate at
appraisal of 34 percent and NPV of US$190 million at the same discount rate. In addition, it was estimated that
at completion, the project would trigger lifetime emissions reduction of 2.1 million tCO2, which would significantly
raise the estimated NPV to between US$229 million and US$247 million.

Financial returns estimated were however negative, reflecting the sharp increase in non-technical losses
between 2016 and 2020, and the FIRR was hence substantially below that estimated at appraisal (17 percent).

Operational/Administrative Efficiency

The project, whose implementation was affected by the two pandemics (Ebola and Covid-19), closed 49 months
after the original closing date (although to some extent this reflected the extra time needed to process and
implement the additional financing). Nevertheless, the actual cost of implementing the operation remained
within the earmarked budget. The project’s results were achieved at a total cost of US$91.94 million, which was
slightly lower than the estimated cost of US$95 million.

Based on the above, the project’s efficiency can be considered to be Substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)            *Coverage/Scope (%)

                                                                                                       Page 8 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LR-Accelerated Electricity Exp. (FY13) (P133445)



                                                                                    0
Appraisal                                                 34.00
                                                                                     Not Applicable
                                                                                    0
ICR Estimate                                              30.00
                                                                                     Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The project’s development objectives remain substantially relevant to the needs of Liberia’s energy sector and
of a fragile state. Its overall efficacy is rated Substantial, the project having achieved many of its key
development objectives. Its efficiency is similarly rated Substantial, on the basis of both economic analysis and
Operational/Administrative efficiency considerations. As such, its overall outcome is rated Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Key risks to development outcome relate to the pricing and reliability of energy services. Unless the pricing
of grid energy services is brought down to reasonable levels, the incentive for self-generation of electricity
will not diminish, and expansion of energy access will be difficult to sustain. These risks apply also to the
sustainability of the improvements made to institutional capacity. Mitigation measures include advancing the
pace of energy sector reforms, including electricity tariff adjustments and bringing improved governance and
greater transparency to the functioning of the utility.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The design of the project was strategically relevant at appraisal, and remained so during
  implementation. The objective of increasing access to electricity and strengthening the capacity of the
  utility was a key priority for a country emerging from two civil wars which had destroyed the electricity
  infrastructure. The World Bank’s engagement in the electricity sector in Liberia followed a multiphase
  programmatic approach, with the Bank playing a leadership role among the key donors involved in this
  sector, who brought additional resources to bear. However, according to the ICR (pgs.30-31), the design
  of the TA activity would have benefited from some checks and balances to ensure that institutional
  capacity supported by the project was effective and efficient. Notwithstanding some on-going
  coordination among stakeholders, accountability regarding quality of results was not a major
  consideration of the contracts package.



                                                                                                    Page 9 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LR-Accelerated Electricity Exp. (FY13) (P133445)



  The implementation arrangements put in place for the project were generally adequate, though there was
  some room for improvement. The arrangements involved placing the project implementation unit (PIU) in
  LEC itself, however without clear specification of responsibilities between line ministry and utility – which
  led to some confusion and impacted results, especially as regards the management of the TA activity
  during the implementation period.

  The ICR also draws attention to the project’s risk assessment, which was appropriate, though mitigation
  measures could have been strengthened. The risk relating to the capacity of the implementing agency
  for instance was identified – the PAD rating it as High (PAD, p.16). However, mitigation measures were
  not adequate, so when the risk manifested, project implementation was adversely impacted.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The project appears to have been adequately supervised. The Bank team conducted 14 bi-annual
 supervision missions over an eight-year period which included the deadly Ebola pandemic (2014-15),
 which delayed implementation by two years, and affected the pace of remobilization of contractors and
 consultants to the sites. Despite this, and the subsequent Covid-19 pandemic, which also slowed down
 project implementation, the Bank team continued to provide sustained implementation support to the
 Government in a fragile, post-conflict (FCV) environment.

 The Bank team worked to support and sustain Government commitment for the operation, and to ensure
 coordination of donors to the project’s development objectives. The key donors active in the sector (EU,
 USAID and JICA) supported the Government with parallel operations in generation and in expanding rural
 and urban electrification.

 The ICR notes (p.31) that the Bank team could have pushed for improved staffing of the PIU, closer
 oversight of which could have positively affected the quality and pace of the project’s implementation. This
 would have included the need to hire an M&E expert, select a permanent owner’s engineer and monitor the
 performance guarantees diligently.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization



                                                                                                    Page 10 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LR-Accelerated Electricity Exp. (FY13) (P133445)



a. M&E Design
 M&E design and arrangements appear to have been generally adequate. The PDOs were clearly stated
 and appropriately reflected in the results framework. Most indicators to measure outputs and outcomes of
 individual objectives were sound. That said, while the PDO indicators were mostly measurable and
 achievable, they could have been more comprehensive and specific to each sub-objective – especially for
 PDO-2, where outcome indicators needed to be more attuned to capturing the breadth and performance of
 the institutional strengthening of the energy utility and line ministry.

 As mentioned earlier (Section8), the PIU did not envision hiring an M&E specialist. This was a mistake,
 which hampered project monitoring, and should have been rectified during implementation.



b. M&E Implementation
  The Mid-Term Review (MTR) in July 2018, which assessed program implementation, found that the M&E
  system was appropriate for the requirements of the project and was functioning well, with outcome and
  intermediate indicators being reported regularly. According to the ICR (p.27), some of the intermediate
  indicators needed to be elevated to PDO-level, in order to measure the institutional-strengthening aspect
  of the PDO better.

  According to the ICR also, M&E supervision was insufficient in reporting on the progress made about the
  transitional management arrangement at LEC and the progress achieved towards achieving PDO-2. An
  external audit of the MSC and TA contracts would have been particularly useful in assessing
  achievement under the contracts and institutional capacity building results.



c. M&E Utilization
  Data reporting by the PIU, Aide Memoires and Implementation Status and Results Reports (ISRs) all
  played a role in establishing dialogue among key stakeholders. These data also informed key
  implementation decisions, including the restructurings/additional financing. The quality of M&E
  utilization was however hampered by the absence of an M&E specialist.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as Category B, triggering the following policies: (a) Environmental Assessment
   (OP 4.01), (b) Physical Cultural Resources (4.11), and (c) Involuntary Resettlement (OP4.12). An updated
   Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF)
   were prepared and cleared by the World Bank, which implementing agencies were responsible for
   implementing, along with preparation of an Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) and an
   Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP). The ESIA and ESMP, which specified several

                                                                                                 Page 11 of 14
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    LR-Accelerated Electricity Exp. (FY13) (P133445)



  mitigation measures to minimize or avoid potential environmental impacts, were approved by Liberia’s
  Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and the World Bank.

  An Oil Spill Response Plan for the HFO facilities was also approved by the World Bank, providing an
  agreement with the company running the facility to apply sound environmental management standards.

  A Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) was put in place, and a complaint was filed by a private company
  relating to a dispute with LEC over ownership of a land where one of the project substations (Kakata) was
  constructed. After the company rejected LEC’s proposal for arbitration, the case went to the courts, where it
  was subsequently dismissed.

  An estimated US$87,000 was provided by the Government to compensate project-affected persons (PAPs)
  for mainly economic tree crops, makeshift commercial structures and some private plots of land. A further
  US$740,000 was disbursed to compensate 858 RAP beneficiaries for affected structures, land and
  economic tree crops. However, another US$50,229 was needed to compensate a further 393 PAPs for
  economic tree crops in the Virginia to Bomi corridor: this compensation was not received by these PAPs up
  to project closing because of insufficient funds, and discussions were on-going with the Ministry of Finance,
  to obtain the necessary funds.

  The ICR points out (p.29) that ISRs had rated the Safeguards function as Moderately Satisfactory
  throughout the implementation period.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Procurement performance was rated Moderately Satisfactory in the ISRs, procurement risk remaining
  Substantial throughout the period. Allegations of fake manufacturers authorization in some winning bids
  related to SCADA equipment were uncovered at one point, leading the Bank to impose debarment
  sanction on the bidder. The Procurement Plan was updated regularly in the Bank’s procurement system
  (STEP), though it appears that some contract management documents had yet to be uploaded as
  required. The ICR notes (p.29) that although procurement performance had improved gradually, there
  were still outstanding issues related to contract extensions and order variations. The ICR cited an example
  of LEC attempting to procure goods without following IDA procurement guidelines and without the
  knowledge of the project coordinator. Though the purchase order was later cancelled it brought to light
  serious deficiencies in accounting controls at LEC.

  Financial management (FM) performance was adequate overall during the implementation period in terms
  of staffing, budgeting, reporting, accounting and external audit. Interim Financial Reports (IFRs) were
  generally submitted on time, meeting the financial covenants. However, some challenges emerged in the
  execution of budgets. In addition, there was a general capacity constraint concerning FM reflected in slow
  processing of Letters of Credit, and payment and performance guarantees expiring.

  The Annual Financial Statement Audit for the project for FY20-21 was completed and final reports
  submitted on time. An unqualified opinion was expressed by the Auditor General on the financial
  statements for the period under review, with the final audit of the project after August 31, 2022 expected to
  be delivered by end-May 2023.


                                                                                                  Page 12 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LR-Accelerated Electricity Exp. (FY13) (P133445)




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                    IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                          Satisfactory           Satisfactory
                                 Moderately
Bank Performance                                        Moderately Satisfactory
                                 Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                   Substantial            Substantial

Quality of ICR                   ---                    Substantial


12. Lessons

IEG derives the following lessons drawn from the ICR:

1. The Bank Group’s reengagement in the energy sector in FCV countries calls for sustained
coordination and dialogue with both Government and other development partners (DPs) to
achieve maximum synergy. This project was part of a multiphase programmatic approach for
providing support to the energy sector, and the World Bank was engaged with several other DPs,
such as USAID/MCC, JICA, EU and the African Development Bank (AfDB), who were all engaging
with Liberia through key investments in the sector. The process of coordination and harmonization
of the priorities and contributions of individual DPs to the country’s short-term and medium-term
goals was not without challenges – which explains some of the shortcomings in the project’s results
(e.g. the weaknesses in technical and institutional capacity). The coordination was helpful however
in enabling a comprehensive program to be developed to support the modernization and
diversification of the country’s electricity sector, with the Bank providing seminal support to Liberia’s
energy subsectors, and each DP providing specific investment support in electricity generation,
transmission and management.

2. Having an M&E specialist within the PIU matters for close project monitoring and
implementation reporting. As Liberia was a post-conflict country, technical capacity was scarce in
the PIU, notwithstanding which the hiring of an M&E specialist was not considered a priority. During
implementation, and by project closing, the absence of such a specialist made project monitoring
and implementation reporting definitely more challenging. This also affected ICR preparation (see
ICR, p.33), as the PIU’s institutional memory was found to be lacking, as there were no specific M&E
staff to monitor, record and report on the project’s implementation.



                                                                                                      Page 13 of 14
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       LR-Accelerated Electricity Exp. (FY13) (P133445)



3. Planning in the electricity sector needs to go beyond short- and medium-term
objectives. Under the project, construction of HFO storage tanks was prompted by a short-term
need without a long-term view. When electricity generation progressively switched over from
thermal to hydro generation, the storage tanks constructed ended up being underutilized. Current
hikes in HFO prices viewed against more recent developments in renewable energy suggest that
focusing on purely short-term needs can lead to suboptimal decisions in a longer-term context.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is well written, candid and internally consistent, and provides a fair amount of detail on design and
implementation issues. The achievement of objectives is adequately analyzed. Weaknesses in the M&E
system and elsewhere are highlighted and discussed. Overall, the narrative appears to support the ratings and
available evidence. One area which could have been better framed is compliance with environmental and
safeguards issues. Also, key lessons from the project could usefully have had a broader application to potential
future operations and interventions.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                  Page 14 of 14
