     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     FSP (P159655)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0023473

1. Project Data



 Project ID                               Project Name
 P159655                                  FSP

 Country                                  Practice Area(Lead)
 Afghanistan                              Governance


 L/C/TF Number(s)                         Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-D2630,TF-A6277                       28-Dec-2022                                          44,941,238.36

 Bank Approval Date                       Closing Date (Actual)
 19-Dec-2017                              28-Dec-2022

                                          IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                         100,000,000.00                                    75,000,000.00

 Revised Commitment                           46,251,081.16                                    21,251,081.16

 Actual                                       44,941,238.36                                    19,999,302.16




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                 ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Rima Al-Azar               Konstantin Atanesyan        Jennifer L. Keller              IEGEC (Unit 1)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Financing Agreement (Schedule 1, p. 4), and the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, p. 13),
   the Project Development Objective (PDO) was "to contribute to the improvement of domestic revenue
   mobilization and public expenditures management, and of reinforcing a performance-oriented management
   culture in the Ministry of Finance."

   For the purpose of this ICRR, the project’s PDO can be unpacked as follows:


                                                                                                 Page 1 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     FSP (P159655)



   Objective 1. To contribute to the improvement of public expenditures management;

   Objective 2. To contribute to the improvement of domestic revenue mobilization; and

   Objective 3. To contribute to reinforcing a performance-oriented management culture in the Ministry of
   Finance.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   The FSP was organized around four complementary components supporting government-executed
   technical assistance, capacity building, and information technology (IT). For purposes of clarity and
   coordination, and because FSP included a multitude of joined-up actions along thematic lines between
   departments within the ministry, the four components were categorized around the PFM cycle.

   Component 1: Budget as Tool for Development (US$10 million revised to US$3.3 million). This
   component was designed to (i) increase budget credibility by improving the efficiency of budget processes,
   the realism of budget estimation and costing; (ii) link budget with policy and introduce medium term
   budgeting; (iii) strengthen the Gender Responsive Budgeting (GRB) Unit; and (iv) support the development
   of costed sector strategies and work plans.

   Component 2: Revenue Mobilization (US$40 million revised to US$20.16 million). This component was
   designed to strengthen capacities of various revenue administration departments through three sub-
   components:

          Tax administration: This sub-component consisted in (i) improvements in basic IT infrastructure
           and systems of the Afghanistan Revenue Department (ARD), especially Standard Integrated
           Government Tax Administration Systems (SIGTAS) and e-payments; (ii) support for the
           implementation of the ARD reform plan; and (iii) support to ongoing reforms of tax policy and the
           introduction of Value Added Tax (VAT).

          Customs Administration: This sub-component supported the Afghanistan Customs Department
           (ACD), including (i) development and implementation of several IT systems/portals, including the
           National Single Window (NSW) system, Trade Information Portal and the Automated Systems for
           Customs Data (ASYCUDA); (ii) strengthening enforcement (data analysis and collection, anti-
           corruption policies and plans, and post clearance audit and mobile verification); and (iii) , simplifying
           and standardizing of customs clearance and processes, and Human Resource (HR) reforms.

          Afghanistan Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative (AEITI): This sub-component aimed to
           enhance the Government’s capacity to effectively regulate Afghanistan’s minerals and hydrocarbon
           sector by addressing AEITI recommendations of Validation and Reconciliation reports.


                                                                                                       Page 2 of 24
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    FSP (P159655)



  Component 3: Treasury Management, Accountability, and Transparency (US$30 million revised to
  US$24.82 million). This component aimed to consolidate basic core PFM functions and was organized
  along five subcomponents supporting reforms in:

        Treasury by (i) consolidating financial management systems including AFMIS; (ii) improving
           commitment control; (iii) producing complete and comprehensive financial accounts; and (iv)
           introducing new payroll controls.
          Audit and financial reporting by supporting (i) the Internal Audit Department (IAD) to improve audit
           follow-up and strengthen the internal audit function of line ministries; (ii) the SAO’s external audit
           efficiency and rolling out of an Audit Management Information System (AMIS) to automate manual
           audit processes.
          Public procurement by (i) improving compliance of enacted regulations through further strengthening
           the current legal, regulatory and policy framework; and (ii) introducing of electronic Government
           Procurement (e-GP) including its change management, cultural integration, increased awareness
           and socialization within the government and users;
          State owned enterprises (SOEs), insurance and public properties by (i) conducting a thorough
           diagnostic of the performance—financial, operational and fiscal—of the entire sector; and (ii)
           strengthening of the legislative framework for insurance; and
          Citizen engagement by (i) establishing a framework where CSOs collaborate with the MOF to further
           citizens’ awareness of the planning, budgeting and oversight of budget execution at national and
           sub-national levels; and (ii) under the Auditor General, providing technical support on how-to
           implement citizen engagement practices and tools around the audit cycle.

  Component 4: Institutional Capacity Building and Performance Management US$20 million revised
  to US$11.71 million) This component aimed to build capacity of MOF staff and the requisite systems for
  effective functioning of the ministry by (i) supporting MOF Administration business process re-engineering
  and automation, and digitalization of MOF’s archive system; (ii) assisting MOF to increase women’s
  participation in the sector and within the ministry; (iii) upgrading IT systems and training of IT staff; and (iv)
  developing a Communications Strategy to institutionalize the process of behavioral change to support new
  policy processes.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project cost: The original project cost was US$100 million (Loan Agreement, p. 1; PAD, p. 2), which was
  revised to US$60 million following the restructuring on 16 September 2020. The restructuring reallocated
  US$40 million from FSP’s ARTF grant for the COVID-19 crisis response. This was further decreased to
  US$46.25 million following the portfolio-wide cancellation of the remainder of funds on 8 April 2022. At the
  project closing on 28 December 2022, the amount disbursed was US$44.94 million.

  Financing: The project was jointly financed by an IDA Credit (US$25 million), and the Afghanistan
  Reconstruction Trust Fund (US$75 million revised to US$21.25 million). The disbursement percentages
  were IDA-D2630 at 99.8 percent and TF-A6277 at 94.1 percent (26.7 percent if calculated based on the
  original allocation).

  Borrower Contribution: None planned or made. Government commitment of up to US$100 million in
  parallel financing.


                                                                                                        Page 3 of 24
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  FSP (P159655)



Project cost: The original project cost was US$100 million (Loan Agreement, p. 1; PAD, p. 2), which was
revised to US$60 million following the restructuring on 16 September 2020. The restructuring reallocated
US$40 million from FSP’s ARTF grant for the COVID-19 crisis response. This was further decreased to
US$46.25 million following the portfolio-wide cancellation of the remainder of funds on 8 April 2022. At the
project closing on 28 December 2022, the amount disbursed was US$44.94 million.

Financing: The project was jointly financed by an IDA Credit (US$25 million), and the Afghanistan
Reconstruction Trust Fund (US$75 million revised to US$21.25 million). The disbursement percentages
were IDA-D2630 at 99.8 percent and TF-A6277 at 94.1 percent (26.7 percent if calculated based on the
original allocation).

Borrower Contribution: None planned or made. Government commitment of up to US$100 million in
parallel financing.

Dates: The project was approved on 19 December 2017 and became effective on 1 January 2018. The
closing dates was 28 December 2022. Though the Taliban takeover took place in August 2021, the project
closed in December 2022 which was the original closing date because the Bank no longer had a
government counterpart to formally close the project once it was suspended in 2021. The ICR used the
milestone of 15 August 2021 (the fall of the Government) as the effective end of project implementation.

The project underwent one restructuring in June 2020 which resulted in three major changes:

    1. Change in Results Framework: The restructuring paper resulted in the correction of one baseline
       value for the long-term technical assistants as the number was originally set at 499 instead of
       780.Three indicators were revised: (i) "Improved gender disaggregated statistical analysis and
       documentation" was changed to “gender budget statements developed for key ministries” to better
       reflect the actual focus on gender budget statements, (ii) "Web-based AFMIS extended to
       embassies and selected districts, municipalities, and SOEs" was replaced with “Approved time-
       bound development and migration plan to a new AFMIS platform” to measure the transition to a new
       management information platform in-line with a recent MOF decision; and (iii) "Simplification and
       standardization of MOF Administration business processes" was changed to “Establishment of
       Asset Inventory Management System” to reflect the revised scope of the project. Two indicators
       were dropped: (i) "Effective M&E of development projects through development of a proper M&E
       system" due to the transfer of this function to the Ministry of Economy, which was beyond the project
       coverage and influence; and (ii) "Number of Internal Audit Department (IADs) in line ministries that
       are strengthened, and functioning based on standards set out by Institute of Internal Auditors (IIA)"
       due to discontinuation of FSP financing for internal audit reform (Restructuring Paper, p. 5).
    2. Change in Components and Cost: The budget allocation was decreased for each of the four
       project’s components as follows: Component 1: Budget as Tool for Development. The budget
       allocation was reduced from US$10 million to US$3.31 million without changes in the composition of
       the subcomponents. Component 2: Revenue Mobilization. The budget allocation was decreased
       from US$40 million to US$20.16 million. Activities for supporting the Afghanistan Extractive
       Industries Transparency Initiative (AEITI) were cancelled, as all new activities were transferred to
       the Afghanistan Gas Project (AGASP), which became effective in January 2020. Component 3:
       Treasury Management, Accountability, and Transparency. The budget allocation was reduced
       from US$30 million to US$24.82 million. Instead of investing in further roll-out of the vendor-locked
       Afghanistan Financial Management Information System (AFMIS), the limited FSP resources were
       re-allocated to facilitate the migration to a new preferably open-source platform. Investments in

                                                                                                 Page 4 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     FSP (P159655)



          internal audit reform activities were also discontinued. Component 4: Institutional Capacity
          Building and Performance Management. The budget allocation was reduced from US$20 million
          to US$11.71 million. The FSP was refocused to support business process re-engineering and
          automation of asset management (Restructuring Paper, p. 5).
       3. Change in Financial Management: The period for submission of the annual audited financial
          statements was increased from six (6) to nine (9) months after the end of the project’s fiscal year
          (Restructuring Paper, p. 6).




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Using the milestone of 15 August 2021 (the fall of the Government) as the effective end of the project, the
project's objectives were highly relevant and aligned with the government's strategies, the World Bank's
programmatic approach, as well as with commitments by other development partners engaged in the
sector.

The project was aligned with the Government of Afghanistan's (GoA) strategies and reform
programs. The FSP contributed to the GoA’s higher-level objective to promote self-reliance (key national
goal) which was defined in the strategic vision document “Realizing Self-Reliance: Commitments to
Reforms and Renewed Partnership” (ICR, p. 12). This vision was translated into two reform programs which
the FSP supported directly: (1) the Second Afghanistan National Peace and Development Framework
2021-2025 (ANPDF II), updated right before the political crisis of 2021. FSP directly supported all the
aspects of ANPDF II strategic objectives (SO) to “Mobilize finances and optimize expenditure to meet the
costs of transformation by restoring fiscal sustainability and ensuring macroeconomic stability” (SO 5.2) and
“Promote efficient and effective implementation of projects by increasing capacity in planning,
implementation, auditing, finance, and procurement” (SO 8.1) (ICR, p. 14). (2) the GoA’s PFM Road Map
and its five-year rolling Fiscal Performance Improvement Plan (FPIP) which focused on “building the
country’s public administration capacity to accelerate aid utilization, provide faster and better services, and
ensure transparency and accountability of public expenditure to take the reconstruction agenda forward and
win back the trust of citizens” (PAD, p. 12). Specifically, the project provided upfront investments drawn
directly from FPIP work plans (PAD, p. 12). The project’s relevance was reflected through the
Government’s strong ownership of the FSP which was demonstrated by its commitment of up to US$100
million in parallel financing over five years, to support related infrastructure that would not be directly
financed from FSP (PSD, p. 12).

The project was also relevant to and fully aligned with the World Bank Group’s FY17-FY20 Country
Partnership Framework (CPF) and its programmatic approach to support the FPIP. Specifically, the
FSP supported the CPF’s first pillar “Building Strong and Accountable Institutions” and its two objectives:
Objective 1.1 “Improved public financial management and fiscal self-reliance”; and Objective 1.2 “Improved
performance of key government ministries and municipalities” (ICR, p. 14). Though the ICR does not
assess the FSP against the World Bank Group's (WBG) programmatic approach to support the FPIP, the
project was central to the approach’s three interrelated and complimentary instruments since the FSP was
one of its three instruments. The first instrument - the FPIP Advisory Facility – was a Bank-executed
programmatic technical assistance package to operationalize and inform FPIP implementation The second
instrument – the FSP project – was the implementation arm of the new engagement model and provided

                                                                                                    Page 5 of 24
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      FSP (P159655)



               investments drawn directly from the FPIP. The third instrument - IP Plus – was a multi-donor policy-based
               budget support based on benchmarks to achieve strategic objectives of FPIP. The investments made
               through FSP were designed to achieve those benchmarks (PAD, pp. 60-61).

               Finally, and through not mentioned in the ICR, the FSP was also aligned with the commitments and
               interventions of other development partners in the same sector, including bilateral partners (e.g.,
               United States-funded New Development Partnership Program) and multilateral ones (e.g., the European
               Union (EU)-funded State Building Contract and the International Monetary Fund (IMF)’s Extended Credit
               Facility (ECF) for Afghanistan) (PAD, p. 23). In addition, it complemented UN Women’s capacity building
               activities regarding Gender Responsive Budgeting (GRB) (PAD, p. 45).


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Contribute to the improvement of public expenditure management

                             Rationale
                             Despite establishing a functioning Public Financial Management (PFM) system at the time of project
                             preparation, Afghanistan’s PFM systems were not sufficiently developed to support strategic allocation of
                             resources and efficient service delivery. Almost half of the development budget remained unspent (execution
                             rate was 54 percent), leading to an overall budget execution rate of 76 percent. The low execution rate was
                             the result of inefficiencies in budget planning, poor appraisal of development projects, protracted procurement
                             processes, and overall low government capacity. To improve PFM, the project supported several departments
                             of the Ministry of Finance (MOF), namely, the Budget Department, the Macro Fiscal Performance Department
                             (MFPD), and the Policy Department by: (i) putting in place new processes and regulations (e.g., delegation of
                             financial authority, procurement, framework agreements); (ii) equipping and training (Institute of public
                             certified accountants, national procurement institute, public investment management); (iii) producing toolkits
                             and modules (e.g. gender budgeting, e-procurement, and performance auditing); (iv) drafting policies and
                             regulations (procurement and Operations and Maintenance); and enhancing information systems (Pension
                             Management Information System, Afghanistan Financial Management Information System (AFMIS) and Da
                             Afghanistan Bank’s Systems).

                             Inputs and Outputs

                             Through consultancies, technical assistance, procurement of IT systems (inputs), the project produced the
                             following outputs: (1) New processes for delegating financial authority to the provinces; (2) Toolkit for gender
                             sensitive budget analysis; (3) Establishment/training of the Public Investment Management (PIM) unit of
                             MOF; (4) Interoperability of the AFMIS and Da Afghanistan Bank’s Systems (DABS) for enabling e-payments;

                                                                                                                               Page 6 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   FSP (P159655)



(5) Establishment/training of Afghanistan Institute of Certified Public Accountants (CPA); (6) Electronic
government procurement (e-GP) modules; (7) Procurement cadre regulations; (8) Establishment/equipment
of the National Procurement Institute (NPI); (9) Regulations for framework agreements; (10) Drafting the
Supreme Audit Office (SAO) Law; (11) New toolkits and checklists at SAO for performance audit, compliance
audit, financial audit, IT audit and Qatia (financial statements) audit; (12) Operations and Maintenance (O&M)
policy; and (13) Development and roll-out of Pension Management Information System (PMIS).

The causal chain was that by (i) training staff, (ii) equipping units, (iii) developing guidelines and toolkits, (iv)
strengthening information systems, (v) drafting policies and regulations, the different aspects related to
procurement and financial management would be strengthened which would lead to an improvement of public
expenditure management.

Outcomes

Key Outcome indicator (KOI): Increased development budget execution rate

      Baseline (Aug 2017): 54 percent

      Target (Dec 2022): 75 percent
      Achieved (pre-Taliban takeover – Dec 2020): 82 percent
      Not Achieved (post-Taliban takeover): 28.5 percent (estimated)

Achieved (21 Dec 2020). Based on the results of the last year before the Government fell, the indicator was
still meeting the target, notwithstanding delays or cancellation of many projects due to COVID-19. According
to informal estimates, the overall execution rate for the post-crisis development budget was 28.5 percent
(discretionary plus non-discretionary) in FY2021. As of FY2022 only the discretionary development budget is
active and is being used mainly to provide for NTA salaries and some essential contracts (Electronic National
Identification Document/ e-NID, Passports etc.).

Key Outcome Indicator: Effective implementation by budgetary units on the external audit
recommendations

      Baseline (Aug 2017): 15 percent
      Target (Dec 2022): 60 percent
      Actual (Mar 2020): 30.60 percent

Not Achieved. According to the Mid Term Report (MTR, July 2020), this indicator was generally on track, but
most of the pilot ministries still performed poorly. However, the situation started deteriorating in 2020, since
many audits and related follow-up activities were delayed.

Interim Results Indicator (IRI): Increased budget execution rate of the provinces by implementing new
provincial budgeting policy

      Baseline (Aug 2017): 57 percent
      Target (Dec 2022): 75 percent
      Actual (Dec 2020): 87 percent


                                                                                                      Page 7 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   FSP (P159655)



Achieved. Provincial budget execution for 2020 was 87 percent exceeding the end project target, but the
implementation of the policy at the provincial level was affected by the limitations related to communication
with provinces.

Interim Results Indicator: Gender budget statements developed for key ministries

      Baseline (Aug 2017): 5 ministries
      Target (Dec 2022): 12 ministries
      Actual (Dec 2020): 20 ministries

Achieved. FSP supported the achievement of the outcome through development of a toolkit for gender
sensitive budget analysis, that aided preparation of gender statements for pilot ministries. However, there is
no information related to whether the gender statements were only produced or whether they were actually
used/implemented.

Interim Results Indicator: Large projects are properly appraised with the support of a new PIM Unit to
be established

      Baseline (Aug 2017): 10
      Target (Dec 2022): 50
      Actual (Dec 2020): 100

Achieved. Since 2019, MOF mandated that all project concept notes (proposals) go through appraisal.
In 2020, the indicator value remained at the level of 100 percent well exceeding the end project target.

Interim Results Indicator: Approved time-bound development and migration plan to a new AFMIS
platform

      Baseline (Aug 2017): No
      Target (Dec 2022): Yes
      Actual (Aug 2021): No

Not Achieved. The development of the new system was the responsibility of the National Statistics and
Information Authority (NSIA) working closely with MOF. The AFMIS development and migration plan was
expected to be ready and formalized by end-2021. Instead, the AFMIS is still operational without support from
the vendor and is running without license (ICR p. 19).

Interim Results Indicator: Afghanistan Institute of Certified Public Accountants (CPA) established and
two batches trained

      Baseline (Aug 2017): Institute not established
      Target (Dec 2022): Institute established, CPA law enacted, and curriculum developed
      Actual (Aug 2021): CPA established and associate memberships of Confederation of Asian
       and Pacific Accountants (CAPA) and the South Asian Federation of Accountants (SAFA) obtained




                                                                                                  Page 8 of 24
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      FSP (P159655)



Partly Achieved. The Institute was established and memberships in two international/regional accountancy
bodies were obtained. However, the CPA law was not enacted nor was the training delivered.

Interim Results Indicator: Rolling out e-GP in the pilot phase in three or more departments

        Baseline (Aug 2017): 0
        Target (Dec 2022): 3
        Actual (Aug 2021): 3

Achieved. The reported three pilots were for the e-tendering module, e-planning and contract monitoring
covering 72 pilot entities. In addition, the project supported initial steps towards introduction of framework
agreements in 10 pilot public entities. Furthermore, the National Procurement Institute (NPI) was established,
mass recruitment for procurement professionals was completed, and the Procurement Cadre regulation was
approved and published.

Finally, and in addition to strengthening the budget processes, the PAD mentions that the FSP would also
support fiscal and development policies. Specifically, in terms of fiscal policy, the FSP would support the
quality of the medium-term fiscal framework (MTFF) in developing a well-designed medium term budget
framework (MTBF) and a medium-term expenditure framework (MTEF) (PAD, p. 14). In terms of
Development Policy, the PAD states that the FSP would assist in developing costed sector strategies and
workplans (PAD, p. 15). The ICR does not discuss whether and to what extent did the FSP support these two
policies.




Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
---

Revised Rationale
Since the Taliban takeover on 15 August 2021, there has been no official relationship between the World
Bank and the government. There is no information about any project activities after that date.



Revised Rating
Negligible


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective

                                                                                                 Page 9 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   FSP (P159655)



Contribute to the improvement of domestic revenue mobilization

Rationale
By the time of project preparation, the Government of Afghanistan (GOA) had started to put in place policy
and administrative measures to increase domestic revenue collection. This was with the aim to bridge the
gap between domestic revenues and public expenditure (in 2016, domestic revenue reached 10.8 percent of
GDP, while expenditure was 26.9 percent of GDP). However, improving domestic revenue mobilization faced
several challenges including a narrow tax base, low capacity, weak internal controls, and a decentralized tax
administration (PAD, p. 11).

The causal chain is that by strengthening the capacity of various revenue administration entities (e.g., Tax
Administration, Customs Administration) to increase tax compliance, and facilitate timely filing and payment
and to effectively regulate Afghanistan’s minerals and hydrocarbon resources sector by supporting the
Afghanistan Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative, this would lead to an improvement in domestic
revenue mobilization.

Inputs and Outputs

Through national and international technical assistance, provision of training and major investments in ICT
(inputs), the project produced the following outputs (1) Re-organized and modernized the Afghanistan
Revenue Department (ARD), (2) Increased number of active tax filers (large, medium and small), (3)
Development of business processes , VAT oversight tool and training of staff on Value added tax (VAT), (4)
Interoperability of Standard Integrated Government Tax Administration System (SIGTAS) and DABS systems
enabling e-payments, (5) Rollout of new Automated System for Customs Data (ASYCUDA) modules , (6)
Establishment of off-country disaster recovery site for ASYCUDA, (7) Technical support to reform customs
functions such as legal, valuation, tariff, risk management and post-clearance audit, (8) National Single
Window (NSW) feasibility study, (9) Updated Mining Law, and (10) Establishment of the Afghanistan
Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative (AEITI) Portal covering all post-2016 contracts/data.

Outcome

Key Outcome Indicator: Increased domestic revenue as a percentage of Gross Domestic Product (GDP)

        Baseline (Aug 2017): 10.7
        Target (Dec 2022): 12.2
        Actual (Dec 2020): 11.8
        Not Achieved (post-Taliban takeover): 10.3 percent (estimated)

Partially Achieved. The indicator value at around 14 percent for 2019 already exceeded the end project
target, but later was significantly affected by the COVID-19 pandemic. The 2020 value still exceeded the 11.6
percent target for the third year and remained close to the end project target of 12.2 percent. After the fall of
the Government the indicator value dropped to 10.3 percent for the year 2021 according to informal
estimates.

Interim Results Indicator: Increased number of active tax filers

      Baseline (Aug 2017): Large Taxpayer Office (LTO): 195; Medium Taxpayer Office (MTO): 5,325;
         Small Taxpayer Office (STO): 3,137

                                                                                                  Page 10 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   FSP (P159655)




      Target (Dec 2022): LTO: 380; MTO: 10,400; STO: 6,713
      Actual (Dec 2020): LTO: 1,153; MTO: 13,249; STO: 8,517

Achieved. Through the introduction of facilitation measures (e-filing and e-payment to taxpayers), FSP
succeeded in substantially increasing the number of taxpayers, in particular the Large Taxpayers since by
mid-2020, e-filing became mandatory for all large taxpayers (ICR p. 16).

Interim Results Indicator: Staff and business processes are in place for VAT implementation in 2020

      Baseline (Aug 2017): No staff or processes in place
      Target (Dec 2022): VAT business processes developed and staff trained
      Actual (Aug 2021): Preparation for the VAT implementation was in progress

Partially Achieved. The ARD drafted selected business processes and technical specifications for the
SIGTAS VAT module. However, completing the VAT training for selected ARD staff, and approving the VAT
business process for registration, filling, payment, refunds, taxpayers current accounts, accounting standards
were among the pending immediate steps right before the fall of the Government.

Interim Results Indicator: Implement ARD Re-Organization and Modernization Plan Text

      Baseline (Aug 2017): Plan approved by cabinet
      Target (Dec 2022): All regional revenue offices report to ARD
      Actual (Aug 2021): There is no reorganization and modernization plan submitted for Cabinet approval

Not Achieved. The ARD managed its organizational structure through its own core departments
(Tashkeel), but the relevant changes were not guided by a broader reorganization and modernization plan
requiring a formal approval of the Cabinet. Nevertheless, some changes (e.g., establishment of a Single
Large Taxpayer Office (SLTO), improvement of audit functions and creation of an independent Tax Dispute
Resolution Board) did contribute to the improved revenue collection (ICR, p. 16).

Interim Results Indicator: Percentage increase in custom duties through enhancement of ASYCUDA
customs automation

      Baseline (Aug 2017): 5
      Target (Dec 2022): 100
      Actual (Dec 2020): 91

Partially Achieved. The 2020 indicator exceeded the third-year target of 60 percent, and was closer to the end
project target of 100 percent. ASYCUDA implementation has progressed, with rollout of various modules
(e.g., passenger/cash declaration module, transit (TIR) module, e-payment module etc.) to different customs
offices. As a result, automation covered majority of customs offices, including 29 customs sites, 16 border
crossing points, 16 inland clearance depots, and 5 headquarters offices using ASYCUDA.

Finally, and as mentioned above, following the MTR, the AEITI activities which were planned to be financed
by FSP were transferred to the Afghanistan Gas Project (AGASP), which became effective in January 2020
(ICR, p. 12).


                                                                                                Page 11 of 24
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      FSP (P159655)




Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 2 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
---

Revised Rationale
Since the Taliban takeover on 15 August 2021, there has been no official relationship between the World
Bank and the government. There is no information about any project activities after that date.



Revised Rating
Negligible


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
Contribute to reinforcing a performance-oriented management culture in the Ministry of Finance

Rationale
In order to be aligned with the government’s self-reliance vision, the project focused on building institutional
capacity and reducing reliance on consultants. Furthermore, it supported the roll out of the FPIP policy which
included a strong focus on implementation.

The causal chain to that by improving the MOF’s public administration capacity (by decreasing its reliance on
NTAs) and by ensuring transparency in public expenditures (by publishing the FPIP plans on APMIS), and
increasing greater citizen engagement, the performance-oriented culture at MOF would improve and the
Government would win back the trust of citizens.

Inputs and outputs

Through technical assistance and training (inputs), the FSP (1) rolled out the Fiscal Performance
Improvement Plan (FPIP) policy, and (2) Performance Management and Reporting System (PMRS or APMIS)
(outputs).

Key Outcome Indicator: Improvement in core institutional capacity, represented by a reduction in the
number of long-term technical assistants.

        Baseline (Aug 2017): 780 (corrected value); 499 initial baseline value
        Target (Dec 2022): 250
        Actual (May 2021): 492



                                                                                                  Page 12 of 24
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      FSP (P159655)



Not Achieved. Despite partial progress (against the corrected baseline value) the indicator remained off-track
throughout the project implementation period.

Interim Results Indicator: Improvement in performance management coverage, represented by an increase
in the number of teams adopting FPIP

        Baseline (Aug 2017): 90
        Target (Dec 2022): 140
        Actual (Dec 2020): 140

Achieved. The number of teams adopting FPIP within MOF, SAO, and NPA reached to end project target of
140. The FPIP expansion was facilitated by the MOF’s PMT which was supported by FSP and served as the
coordination unit for the project. The PMT was responsible to collate the information from directorates and
prepare performance reports.

Interim Results Indicator: Transparency and citizen engagement in reform planning, represented by
timely publication of annual and mid-year FPIP assessment reports

        Baseline (Aug 2017): No
        Target (Dec 2022): Yes
        Actual (Dec 2020): Yes

Achieved. The APMIS was developed and used by PMT to publish FPIP plans. It was also used for entire
FPIP planning, monitoring and reporting cycle.

However, there is no discussion in the ICR regarding the activities related to citizen engagement which were
envisaged in the PAD, including (i) the mobilization of Civil Society Organizations (CSOs) to establish and
implement a framework where CSOs collaborate with MOF for further citizens’ awareness in the planning and
oversight of the budget at both national and sub-national levels; and (ii) supporting Citizen Participatory Audit
(CPA) through SAO’s engagement with CSOs around the audit cycle to jointly monitor the quality of public
expenditures to strengthen their impact in exercising public oversight (PAD, p. 17). These activities were
intended (i) to complement the increase in transparency and FM information availability; (ii) to ensure that
CSOs would be trained on the utilization of the APMIS and the understanding of the FPIP plans; and,
eventually, (iii) to regain citizen trust.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 3 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
---

Revised Rationale


                                                                                                  Page 13 of 24
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                FSP (P159655)



                            Since the Taliban takeover on 15 August 2021, there has been no official relationship between the World
                            Bank and the government. There is no information about any project activities after that date.



                            Revised Rating
                            Negligible


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The project's overall efficacy is Modest since it Achieved/Partially Achieved two of its Key Outcome Indicators
                            and did not achieve the third one. In addition, of the 13 Interim Results Indicators (IRIs), targets for 10 were
                            Achieved or Partially Achieved; whereas, targets for three were Not Achieved. However, examining the three
                            project objectives, the third one “To contribute to reinforcing a performance-oriented management culture in
                            the Ministry of Finance” was only partially supported by the intermediate results under project component
                            4. No activities were implemented related to increasing citizen engagement nor was it clear to what extent
                            the project achieved the outcomes related to increased transparency by focusing on availability of information
                            to the public (as opposed to increased accessibility and utilization of information). Furthermore, the originally
                            intended support to fiscal and development policies was not implemented. Finally, and while the project only
                            partly achieved the outcome targets before the crisis, there is no information as to whether it
                            achieved/sustained them after the Government’s fall.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating                                   Primary Reason
                            Modest                                                    Low achievement


    5. Efficiency
   Due to the data limitations no ex-post economic rate of return or cost-effectiveness analysis were conducted to
   evaluate the efficiency of the project. While the second-order impact of the FSP (reducing corruption, improving
   the business environment, and fostering a more rule-based approach) is difficult to assess, the first order impact
   of the FSP on growth and development (enhanced revenue mobilization which in turn would result in increased
   expenditures, increase in the budget execution rate, and an improvement in the efficiency of public
   expenditures) was analyzed up to the fall of the Government and found that the FSP contributed to an economic
   growth rate by an average of 0.5 percentage points each year from 2017 to 2021 (ICR, p. 51). These analyses
   were high-level and cannot be replicated at project completion due to data limitations and overall constraints
   related to applicability of such high-level analyses under the new country circumstances (COVID-19 pandemic
   and political crisis of 2021). Nevertheless, the ICR discusses important elements that affected the FSP’s
   efficiency both under the Efficiency section and a detailed Annex as well as under different sections, including
   “Key Implementation Factors”.

   The project’s cost was substantially decreased due to COVID-19 and conflict. The planned project had a
   total budget of US$100 million which was decreased to US$60 million as a result of shifting US$40 million to

                                                                                                                               Page 14 of 24
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      FSP (P159655)



address the COVID-19 pandemic. Furthermore, after the collapse of the Government of Afghanistan, the Bank
paused all disbursements on its Afghanistan portfolio. The undisbursed balance, except liabilities and
commitments owed by the previous government, were suspended on 24 February 2022. Consequently,
US$13.7 million out of US$15 million undisbursed ARTF balance under FSP was cancelled on 8 April 2022
(ICR, p. 27). The ICR could have provided an analysis as to why the project was able to achieve targets for
several of its indicators with a substantially lower-than-planned budget and whether this was due to unambitious
targets and/or to an overly generous allocation of financial resources. A decrease by US$40 million (40 percent
of the original budget) - notwithstanding the FSP ceasing to fund a high number of National Technical
Assistance (NTAs) and discontinuing a few activities after the MTR – should have had an impact on project
efficiency.

The inefficiency of implementation arrangements was hidden. In line with the Government’s commitment to
gradually reduce the dependence on parallel systems, the FSP did not include a Project Implementation Unit
(PIU) but focused on project implementation through country systems (PAD, p. 13). The MOF Performance
Management Team (PMT) – comprised of six members and reporting to the Deputy Minister for Finance -
provided day-to-day operational backstopping and coordination across beneficiary departments. MOF, NPA, and
SAO managed the implementation of the program through corporate systems and their roles and responsibilities
were clearly defined. Furthermore, each implementing agency had its own procurement plan and was
responsible for implementing its respective FSP activities (ICR, p. 26). However, these implementation
arrangements using corporate systems were heavily reliant on NTAs). Implementing a significant share of
reforms through NTAs also made it difficult to distinguish the capital or recurrent nature of some of the
Incremental operating cost (IOC) financing. Despite the substantial cut of NTA funding for MOF under FSP
following the MTR (from 462 before the MTR to about 170-180 approved for 2021), the MOF increased their
financing under its own budget resulting with close to 500 NTAs still being employed in early 2021 (ICR, p. 21).
The share of recurrent cost financed through the IOC plan was estimated to be around 14 percent of actual
project financing which is significant and decreased the FSP’s overall efficiency (ICR, p. 51).

Failure to upgrade and migrate IT systems contributed to increased inefficiencies. Vendor-locked
proprietary and/or vulnerable homegrown software solutions required continuous funding of recurrent costs for
licenses, maintenance, and utilities (internet and electricity) (ICR, p. 21). Furthermore, the systems (e.g.,
ASYCUDA, AFMIS, etc.) were extended beyond the original plans in order to avoid their failure. The specific
consequences of not upgrading and migrating these systems led to delays in implementing the plans for NTA
transition, the ASYCUDA exit plan, etc. (ICR, p. 25). Though initially the FSP funded investments in operation
and maintenance of the IT systems, including procurement of necessary hardware and linking the AFMIS with
the DABS to enable e-payments, following the MTR, the project no longer funded the proprietary AFMIS
solution. As of project end, the AFMIS was still operational without support from the vendor and was running
without a license (ICR, p. 19).

In addition to the above, there are other factors that most likely contributed to a decrease in the project’s
efficiency and which are not discussed in the ICR:

The project experienced delays in procurement and implementation of some activities. Procurement was
delayed due to several factors including staff capacity constraints, the security situation, and limitation of the
local market. This resulted in frequent rebidding and complaints, which then took significant time to review and
resolve. (ICR, p. 26). Furthermore, training of Afghanistan Institute of Certified Public Accountants’ staff was not
conducted due to the delays in finalizing the curriculum (ICR, p. 19).




                                                                                                       Page 15 of 24
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      FSP (P159655)



The ICR does not discuss the effect of COVID-19 on efficiency. While the ICR (p. 27) mentions that the
COVID-19 pandemic adversely affected the performance and reforms implemented by various FSP
stakeholders (e.g., reforms related to tax and customs administration, external audit, roll-out of the pension
management information system) under “Key Factors During Implementation”, it does not take it into
consideration in the efficiency analysis. For example, VAT implementation (e.g., finalization of business
processes and technical requirements) was significantly delayed due to the COVID-19 pandemic (ICR p. 16).


Efficiency Rating
Negligible


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?              Point value (%)             *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                         0
 Appraisal                                                    0
                                                                                          Not Applicable
                                                                                         0
 ICR Estimate                                                 0
                                                                                          Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The project’s overall rating is Moderately Unsatisfactory (pre-crisis) and Negligible (post-crisis). This rating is
based on assessments of project relevance, average efficacy of the three outcome areas, and efficiency. Split
rating is applied to differentiate the progress before and after the political crisis of 15 August 2021 (see Table 1)
The project was highly relevant and aligned to both the Government’s and World Bank priorities. It succeeded in
achieving two out of three of its key objectives (and a number of interim indicators (seven were Achieved and
three were Partially Achieved); whereas three were Not Achieved. Achievement of its three objectives was rated
as “modest” (pre-crisis) and “negligible” (post crisis). The project’s overall efficiency was negligible, given that it
experienced delays, high implementation costs and procurement challenges.

Table 1. Calculation of the Overall Project Outcome Rating

                                                                                                   Post-crisis
Outcome Component                                                           Pre-crisis ratings
                                                                                                   ratings
Relevance                                                                   Substantial
Overall Project Efficacy                                                    Modest                 Negligible
Outcome 1 – Improvement of public expenditures management                   Modest                 Negligible
Outcome 2 – Improvement of domestic revenue mobilization                    Modest                 Negligible
Outcome 3 - Reinforcing a performance-oriented management culture
                                                                            Modest                 Negligible
in the Ministry of Finance
Efficiency                                                                  Negligible

                                                                                                        Page 16 of 24
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      FSP (P159655)



                                                                           Moderately
Outcome Ratings                                                                               Unsatisfactory
                                                                           Unsatisfactory
Disbursements                                                              US$36.39M          US$23.61M
Share of disbursements (Weight)                                            60.65%              39.35%
Overall Outcome Rating                                                     Moderately Unsatisfactory
a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Unsatisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The overall risk to development outcome was rated High by both the ICR (p. 32) as well as the PAD which
considered that the political, governance and institutional capacity for implementation and sustainability risks
were High at the time of project approval (p. 3).

The FSP planned to mitigate some of these risks by following a “staggered approach” and by “front-loading
reforms that [were] the most likely to be robust, feasible and critical from a political economy perspective and
with the greatest buy-in” (PAD, p. 24). However, following the fall of the Government, the sustainability of
human resources capacities, IT systems, and processes was severely jeopardized. While the ICR considers
that the IT systems are “relatively sustainable” and the staff capacity is “potentially or partially sustainable”,
the ICRR would argue the contrary.

In terms of staff capacity, even prior to the fall of the Government, the NPA was ahead of the other FSP-
supported institutions in transitioning its staff from NTAs to Tashkeel and had created and trained a
Procurement Cadre (p. 32). Following the fall of the Government and interruption of project financing, many
technical personnel contracts were shifted from FSP to discretionary budget, which set NTA quotas for each
ministry (ICR, p. 21). In a certain way, the crisis accelerated the reforms that the FSP was unable to
implement by limiting the NTA contracts and transitioning others to Tashkeel which may potentially ensure
sustainability of broader project results, including retaining the professional capacity built over years (p. 32).

Though the ICR considers that several systems (e.g., AFMIS, ASYCUDA and SIGTAS) had reached the
“point of no return” and were relatively sustainable (ICR, p. 24) because the Taliban authorities realized the
importance and benefits of these systems and ensured their continued operation, however, some of these
systems (e.g., AFMIS) are running without vendor support and without a license (ICR p. 19) which might
curtail their long-term sustainability. In terms of ASYCUDA, the handover of the system from the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD) to the Afghanistan Customs Department (ACD)
did not take place, which puts the maintenance of the customs system post-June 2021 at serious risk. Up to
the time of the drafting of the ICR, the operation and maintenance of the system was still supported by the
UNCTAD’s national project team (ICR, p. 17); however, it is not clear how long this support will last.

Finally, the fall of the Government reversed several policies and processes that were put in place. In
particular, those related to the following (i) fiscal transparency and information related to budgetary
allocations; (ii) national development strategy which would inform the budget allocations; (iii) advancements
in gender inclusiveness in PFM; and (iv) sustainability of the Afghanistan Institute of Certified Public
Accountants (CPA) since no measures for its formal and financial independence were put in place (ICR, p.
41).


                                                                                                       Page 17 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     FSP (P159655)




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The ICR did not rate the project’s Quality-at-Entry. The project’s design had some strong
  elements, in particular the use of analytical assessments as well as a certain degree of flexibility
  which was crucial given the FCV context. However, the project’s design also exhibited several
  weaknesses, including not taking into consideration the incentives to achieve the desired
  reforms, lack of clarity regarding the government’s financial contributions and not having a clear
  ToC.

  The project’s design benefitted from several analytical assessments. These included the following
  (i) 2013 Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability (PEFA); and (ii) several ASAs undertaken by the
  FPIP Advisory Facility, including an all-of-MOF Information and Communications Technology (ICT)
  Assessment (PAD, p. 17), a PIM Assessment (PAD, p. 45), and a competency framework/Human
  Resources assessment (PAD, p. 53).

  The project’s linkage with the FPIP provided the flexibility which fitted the FCV context. Due to the
  “rolling” nature of FPIP plans, the FSP’s scope was designed with greater flexibility in allocating
  resources where they were needed to address ad hoc needs and challenges that usually arise in a FCV
  environment (ICR, p. 30). However, the project’s design could have anticipated some of the challenges
  related to the FCV context which created logistical challenges in supplying goods, limited interest of
  international bidders, and involved high cost of associated security arrangements.

  The project’s implementation arrangements sought to rely on national systems and avoided
  creating parallel structures. The FSP’s design focused on enhancing fiduciary arrangements and
  strengthening national systems. In particular, the FSP prioritized capacity building and for NPA and SAO
  to enhance their respective contributions during project implementation, including auditing the IDA/ARTF
  program (ICR, p. 30). However, given the high number of NTAs in the various government departments,
  the ICR noted the existence of “hidden” PIUs and argued that a more conventional PIU to implement the
  project could have been more practical than using weak national systems (ICR, p. 33).

  The project’s objectives were not matched with the appropriate incentives to achieve them. The
  FSP’s objectives were ambitious and, for the available staff capacity at the implementing agencies,
  conflicted with the priorities of self-reliance. Achieving FSP’s outcomes required that NTAs continue to be
  involved in day-to-day MOF functions. Whereas to move closer to self-reliance, Bank staff working on the
  project considered that the project needed to promptly adopt an NTA transition plan[JC1] [RAA2] [JC3] .
  However, insufficient attention was given to addressing the incentives and legacies of previous projects
  during the design which affected the implementing the NTA transition plan and the reduction in their
  numbers.

  Scope of parallel financing from the Government was not clearly defined at the outset. MOF
  overestimated its capacity to provide parallel financing for PFM reforms from the national budget, which
  was expected to match FSP financing (in-line with the plans reflected in the PAD). The scope (both



                                                                                                  Page 18 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     FSP (P159655)



  amount and use) of the parallel financing was not clear at the outset, making it difficult to monitor (ICR, p.
  25).

  The project design did not include a Theory of Change (ToC) which presented the pathways from
  inputs, outputs to outcomes and objectives. Though a ToC and associated assumptions were not
  developed for the FSP, the PAD included a detailed Results Framework which allowed the ICR to re-
  construct a ToC. The Results Framework is discussed below under M&E Design.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The ICR did not rate the quality of the supervision. However, the following elements were considered to
 have contributed to the quality of the Bank’s supervision:

      i. There was stability in Bank leadership of the task, with only one change in task team leader (TTL)
           during the project and a seamless transition of the Accountability and Decision Making (ADM) role
           was ensured prior to the MTR;
     ii.   Physical proximity of the TTL/co-TTLs who were based – for most of the time - in Dubai and Kabul
           allowed for real time interaction and support to the Client (ICR, p. 31);
    iii.   Implementation support missions were timely, involved a large team of technical experts, and
           openly reported on the implementation issues proactively seeking management support on
           resolving the critical bottlenecks;
    iv.    Frequent informal missions took place between the formal implementation support missions and
           were part of handholding arrangements. They also provided Back to the Office Reports (BTORs) to
           the management and kept them appraised of any challenges (ICR, p. 27); and
     v.    Regular review of MOF’s grievance redress mechanism (GRM) system allowed the Bank team to
           respond to project-related grievances.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 Though the PAD did not include a Theory of Change, the Results Framework and results indicators
 were closely aligned to the PDO and the underlying ToC. Furthermore, the indicators had clear


                                                                                                     Page 19 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     FSP (P159655)



 baseline data, and were updated regularly. Nevertheless, the Results Framework lacked Interim Results
 Indicators to measure specific achievements which would contribute to the FSP’s PDO and one Key
 Objective Indicator - Increased domestic revenue as a percentage of GDP – was too high-level to
 convincingly argue that the FSP contributed to its achievement.

 The ICR did not address the lack of interim results indicators to measure some of the activities necessary
 to achieve the PDOs. For example, “citizen engagement” which was supposed to contribute to improving
 the performance-oriented management culture in MOF, had no indicators associated with it. Similarly,
 there were no indicators associated with supporting the fiscal and development policies which were
 necessary for improving public expenditures management.

 In addition, the Results Framework did not envisage the reporting of number of persons trained
 disaggregated by sex. Though FSP was gender-tagged and was meant to promote the training and
 recruitment of women for PFM positions (ICR, p. 30), it did not capture the number of women recruited
 and/or trained in the various institutions that were supported by the project.

 The ICR mentions the drafting of several legislative documents (e.g., CPA Law, SAO Law and Mining Law)
 which can contribute to both improved effectiveness as well as the sustainability of PFM interventions,
 these policy-level outputs were not captured in the Results Framework which focused mostly on processes
 put in place.

 Finally, the indicator for the share of revenue in GDP used to measure the FSP’s contribution to “improved
 domestic revenue mobilization”, was very high level and it would be difficult to demonstrate the pathway
 from inputs to outputs to outcomes to achieve this improvement.



b. M&E Implementation
  The ICR provides brief information on M&E implementation and does not include any information
  regarding the Implementation Status and Results Reports nor the Aide Memoires (quantity or quality).

  The PMT collected and reported on a regular basis the M&E data as part of FPIP reports which were
  published and disseminated twice a year This also led to streamlining donor support to PFM reforms
  (ICR, p. 30). Due to the scope of the financed reforms largely focusing the reforms at the national level
  and the reliance on PMT and the NTAs, the FSP’s results framework did not face limitations related to
  data availability. Given the technical nature of the indicators, most of them could not be updated in real
  time (ICR, p. 28).

  To complement the project’s M&E framework, the FSP put in place third-party monitoring arrangements
  for monitoring and supporting implementation of reform programs (ICR, p. 25). However, no information
  is provided regarding the TPMA’s reports’ quality and timeliness.

  The ICR reports inconsistencies in the calculation of a few indicators. Specifically, the Bank liaised with
  SAO on addressing discrepancies in measuring the “Effective implementation by budgetary units on the
  external audit on implementation of external audit recommendations”, but the security situation
  deteriorated before the indicator’s results could be re-calculated and reported (ICR, p. 28). Another
  example are inaccuracies in the reported numbers for the share of female employees at MOF. Both
  during project appraisal and MTR, it was stated that women constituted 11 percent of MOF staff.


                                                                                                    Page 20 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     FSP (P159655)



  However, in 2021, this ratio was increased to 14 percent which was inconsistent with the reported
  absolute number of 824 female staff out of a total of 8,600 (i.e., around 9.5 percent) (ICR, p. 23).



c. M&E Utilization
  The M&E findings informed project management and the technical discussions between the Bank and
  the implementing agencies. Furthermore, based on the M&E information, several IRI indicators were
  modified (three indicators), dropped (two indicators), or corrected (one indicator) during the project’s
  restructuring in September 2020 to better correspond to the project activities (ICR, p. 29). Finally, the
  use of Third-Party Monitors proved to also be useful for preparing the ICR since they were able to
  provide up-to-date information, especially given that the Bank missions had been suspended once the
  Taliban took over.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   No environmental or social safeguards policies were triggered by the project.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   In terms of financial management, the ICR does not mention whether interim financial reports and annual
   project audit reports were submitted on a timely basis or whether they were found to be of acceptable
   standards. However, it states that there were financial management challenges related to reconciliation of
   payroll and HR records as well as with fixed assets verification (ICR, p. 29) which points to the possibility of
   financial mismanagement. Furthermore, and following the fall of the Government, the Bank’s fiduciary
   teams worked closely with the Third-Party Monitoring Agent (TPMA) to estimate the outstanding
   commitments in the US$10.62 million Designated Account (DA) balance. Based on their preliminary
   assessment, a balance around US$8.53 million of total IDA and ARTF resources were due for
   refunding. The ICR was prepared in January 2023 - more than one year after the fall of the Government -
   and it does not indicate whether the balance has been refunded.

   In terms of procurement, there were backlogs, problematic and/or failed procurement packages which the
   Bank’s procurement team attempted to resolve through Hands-on Expanded Implementation Support
   (HEIS) starting from February 2020.

   Lastly, the MTR mission identified some shortcomings in MOF’s GRM which was also being used as the
   project’s GRM. MOF was requested to share a detailed description of its GRM system for review and to
   agree on remedial measures to improve it. However, the MOF failed to submit the requested information


                                                                                                     Page 21 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     FSP (P159655)



   despite the Bank’s follow-up requests during the February 2021 and May 2021 implementation support
   missions (ICR, p. 29).




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   The ICR did not identify any unintended impacts.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                    IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
                               Moderately             Moderately
Outcome
                               Unsatisfactory         Unsatisfactory
                               Moderately
Bank Performance                                      Moderately Satisfactory
                               Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                 Substantial            Substantial

Quality of ICR                 ---                    Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICRR confirms the series of lessons and recommendations emerging from the project’s
experience and presented in the ICRR and proposes an additional one regarding the importance of
high-level commitment to advance policy reforms. IEG summarizes the most persuasive lessons
below:

Balancing ambition of objectives with pragmatism is especially important in FCV contexts.
Projects’ design needs to carefully manage the trade-off between the ambition of PFM reforms and
more pragmatic and necessary priorities of ensuring government’s day-to-day operation with existing
capacity and with limited external support, in particular if donor financing is interrupted. As such,
institutional reforms in such FCV environments need to have realistic objectives that can be
sustained by the government’s own resources. The ICRR would add that a political economy
analysis, mapping the winners/losers of such reforms would also help in guiding both the design and
implementation of such projects, and not only in FCV contexts.

There is a need to address human resource capacities and incentives in a streamlined and
coordinated fashion with other projects to ensure proper project implementation. By
supporting NTAs through the FSP project, the World Bank undermined another project - TAGHIR –
which intended to transition NTAs to Tashkeel (the ministry’s organization structure). It would be
preferable to concentrate all financing of external staff under a single instrument for proper


                                                                                                    Page 22 of 24
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       FSP (P159655)



streamlining with civil service reform program. Furthermore, and though in theory it is preferable to
rely on national systems for fiduciary arrangements, it may be more efficient and effective to use
conventional PIUs to implement the project and to outsource the audit of projects to a reputable
audit firm than to rely on the limited national capacities.

Carefully design digital approaches and business models to ensure efficiency as well as
sustainability. ICT solutions, in particular in FCV contexts, are associated with a set of
implementation, quality and sustainability risks. Considerations at the design stage should be taken
to ensure that simple open-source solutions that combine flexibility on maintenance arrangements
(including avoiding proprietary licensing) and affordable cost are chosen in order to avoid
fragmentation, inefficiencies and unsustainable ICT solutions. Selecting vendors solely on lowest
price without taking into consideration life-time costs of the system (including license fees), may not
be the most efficient, effective or sustainable solution in the long-run.

Another lesson which is not included in the ICR but is alluded to under “Key Factors During
Preparation”: is the importance of selecting the appropriate counterparts and engaging at the
right level to ensure high-level ownership and commitment for advancing the reform agenda.
FSP partnered with three key stakeholders (MOF, NPA and SAO), which were critical for advancing
the PFM reforms in the vulnerable and high-risk FCV context. All three institutions served as
implementing agencies and actively supported the reform. Furthermore, the Bank engaged closely
with the key stakeholders to prepare the project's budget in a participatory way. Closer engagement
with President’s office was one of the untapped measures that could strengthen the reform focus
and collaboration towards overall project targets.

Finally, in Afghanistan, it was very useful to have a dedicated Gender and Social Development
expert on the Bank's team to lead the dialogue on gender-related issues and to follow up on the
gender-related activities implemented by the project.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR was based on a desk review of reports prepared prior to fall of the Government in August 2021 and,
after that, on “informal estimates” without indicating the basis for these estimates. Though not specifically
mentioned, interviewing authorities was not possible and a Borrower ICR was not prepared. Notwithstanding
these limitations, the ICR is generally well-written and provides a detailed overview of the project and available
evidence support the ratings. It has also included a clearly reconstructed Theory of Change based on the
project’s Results Framework. It is candid and points out the instances of potential mismanagement as well as
other weaknesses in project implementation though, it failed to rate the project's Quality- At-Entry.

In order to complement the limitations in accessing information and informants following the fall of the
Government, the ICR could have interviewed other stakeholders (e.g., UNCTAD, UN Women, and some CSOs)
as well as analyzed the MOF’s website for evidence of any reforms that were sustained. Equally, it would have

                                                                                                     Page 23 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     FSP (P159655)



been interesting to have additional information some aspects of the FSP (e.g., M&E findings by the TPMA and
the status of MOF’s Gender Unit).

In addition, given the several fiduciary challenges (procurement and financial management) that the FSP faced,
it would have been interesting for the ICR to highlight any lessons learned which future projects could learn
from, especially in FCV contexts. In addition, since the PAD had already highlighted several risks, lessons
learnt regarding the mitigation of such risks would also be useful for future similar projects.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                Page 24 of 24
