     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SWIOFish1 (P132123)



                                                                                Report Number: ICRR0023545

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P132123                                   SWIOFish1

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Eastern and Southern Africa               Environment, Natural Resources & the Blue Economy


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-55460,IDA-55890,IDA-D0110,IDA-        30-Sep-2021                                         86,236,422.08
 H9940,IDA-H9950

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 27-Feb-2015                               30-Sep-2022

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                          75,500,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                           75,497,460.36                                               0.00

 Actual                                       70,907,391.25                                               0.00




 Prepared by               Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Katharina Ferl            Vibecke Dixon                 Avjeet Singh                   IEGSD (Unit 4)




 P132029_TBL
 Project ID                                Project Name
 P132029                                   SWIOFish1 ( P132029 )



 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
                                                                                                 15329030.83

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)

                                                                                                 Page 1 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SWIOFish1 (P132123)



 27-Feb-2015

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                        Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                                      0.00                                     15,500,000.00

 Revised Commitment                                       0.00                                     15,329,030.83

 Actual                                                   0.00                                     15,329,030.83




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Project Appraisal Document (p. ix) and the Financing Agreement of March 12, 2015 (p. 5)
   the objective of the project was “to improve the management effectiveness of selected priority fisheries at
   regional, national and community level”.

   According to the ICR (para. 9) Comoros, Mozambique, and Tanzania participated in this first series of projects
   (SOP) because they had confirmed national IDA allocations.

   Throughout project implementation the PDO was not changed. The targets of PDO indicators 2 and 3 (for
   Tanzania) were increased and the target for number of project beneficiaries for Mozambique was decreased.
   However, this reduction did not reduce the scope of the project and the actual outcome ended up exceeding
   the original and revised target. Therefore, a split rating is not warranted.

   For the analysis in this ICRR, the PDO will be parsed as follows:

        1. To improve the management effectiveness of selected priority fisheries at regional level;
        2. To improve the management effectiveness of selected priority fisheries at national level; and
        3. To improve the management effectiveness of selected priority fisheries at community level.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components


                                                                                                     Page 2 of 21
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  SWIOFish1 (P132123)



The project included four components:

Component 1. Enhanced regional collaboration (appraisal estimate US$3.03 million, actual US$2.88
million): This component was to finance two sub-components:

Sub-component 1.1: Enhancing capacity for managing priority regional fisheries and challenges: This sub-
component was to finance the engagement with all South West Indian Ocean Fisheries Commission
(SWIOFC) countries to start developing a regional strategy to increase national and regional benefits from
priority regional fisheries, collaborating on trans-boundary living marine resources, and addressing shared
challenges. It was also to support implementing a core regional work plan toward implementing this
strategy.

Sub-component 1.2: Regional coordination and collaboration: This sub-component was to finance the
further development and consolidation of institutional arrangements for regional fisheries collaboration,
through the SWIOFC and the Indian Ocean Commission (IOC). The sub-component also was to support
regional knowledge management and exchange.

Component 2. Improved governance of priority fisheries (appraisal estimate US$54.66, actual
US$39.84 million): This component was to finance the following activities: i) providing knowledge and
management to priority fisheries; ii) improving the performance of public institutions and assets; and iii)
developing national Fisheries Information Systems (FISs) and public dashboards to track the sector’s
performance; iv) constructing basic public fisheries services and infrastructure; v) developing capacity and
conducting leadership training; vi) conducting communication and public awareness programs on the
countries’ fisheries status, the economic, social, and environmental importance of priority fisheries and
marine habitats, and the impact of illegal fishing.

Component 3. Increased economic benefits from priority fisheries (appraisal estimate US$24.98
million, actual US$28.2 million): This component was to finance the following activities: i) establishing and
strengthening of fisheries co-management units for joint local fisheries management; ii) supporting the
implementation of co-management agreements signed between co-management units and the local
administration (including sustainable fishing practice, seasonal access closure, and community
surveillance); iii) developing or strengthening of local financing schemes and market linkages for local
value-chain operators interested in establishing or expanding their businesses; and iv) planning and
investing in strategic infrastructure.

When the project was restructured in September 2021, two activities from Tanzania’s component 3 were
dropped; i) providing grants for Village Saving Loan (VSL) schemes; and ii) feasibility study for semi-
industrial tuna fleet activities. Also, resources were shifted from component 3 to components 2 and 4.

Component 4. Project management and coordination (appraisal estimate US$8.33 million, actual
US$15.32 million): This component was to finance regional project coordination and implementation,
country-level implementation and management, and monitoring and evaluation at regional and country level
operating through Regional and National Steering Committees (RSC/NSCs) and Regional and National
Implementation Units (RIU/NIUs) and Project Implementation Units (PIUs).




                                                                                                 Page 3 of 21
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    SWIOFish1 (P132123)




e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost: The project was to cost US$91.0 million. Actual cost was US$86.23 million.

  Financing: The project was financed by: i) IDA credit (IDA-55460) in the amount of US$11.70 million (of
  which US$10.9 million disbursed); ii) IDA credit (IDA-55890) in the amount of US$31.0 million (of which
  US$29.8 million disbursed); iii) grant (IDA-D0110) in the amount of US$9.5 million (of which US$8.79 million
  was disbursed); iv) grant (IDA-H9940) in the amount of US$18.3 million (of which US$16.78 million
  disbursed); v) grant (IDA-H9950) in the amount of US$5.0 million (of which US$4.51 million disbursed); vi)
  Trust Fund (TF-19021) in the amount of US$5.0 million (which completely disbursed); vii) Trust Fund (TF-
  19023) in the amount of US$3.5 million (of which US$3.3 million disbursed); and viii) Trust Fund (TF-19022)
  in the amount of US$7.0 million (of which US$6.9 million disbursed).

  Borrower Contribution: It was not planned for the Borrower to make any contributions.

  Dates: The project was restructured six times (level 2), each focusing on a specific country:

        On November 2, 2016, the project (Tanzania) was restructured to reallocate financing between
           disbursement categories.
        On December 19, 2018, the project (Mozambique and Tanzania) was restructured to: i) reorganize
           the budget and reduce the number of Ministry institutions directly engaged in project implementation;
           ii) to realign indicators and targets with emerging priorities of the Government and project, as well as
           with what was realistically achievable within the remaining project timeframe; iii) change the
           disbursement categories and reallocation; and iv) operationalize match grants scheme.
          On September 30, 2020, the project (Mozambique) was restructured to: i) reorganize the budget; ii)
           Revise the Results Framework to align targets with the available budget. The following indicators
           were modified: a) Infrastructures to support artisanal fisheries completed and operational (number),
           with target reduced from 8 to 6; b) Commercial Businesses receiving support from ProAzul Matching
           Grants Scheme (Number), with target reduced from 16 to 5.
          On June 7, 2021, the project (Comoros) was restructured to: i) reallocate the budget, taking into
           account both downsizing the PIU and the prioritizing of activities to be undertaken for the remainder
           of the project implementation; ii) change the Results Framework; iii) extend the project closing date
           by three months from June 30, 2021, to September 30, 2021 to allow for the completion of activities
           which had been delayed due to the COVID-19 pandemic; and iv) revise the Results Framework to
           drop one intermediate outcome indicator, increase the target of one intermediate outcome indicator
           and revise the text of one intermediate outcome indicator.
          On September 28, 2021, the project (Tanzania) was restructured to: i) reallocate the budget; ii)
           extend the project closing date by twelve months from September 30, 2021, to September 30, 2022
           to allow for the completion of project activities which had been delayed due to the COVID-19
           pandemic.
          On September 29, 2021, the project (Comoros) was restructured to: i) reallocate the budget; ii)
           extend the project closing date by three months from September 30, 2021, to December 30, 2021 to
           allow for the completion of project activities which had been delayed due to the COVID-19
           pandemic.




                                                                                                     Page 4 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SWIOFish1 (P132123)



3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Regional, country and sector context. Nine countries border the waters of the South West Indian Ocean
(SWIO), among those are Tanzania, Comoros and Mozambique and who are members of the South West
Indian Ocean Fisheries Commission (SWIOFC), a regional fisheries body.

According to the PAD (p. 1) the SWIO region’s seafood exports (excluding South Africa) were about
US$1.3 billion in 2008, half of which were attributable to tuna and shrimp. Local industrial fisheries (mainly
for shrimp) and tuna processing comprised a substantial part of the foreign exchange earnings. Aquaculture
was one of the most rapidly growing food industries in several of the SWIOFC member countries, playing
an important role for livelihoods of SWIO coastal populations. Marine fisheries were critical in key areas
such as poverty reduction, food security, economic growth, balance of payments, and value of natural
capital. However, there were several challenges the region faced: i) resource depletion; ii) economic and
social underperformance; iii) foreign dominated industrial value-chain; and iv) unsustainable artisanal
fisheries.The SWIO marine fisheries were part of a larger marine ecosystem shared by all countries of the
region and the countries shared similar challenges in their fisheries sectors including weak governance,
weak human and institutional capacity, and a fragile business environment. As a result, there was a need to
find a regional solution to address these challenges.

According to the ICR (para. 3) Comoros, Mozambique, and Tanzania faced similar challenges: i) weak legal
and institutional framework; ii) lack of human capacity; iii) weak infrastructure for fisheries; and iv) poor
investment climate. These challenges resulted in deficient management of small-scale fisheries and
monitoring of offshore tuna fisheries (Comoros), overexploitation (Mozambique), and limited private
investments and inadequate maritime safety (Tanzania).

Alignment with the Government Strategy.

Comoros: The objective of the project supported the government’s Medium Term Development Strategy
(2020-2030), naming Blue Economy as one of five strategic pillars. Also, the country’s new 2030
Development Plan stresses the importance of developing fisheries infrastructures in coastal areas to
support value chains, reduce post-harvest losses, and promote local fisheries product trade.

Mozambique: The objective of the project supported the government’s plan for 2020-2024 (Plano
Quinquenal do Governo), specifically priority III “strengthen the sustainable management of natural
resources and the environment”, which prioritizes preparing a national marine spatial plan, restructuring the
sector’s licensing system, and strengthening the country’s Monitoring, Control, and Surveillance (MCS)
system.

Tanzania: According to the ICR (para. 32), the objective of the project supported the government’s
Development Vision 2025 and the Third Development Plan for 2021/22-2025/26 which stress the need to
enhance the value-addition of the fisheries sector through diversification, and environmental protection
through community-based natural resource management and enforcement of legislation against harmful
extractive techniques. Also, Zanzibar’s Development Vision 2025 aims to effectively coordinate and
manage the development of the ocean and its endowments through industrial value addition, sustainable




                                                                                                    Page 5 of 21
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                       Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      SWIOFish1 (P132123)



               exploitation of marine-related resources and products as well as continued support of regional and
               international blue economy institutions and initiatives.

               Alignment with the World Bank Strategy.

               Comoros: The objective of the project was in line with the Bank’s most recent Country Partnership
               Framework (CPF) (FY2020-24), which prioritizes the rehabilitation and construction of climate-smart
               fisheries infrastructure for coastal communities damaged by the April 2019 cyclone (under objective 2
               “disaster recovery and resilience”), as well as the reinforcement of fisheries’ value chains (under objective 3
               “Improving business environment and governance”).

               Mozambique: The objective of the project was in line with objective 4 “enabled green growth through
               sustainable use of natural resources” of the Bank’s most recent CPF (FY2023-27) mentions the importance
               of “…developing a vibrant blue economy and preserving wildlife”.

               Tanzania: The objective of the project was in line with the Bank’s most recent CPF (FY2018-2022)
               especially with objective 1.1 “strengthen the business environment for job creation, notably in
               manufacturing, agribusiness, and tourism” and objective 1.3 “manage natural resources for resilient
               economic growth”.

               The objective of the project was pitched at an appropriate level to address a development problem.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To improve the management effectiveness of selected priority fisheries at regional level

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change: The project’s theory of change envisioned that project activities/inputs such as
                             developing a regional strategy for increasing national and regional benefits from priority regional fisheries,
                             developing regional Minimum Terms and Conditions (MTC), establishing, and upgrading regional fisheries
                             MCS systems and capacities as well as carrying out regional meetings and knowledge management and
                             exchange extents were to result in several outputs. These outputs were to include a regional strategy for
                             priority fisheries being developed, regional MCS of access to tuna and fishery being developed, regional MCS
                             training and systems being developed, the SWIOFC financing mechanism defined and agreed on, and
                             regional meetings and knowledge management and exchange events being carried out. These outputs were



                                                                                                                             Page 6 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   SWIOFish1 (P132123)



to result in the outcome of improved management effectiveness of selected priority fisheries at the regional
level.

The theory of change was sound and logic and contains no apparent logical gaps.

Outputs:

      MTC for access to tuna fishery were agreed on at technical regional level, achieving the target of MTC
       being agreed on. According to the ICR (p. 53), the project financed the costs of regional technical
       meetings, meetings of the SWIOFC MTC task force, development of legal and technical reports by
       consultants in collaboration and co-financing from WWF, and assessment consultation. The ICR (para
       35) notes that the guidelines established a common access regime for foreign fishing of tuna and
       tuna-like species by containing uniform provisions for pre-inspection, licensing, operation, data
       management, and reporting of foreign fishing vessels by the countries; financial compensation to the
       countries; allowed fishing zones; authorized gear; landing and handling procedures for catch and by-
       catch, and other provisions. In 2021, IOC assessed how well the MTC guidelines were implemented
       by the SWIOFC member countries, finding a substantial level of legislative implementation and use of
       the guidelines to improve access agreements’ conditions
      The SWIOFC sustainable regional financing mechanism was agreed upon, achieving the target of
       agreeing on the mechanism. According to the ICR (p. 54) the project financed the preparation of an
       options study, three background studies, and regional consultation meetings.

Outcomes:

      11 new SWIOFC member countries signed bilateral and/or multilateral agreements on fisheries,
       exceeding the target of six new SWIOFC member countries. According to the ICR (p. 46) the project
       financed country representatives’ travel expenses, meeting of technical group members, and national-
       level capacity building activities and studies informing countries about their fishing stocks to negotiate
       the agreements.

       The project was able to exceed its target for new SWIOFC member country signatures to bilateral
       and/or multilateral agreements on fisheries. Also, all three countries agreed on MTC for access to tuna
       fishery and on a SWIOFC sustainable financing mechanism. These achieved outcomes contributed to
       the achievement of the objective. Overall, the achievement of the objective was Substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To improve the management effectiveness of selected priority fisheries at national level

Rationale
Theory of Change: The project’s theory of change envisioned that project activities/inputs such as
developing or updating priority fisheries’ management plans and implementation of agreed fishing control

                                                                                                   Page 7 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   SWIOFish1 (P132123)



measures, developing or updating policy/legal instruments/strategies for fishery management, developing
national fisheries information systems with regular updating, constructing basic public fisheries services and
infrastructure, as well as implementing capacity development and leadership training for public and private
sectors and communication and public awareness programs were to result in several outputs. These outputs
were to include management plans for priority fisheries developed or updated, control measures being
implemented, policy/legal instruments/strategies being developed or updated, fisheries information systems
being established, basic public fisheries services and infrastructure build as well as training being provided,
and communication and awareness programs being implemented. These outputs were to result in the
outcome of management effectiveness of selected priority fisheries at the national level being improved. The
theory of change was sound and logic.

Outputs:

Tanzania:

      Fisheries Information System (FIS) was developed with data routinely collected in various zones.
       A public dashboard was updated annually until 2021.
      The fisheries act was revised, consulted, and submitted to the cabinet, achieving the target of at least
       one key policy or legal instrument for fishery management being developed or updated.
      Control of fishing activity: The percentage of non-compliance incidences per year decreased from 80
       percent in 2015 to 45 percent in 2022, achieving the target of 50 percent of non-compliance
       incidences in a year.
      In 2022, all vessels were registered in collaboration with local communities but only 58 percent of
       them were licensed, not achieving the target of 100 percent.

Mozambique:

      A dashboard was put in place and made public with regularly updated data, achieving the target of a
       FIS/dashboard being operational.
      An aquaculture strategy was reviewed and updated. Also, a mid-term review of fisheries master plan
       was conducted, and the plan was updated. Finally, the Sea and Policy Strategy was developed,
       achieving the target of at least one key policy or legal instrument for fishery management being
       developed or updated.
      Control of fishing activity:
            o The number of days of land patrols in the target area being conducted increased from 200
               days in 2015 to 695 days in 2022, exceeding the target of 360 days.
            o The number of days of coastal patrols in target areas being conducted increased from zero
               days in 2015 to 297 days in 2022, exceeding the target of 240 days.
      A situation plan was elaborated and submitted for approval to the relevant authority, achieving the
       target of submitting a situation plan.

Comoros:

      A dashboard was put in place and was made public with regularly updated data, achieving the target
       of a FIS/dashboard being operational.
      Fisheries law application texts was adopted, achieving the target of at least one key policy or legal
       instrument for fishery management being developed or updated.

                                                                                                  Page 8 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   SWIOFish1 (P132123)




      Control of fishing activity: The percentage of vessels being inspected increased from 2 percent in
       2015 to 25.2 percent in 2022, exceeding the target of 10 percent of vessels.
      A fisheries monitoring center was built, equipped, and made operational. The center houses the
       satellite-based fishing vessel monitoring system to monitor and communicate with licensed industrial
       vessels, operating in the EEZ. Also, a vessel registration system, and a computerized registration
       database were developed. Also, national and local registration personnel was trained. These outputs
       did not have a target.

Outcomes:

Tanzania: Seven Fisheries Management Plans (FMPs) were consulted, approved, and implemented,
exceeding the original target of one FMP being implemented and the revised target of six FMPs being
implemented. In 2022, all vessels were registered in collaboration with local communities but only 58 percent
of vessels were licensed. This outcome did not achieve the target of 100 percent, which was part of
Tanzania’s definition for the “implementation” of the fisheries management plans.

Mozambique: Three management plans for demersal line fisheries, coastal shrimp, and deep-sea
crustaceans were implemented, achieving the target of three management plans being implemented. The
implementation of these plans resulted in licensing capacity within maximum thresholds being established
(based on stock assessments and in collaboration with targeted local communities). In 2022, 34 licenses
were provided for coastal shrimp (compared to a maximum quota of 39 licenses), 23 licenses were provided
for deep-sea crustaceans (compared to a maximum quota of 27 licenses), and no license was provided for
demersal line fisheries (compared to a maximum quota of four licenses).

Comoros: Eco-system Approach to Fisheries (EAF) demersal fisheries management plan was evaluated and
expended to a new National Coastal Fisheries Management Plan (adopted in December 2020) as a
framework for the development and management of demersal and pelagic coastal fisheries. The plan was
only partially implemented with 67 percent vessel registration, not achieving the target of 100 percent vessel
registration.

The target for fisheries management plan implementation was achieved in Mozambique and partially
achieved in Comoros and Tanzania. In terms of operational Fisheries Information Systems (FIS), the indicator
measuring the FIS had three parts: 1. dashboard in place, 2. made public, and 3. with regularly updated data.
Operational fisheries information systems/dashboards were established in Mozambique and Tanzania. While
a FIS was developed with a dashboard in Comoros, parts 2 and 3 were not achieved.

All three countries developed key policy and legal instruments for fishery management as planned and fishing
control activity targets were exceeded in all three countries. These achieved outcomes contributed to the
achievement of the objective. Overall, the achievement of objective two is rated Substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective

                                                                                                 Page 9 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   SWIOFish1 (P132123)



To improve the management effectiveness of selected priority fisheries at community level

Rationale
Theory of Change: The project’s theory of change envisioned that project activities/inputs such as preparing
value chain diagnostics, establishing local financial structures, developing capacity of fisheries co-
management structures, developing local fisheries management plans, and implementing plans’ actions,
investing in productive and social infrastructure for fishers, operators, and women groups were to result in
several outputs. These outputs were to include value chain diagnostics being prepared, local financial
structures being established, co-management structures’ capacities being strengthened, local fisheries
management plans being developed and implemented, and productive and social infrastructure being built.
These outputs were to result in the outcome of management effectiveness of selected priority fisheries at the
community level being improved.

The theory of change was sound and logic.

Outputs:
Tanzania:

      17,949 recipients participated in the village savings loan scheme, exceeding the target of 2,200
       recipients. Beneficiaries received small loans at a low interest, which were used to support small
       businesses, including horticulture activities, retail business, salt and spice processing, cloth and soap
       making, food vending, as well as poultry and fishing activities.
      23 targeted fisheries management infrastructure was operationalized, exceeding the target of three
       infrastructures. These infrastructures included seven in mainland Tanzania, 13 in Zanzibar and three
       Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ) related.
      Seven recommendations were implemented for each priority fish value chain study for economic
       benefits, exceeding the target of three recommendations.

Mozambique:

      17,546 participants participated in Rotating Saving and Credit Scheme (PCR) cycles, exceeding the
       target of 3,000 participants. The PCR associations served as small banking systems, jointly saving
       members’ financial contributions, and providing lending with interest. After several cycles (about 20
       months) the interest was distributed among the shareholders who reportedly used the interest to pay
       for social and economic activities such as house upgrading, school expenses, and boat motor repair.
      Five infrastructures to support artisanal fisheries were completed and were operational, almost
       achieving the target of six infrastructures. The infrastructures included two fish markets, and three
       extension agent houses and offices.
      1,213 individual family applicants received support from the FFP’s matching grant scheme, exceeding
       the target of 400 individual family applicants.
      Four commercial businesses received support from FFP’s matching grant scheme, almost achieving
       the target of five commercial businesses.

Comoros:

      2,134 value-chain operators benefitted from business and value chain development training,
       exceeding the target of 600 operators. Trainings were held in different areas such as business

                                                                                                  Page 10 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   SWIOFish1 (P132123)



       planning, packaging, marketing, good hygiene practices, as well as fish conservation and sale
       equipment.
      13 operational fisheries infrastructures were built, almost achieving the target of 14 operational
       fisheries infrastructures. These infrastructures included: seven cold chain chambers, a fish shop and
       five storage structures.
      The project did not include an indicator for Comoros on at least one target fishery value chain per
       country enhanced.
      Also, the project financed community facilitators who supported and monitored the CMUs, island
       coordinators, cost of community meetings and ceremonies etc.

Outcomes:

Tanzania:

      78 percent of targeted community-based management units achieved three of the four defined
       performance targets, not achieving the target of 92.5 percent of community-based management units
       achieving at least two performance targets. These performance targets were related to vessel
       licensing, incorporation of fisheries’ management measures in community-managed areas’
       management plans, revenue raising, and implementation of area closure measures as planned.

Mozambique:

      43 targeted community-based management units achieved three of the four performance targets,
       achieving the target of 30 community-based management units meeting at least two performance
       targets. Performance targets included; regular Community Fishing Council (CCP) meetings;
       agreements between districts and CCPs; CCO representation in all district co-management committee
       meetings; and fishing gear licensing above 74 percent.

Comoros:

      Six of the targeted community-based management units achieved two of the four performance targets,
       achieving the target of at least six community-based management units achieving at least two
       performance targets. For Comoros, these performance targets were defined as agreement between
       the administration and communities on community management plans; island co-management
       meetings held at least twice a year; at least 85 percent of vessels, static gears, and aquaculture
       operations registered for each CMU; at least 50 percent of vessels, static gears, and aquaculture
       operations licensed for each CMU as per law.
      According to the ICR (para. 54) the CMUs also utilized new fishing techniques provided to them by the
       project. These techniques included low-cost fishing aggregating devices, octopus pots, and lobster
       traps.

The project benefitted a total of 379,162 beneficiaries (30 percent female), exceeding the original target of
135,050 and the revised target of 105,050 beneficiaries but falling slightly short of achieving the target of 31
percent of female beneficiaries.

      In Comoros, the project benefitted 22,762 beneficiaries (of which 21percent were female), exceeding
       the target of 10,000 beneficiaries (not achieving the target of 27 percent being female).

                                                                                                   Page 11 of 21
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                SWIOFish1 (P132123)




                                   In Mozambique, the project benefitted 98,485 beneficiaries (of which 48 percent were female),
                                    exceeding the original target of 60,000 beneficiaries (target of 10 percent being female) and the
                                    revised target of 30,000 beneficiaries.
                                   In Tanzania, the project benefitted 257,071 beneficiaries (of which 24 percent were female),
                                    exceeding the target of 65,000 beneficiaries (not achieving the target of 50 percent being female).

                            Co-management targets were exceeded in Mozambique, achieved in Comoros, and partially achieved in
                            Tanzania. The target for community individuals participating in value chain enhancement was exceeded in all
                            three countries. According to the Bank team (August 29, 2023) the countries’ respective targets were
                            exceeded because of a cautionary target setting at appraisal and the successful outcomes of these, facilitated
                            by the recruitment of local service providers and strong interest from communities and stakeholders in these
                            activities.

                            The target for operational fisheries infrastructure was exceeded in Tanzania and substantially achieved in
                            Comoros and Mozambique. Finally, Tanzania and Mozambique exceeded the targets for fishery value chain
                            enhancement. This activity was not supported in Comoros. Overall, the achievement of this objective was
                            Substantial.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Given the substantial achievement of all three objectives, the overall efficacy rating is Substantial.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



   5. Efficiency
   Economic efficiency:

   The PAD (p. 86) conducted a cost-benefit analysis. The PAD defined benefits for each project component. For
   component 1 (enhanced regional collaboration) the benefits were defined as increased economic returns and
   costs savings for each country and the region. For component 2 (improved governance of priority fisheries) the
   benefits were defined as: i) benefits from a recovery of coastal fisheries; ii) benefits from improved information
   systems; and iii) benefits from improved ecosystem services. For component 3 (increased economic benefits
   from priority fisheries) the benefits were defined as: i) benefits from a recovery of coastal fisheries attributable to
   communities and the private sector; ii) improved incomes for traditional and artisanal fishers, (iii) increased value

                                                                                                                                Page 12 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      SWIOFish1 (P132123)



added to products along value chains; iv) benefits to the private sector and coastal communities from improved
ecosystem services leading to increased fishers income, food security and resilience to climate change and
natural disasters; v) benefits from modernized industrial and semi-industrial fleets; and vi) benefits of improved
or new infrastructure.

The Internal Rate of Return (IRR) estimated at the end of the project (five years) was relatively low (4.5 percent),
rising to 23 percent after 10 years without further investment. The PAD (p. 86) stated that the low results were
due to lack of data. Furthermore, the PAD stated that the project was likely to have a high relative impact on the
development of fisheries and aquaculture activities, in terms of institutional strengthening, sustainable marine
fishing activities and their contribution to social and economic development.

The ICR (para 67) calculated the Financial Internal Rate of Return (FIRR) by comparing the ratio of project
management costs to the total project cost as a proxy for administrative efficiency. The FIRR benefitted the
internal rate of return of the project’s incremental benefits stream from 2018/19 to 2031/32. The incremental
benefit stream was defined as the incremental increase in incomes to all beneficiaries plus the incremental
revenue to participating governments compared to a “without project” scenario. The FIRR was 27.3
percent. Using a discount rate of 12 percent, the NPV was calculated at US$50.5 million. The analysis indicates
that the project was a worthwhile investment.

Implementation efficiency:

The project closed 12 months later than planned to accommodate for delays related to the COVID-19 pandemic,
the suspension of Comoro’s fishing agreement with the European Union, the institutional reforms in
Mozambique, and inadequate project management capacity in Tanzania. According to the ICR (para. 70) as a
result of the COVID-19 pandemic and increased costs of goods, works, and consultations, some contracts were
more expensive than planned. For example, in Mozambique, the development of the National Maritime Spatial
Planning Plan ended up being US$1.02 million more expensive. Also, the assessment and technical design of
landing sites was US$240,000 more expensive. Furthermore, the project experienced higher administrative
costs in Comoros (in the amount of US$250,000) due to the sectoral support suspension by the EU. Until 2018,
the large number of executing agencies (ten in total) resulted in high transaction costs for the PIU as well as
higher project management and coordination costs than originally planned (in the amount of US$2.56 million).
Also, only 70 percent of the construction of the fish market in Chinamacondo District was completed. Finally,
also in Tanzania, two infrastructure investments were not completed. The mariculture resource center in
Kunduchi and a marine park administration block in Mafia island were only financed at 38 percent and 60
percent of the total cost when the project closed. Also, while the marine research lab at Maruhubi was
completed, it was not operational at project closure.

According to the ICR (para. 71) the project experienced efficiency gains. At the regional level, the IOC
experienced cost savings in the amount of US$275,650 due to travel restrictions in 2020. Also, the IOC was able
to obtain co-financing from other programs and projects in the amount of US$1.09 million for regional activities.
In addition, the IOC received 3,186 person-days of in-kind contribution from SWIOFC member countries.

Overall, the project’s efficiency rating is Modest, given the implementation inefficiencies.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


                                                                                                     Page 13 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SWIOFish1 (P132123)




a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                    0
Appraisal                                                  0
                                                                                     Not Applicable
                                                                                    0
ICR Estimate                                               0
                                                                                     Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of the objective was High given its alignment with the Bank’s most recent CPFs in each country
included in the project. Efficacy was Substantial and Efficiency was Modest. The overall outcome rating is
Moderately Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The project’s risks to development outcome can be broadly classified into the following categories:

Government commitment: The governments of Comoros, Mozambique and Tanzania remain committed to
the project’s objective as demonstrated through their ongoing cooperation with the Bank in this area. In
Comoros, this project will be followed by the “Food Resilience Systems Program for Eastern and Southern
Africa Phase 3” (P177816) which focuses on generating sustainable long-term financial support for
governance of the fishery sector. In Mozambique, the “Northern Mozambique Rural Resilience Project”
(P177816), which aims to strengthen MIMAIP’s capacities to manage the fisheries sector and the role of the
private sector in the development of fisheries will build on the outcomes of this project. In Tanzania, the
“Scaling-up Sustainable Marine Fisheries and Aquaculture Management Project” (P179969) is going to
provide institutional support to the government in mainland Tanzania and Zanzibar, aiming to increase the
contribution of aquaculture, mariculture, and recreational fisheries to the sector’s revenue stream.

Political: The ICR (para 111) stated that follow-on projects such as the SWIOFish 2 and SWIOFish 4 have
continued to foster regional cooperation between countries in this area, which might positively impact the
sustainability of project outcomes.

Financial/Technical: According to the ICR (para. 110) lack of budgetary allocations to the fisheries sectors
might be a risk to the sustainability of relevant agencies being fully operational, maintaining MCS functions
and databases as well as providing critical financial and technical support to coastal communities. Especially,

                                                                                                   Page 14 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      SWIOFish1 (P132123)



the fishery sector in Comoros has been strongly dependent on external financial support. Also, member
countries’ focus on COVID-19 recovery efforts, might make SWIOFC dependent on donor support. Without
sufficient allocations to the sector, there might be a risk to the technical capacity built under this project.
Continuous capacity strengthening activities will be critical for sustaining development outcomes.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  According to the ICR (para. 107) the Bank team included technical experts with relevant backgrounds,
  and the project design was built on lessons learned from previous national and regional Bank projects.
  These lessons included: i) importance of phasing fisheries reform processes; ii) allowing sufficient time
  for fisheries sector projects as well as a ensuring a high degree of flexibility and ongoing support; iii)
  importance of local fisheries management being built on broad based consultative processes to ensure
  consensus, inclusion, and sustainability. The Bank team conducted financial management, procurement,
  and safeguard capacity assessments and developed action plans to address identified weaknesses.

  According to the PAD (p. 19) the Bank team identified relevant risks including: i) complex policy issues,
  including the management of reform processes; ii) weak capacity of the participating governmental
  agencies, especially in regard to Bank fiduciary and safeguard procedures, and the logistics and
  management challenges associated with the regional component; iii) resistance of key public and private
  sector stakeholders to introduce reforms, which may not provide equal or short-term benefits; iv) difficulty
  in developing viable and functional production and value chain models and alternative livelihoods at
  different levels; v) dependence on factors and conditions outside the control of the project, in particular
  piracy threats in the region, credit institutions and foreign investment; vi) the poor investment climate
  baseline; and vii) high dependency of coastal fishing communities on the resource. To mitigate those
  risks the project’s reform targets were kept conservative, the project’s time frame was six years to allow
  sufficient implementation time, and the project included budgets to build capacity. Also, countries were to
  address piracy threats through their monitoring, controlling, and surveillance activities. Mitigation
  measures were insufficient especially regarding capacity resulting in implementation delays. Also, the
  Bank team did not identify risks related to exchange rate fluctuations, the complex multi-country design of
  the project and the possibility of one country’s shifting priorities or weak performance could impact the
  success of the entire project.

  The project’s preparation time was over 32 months. According to the ICR (para. 80) reasons for the
  lengthy preparation time included: i) the project countries and financial instrument changed several times
  during preparation; ii) borrowers needed to complete certain milestones including preparing safeguard
  instruments, developing manuals and establishing PIUs. For reaching those milestones countries
  required advanced financing, entailing additional Bank and country approval processes; iii) countries
  were obligated to submit sector policy letters to the Bank ensuring that project-financed surveillance
  activities were in line with countries’ international legal obligations (which was a particularly lengthy
  process for Tanzania); iv) the government of Comoros had to confirm that project activities were not to
  take place in disputed areas (to comply with Bank safeguard policy OP/BP 7.60 (Projects in Disputed
  Areas), which was a lengthy process; v) long discussions internally at the Bank and between the Bank
  and SWIOFC about SWIOFC’s eligibility to receive IDA grants given its lack of legal status and fiduciary
  capacity and how to ensure its autonomy; and vi) all SWIOFC member countries had to endorse the

                                                                                                     Page 15 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SWIOFish1 (P132123)



  project’s design before approval at SWIOFC’s annual meeting. In terms of readiness for implementation,
  beyond the effectiveness conditions for preparing the Project Operations Manual, the countries had in
  place an 18-month Procurement Plan and the required safeguards instruments

  Given the moderate shortcomings at entry, including the long preparation time because of factors that
  were in part within the control of the World Bank, and the partial risk assessment, the overall Quality at
  Entry is rated as Moderately Satisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 According to the ICR (para. 108) the Bank team included fiduciary, operational, and technical exports to
 supervise the project in all three countries. Some Bank staff were located in-country, which allowed for
 continuous support. On average, the Bank team conducted supervision missions to Comoros three times
 per year, to Mozambique and Tanzania twice per year, and to IOC once per year. The Bank team provided
 intensive technical assistance in Mozambique and Tanzania to strengthen implementation capacity during
 the first half of project implementation, and to Comoros during the second half of project implementation.
 The ICR (para. 108) stated that Implementation Supervision Reports (ISRs) were candid and identified
 implementation bottlenecks.

 The Bank team restructured the project, mostly to reallocate/reorganize the budget and adjust the Results
 Framework to better reflect project activities. Weaknesses during supervision included insufficient attention
 to grievance redress in Comoros, which led to suboptimal handling of grievances, and a lack of a
 completion mission in Tanzania due to insufficient supervision budget.

 The overall Quality of Supervision is rated as Moderately Satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The project’s objective was clearly specified. Also, the project’s theory of change and how key
 activities/outputs were to lead to intended outcomes was sound and reflected in the Results Framework.
 The selected indicators encompassed all outcomes of the PDO statement and were sufficiently specific,
 measurable, had baselines, when available, and targets. Most PDO and intermediate outcome indicators

                                                                                                    Page 16 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SWIOFish1 (P132123)



 were adequate to capture the project’s contribution to achieving the objective. The Results Framework had
 some shortcomings: (i) the definition of fisheries management plan implementation was complex; ii)
 inaccuracies in the definition of co-management targets in Mozambique; iii) the indicator that measured
 infraction rate reduction was inadequate for fishing activity control since in some cases enhanced
 surveillance efforts increased the number of reported infractions before reducing it; and iv) for Mozambique
 the beneficiary target did not accurately reflect the project’s geographic focus. Also, some of the
 targets (“number of target community individuals participating in value chain enhancement through project
 initiatives) were not sufficiently ambitious, resulting in significantly exceeding the target.

 According to the PAD (p. 18) the Regional Implementation Unit (RIU) and the National Implementation
 Units (NIUs) were to collect and present data and reports for six-monthly reviews by the Regional Steering
 Committee (RSC) and National Steering Committees (NSCs) in conjunction with World Bank
 implementation support missions.



b. M&E Implementation
  The project was restructured four times to modify the Results Framework and adapt indicators to ensure
  that they were relevant and realistic. However, according to the ICR (para. 97) when the original fisheries
  management indicator was replaced with the relevant corporate results indicator, the target for
  management plan implementation was overly ambitious given the countries’ implementation capacity.

  According to the ICR (para. 98), the project’s M&E data were of good quality. However, during the first
  half of project implementation, Comoros and Mozambique experienced M&E related challenges due to
  the complexity of some indicators and low M&E capacity at the PIUs. The RIU submitted semi-annual,
  mid-term, and completion reports, as well as financial reports and budget, work plans, and procurement
  plans to the World Bank, Global Environmental Facility Secretariat, and the RSC.



c. M&E Utilization
  According to the ICR (para. 99) M&E data were used to measure countries’ progress towards achieving
  the project’s objective as well as regional progress and to inform decision making. Also, M&E data were
  used to identify implementation bottlenecks such as identifying the need to restructure the project.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as category B and triggered the Bank’s safeguard policies OP/BP 4.01
   (Environmental Assessment), OP/BP 4.04 (Natural Habitats), OP/BP 4.09 (Pest Management), OP/BP 4.11
   (Physical Resources), and OP/BP 4.12 (Involuntary Resettlement).


                                                                                                   Page 17 of 21
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    SWIOFish1 (P132123)



  According to the ICR (para. 101) the project prepared Environmental and Social Management Frameworks
  (ESMFs) to provide guidance on site- or activity-specific environmental and social safeguards instruments.
  Also, the project prepared Environmental and Social Management Plans to mitigate environmental and
  social risks of project activities. The ICR stated that several activities required full environmental impact
  assessments to receive certificates or clearances in accordance with the national impact assessment
  guidelines and procedures.

  The ICR (para. 102) stated that the project did not fully comply with OP/BP 4.12 (Involuntary Resettlement).

  Comoros: As required, the government prepared a Resource Access Restriction Plan which identified,
  together with affected communities, alternative livelihood activities. A fish market in Moroni-Hankounou was
  constructed, which did not comply with OP/BP 4.12 since the environmental and social impact screening did
  not state that due to the construction, some households were required to relocate. Also, no instrument was
  developed to manage the relocation.

  Tanzania: Rehabilitation works of the Tumbe and Nungwi fish markets did not comply with OP/BP 4.12
  since the works were completed without the required preparation and implementation of a temporary
  relocation plan or 96 market vendors who had been relocated to areas close by. The Bank requested the
  government to conduct a social audit to identify gaps in compliance with OP/BP 4.12. It was found that no
  substantial social or environmental damage was caused by the construction of the markets and that the
  Zanzibar Ministry of Blue Economy and Fisheries (MBEF) had started to implement the audit’s
  recommendations.

  According to the ICR (para. 103) the project established Grievance Redress Mechanisms (GRMs) in
  Mozambique and Tanzania at the local and central levels.

  Tanzania: Site-specific GRM committees used different tools including phone lines, mail, suggestion boxes,
  radio, and TV campaigns. Two complaints were made during implementation which were resolved.

  Mozambique: The project had a digital GRM system, which was monitored by the PIUs. Grievances and
  inquiries related to livelihood programs, delivery of purchased goods from suppliers, and funding and
  payment requests were made throughout implementation. All grievances had been addressed when the
  project closed.

  Comoros: While the GRM was designed and approved by the Bank, it was not established. Due to the lack
  of sufficient stakeholder awareness in regard to the GRM, grievances were resolved informally resulting in a
  lack of transparency in terms of what grievances were made and if they were resolved.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Procurement:

  According to the ICR (para. 104) the project complied with the Bank’s procurement procedures. The
  project experienced procurement related challenges in Mozambique and Tanzania during the first half of
  project implementation due to low capacity at the PIUs as well as lengthy internal approval processes,
  resulting in implementation delays. The project’s procurement performance improved from 2017 onwards

                                                                                                  Page 18 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SWIOFish1 (P132123)



   due to the hiring of experienced procurement staff, the establishment of more efficient internal approval
   processes, and the PIU having gained procurement experience.

   The project did not encounter any procurement related issues in Comoros or with the Indian Ocean
   Commission (IOC).

   Financial Management:

   According to the ICR (para. 105) the project complied with the Bank’s financial management procedures.
   During the first half of project implementation, the project experienced financial management related
   challenges in Mozambique and Tanzania due to low capacity at the PIU. As a result, the project
   experienced low disbursements. Disbursements accelerated during the second half of project
   implementation when qualified procurement staff for the PIUs was hired.

   Comoros experienced financial management related issues during the second half of project
   implementation due to insufficient procurement staff at the PIU. The external auditor made several
   recommendations which implementation was delayed due to lack of capacity at the PIU. Also, the Interim
   Unaudited Financial Reports were submitted with a delay.

   The IOC had adequate financial management arrangements in place and had sufficient capacity. However,
   IFRs and audit reports were submitted with delays.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                   IEG
                                                                                Disagreements/Comment
                                Moderately
Outcome                                               Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
                                Moderately
Bank Performance                                      Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                  Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                  ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR (p. 44-45) included several important lessons learned, which were adapted by IEG:



                                                                                                   Page 19 of 21
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       SWIOFish1 (P132123)



        Different countries’ absorption capacity and circumstances present challenges for
         regional projects. These challenges might be solved by designing country-level
         fishery projects that include a regional component. In this project, priorities and
         circumstances of countries changed during implementation, resulting in different
         implementation progress and performance levels, reducing the ability to aggregate results at
         the project level. Also, each country had to fulfill certain requirements before project
         implementation started, which countries met at different times, resulting in a lengthy
         preparation process.
        Finding the right balance between visible short-term results and long-term reforms is
         critical for the sustainability of project outcomes. In this project, in Comoros and
         Tanzania, the fisheries infrastructure budget increased during implementation since the
         governments wanted to present visible results with immediate impact on communities.
         However, exchange rate losses and COVID-19 related price increases resulted in unfished
         infrastructures and reforms.
        Local co-management structures can be an effective tool to engage communities in
         decision making and implement actions. In this project, in all three countries, agreements
         with local administrations to manage priority fisheries in assigned fishing grounds
         empowered co-management structures legally and financially.
        Ensuring sustainable regional integration requires a financial commitment by
         countries. SWIOFC, despite several years of support through other Bank projects, is still
         dependent on donor financing since member countries face several competing budgetary
         demands and the advantages of regional cooperation have not been sufficiently understood.
         To ensure the sustainability of SWIOFC, it would be beneficial to cost SWIOFC’s core
         actions, define annual government contributions, with donors financing any gap.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provided an adequate overview of project preparation and implementation of a complex project. The
ICR was internally consistent and included an appropriate Economic analysis. The ICR could have benefitted
from stating why the target of the intermediate outcome indicator, “number of target community individuals
participating in value chain enhancement through project initiatives,” was substantially exceeded. The ICR
included useful lessons learned that can be relevant for other projects in this area. The ICR was lengthy
(40 pages vs. the recommended length of 15), which could be partially justified because of the multi-country
complex project. Overall, the quality of the ICR is rated Substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial



                                                                                                 Page 20 of 21
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
SWIOFish1 (P132123)




                                                                  Page 21 of 21
