     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Poverty Alleviation in Poor Areas (P133326)



                                                                                   Report Number: ICRR0023559

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                   Project Name
 P133326                                      Poverty Alleviation in Poor Areas

 Country                                      Practice Area(Lead)
 China                                        Agriculture and Food


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-85090                                  30-Jun-2021                                         148,313,539.33

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 23-Jun-2015                                 30-Jun-2022

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                               150,000,000.00                                            0.00

 Revised Commitment                                148,313,539.33                                            0.00

 Actual                                            148,313,539.33                                            0.00




 Prepared by                  Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Hassan Wally                 Avjeet Singh                  Avjeet Singh                   IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) of the Poverty Alleviation and Agriculture-based Industry Pilot and
   Demonstration in Poor Areas Project as articulated in the Loan Agreement (LA, page 5) was identical to the
   one stated in the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, paragraph 13) and aimed to:

   "develop and demonstrate rural value chains that promote equitable organizational arrangements,
   participation, and the sustainable increase of income of target households in the Project Provinces."


                                                                                                    Page 1 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Poverty Alleviation in Poor Areas (P133326)



   Parsing the PDO. The PDO will be parsed based on the following three objectives:

   1. To develop rural value chains.

   2. To demonstrate the promotion of equitable organizational arrangements and participation in the project-
   supported value chains.

   3. To achieve sustainable increase of income of target households.




b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The PDO was supported by the following four components:

   1. Integrated Value Chain Development (appraisal cost: US$195.70 million, actual cost: US$204.20
   million). This component supported (a) farmer cooperative formation and strengthening, development of
   functional offices, and value addition: provision of financing to agro-enterprises for investments in
   commercial processing, storage, and packaging of agricultural produce, in partnership with farmer
   cooperatives; (b) grants to the Cooperatives Development Fund (CDF) for agricultural products and
   services for value chain development; and (c) technical training and services to farmers, communities, and
   cooperatives through qualified agricultural enterprises.

   2. Public Infrastructure and Services (appraisal cost: US$66.90 million, actual cost: US$59.90
   million). This component supported (a) public infrastructure including construction of production roads,
   irrigation and drainage infrastructure, and establishment of information and communication technology and
   (b) public services including development and operationalization of food testing certification facilities and
   carrying out of agricultural research and technology transfer and studies for market exploration,
   development, and product marketing.

   3. Research, Training and Extension (appraisal cost: US$0.7 million, actual cost: US$0.7
   million). This component supported learning and dissemination of project implementation lessons to
   support the implementation of China’s national poverty reduction strategy through analytical studies;
   capacity building of government line agencies, entrepreneurs, and public sector institutions; technical
   assistance and training to farmers and agricultural technicians, including the review and improvement of
   investment proposals for key commodity value chains; and preparation of policy and appraisal guidelines for
   public sector support in rural areas.


                                                                                                    Page 2 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Poverty Alleviation in Poor Areas (P133326)



   4. Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation (appraisal cost: US$10.00 million, actual cost:
   US$5.70 million). This component supported institutional strengthening and capacity building of the Project
   Management Offices (PMOs) at the county, municipal, and provincial levels.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project Cost. Total project cost was estimated at US$295.10 million, including price contingencies of
   4% averaged across the three provinces. The actual cost was US$279.51 million (ICR Data Sheet, page 2).
   The difference was due to the cost savings through competitive bidding (ICR, Annex 3).

   Financing. The project was financed through an IBRD loan worth US$150.00 million. The actual amount
   disbursed was US$148.31 million (ICR Data Sheet, page 2).

   Borrower Contribution. The Government was expected to provide counterpart funds of US$145.10 million.
   The actual amount contributed was US$131.20 million (ICR Data Sheet, page 2).

   Dates. The project was approved on June 23, 2015 and became effective six months later on December
   24, 2015. The Mid-Term Review (MTR) was conducted on September 17, 2017 which was six months
   earlier than the expected date of March 15, 2018 as reported in the PAD. The project closed on June 30,
   2022 compared to an original closing date on June 30 2021. The project was restructured once (Level 2) on
   January 22, 2020, when the amount disbursed was US$68.81 million, in order to revise the Results
   Framework, change components and cost, extend the Loan closing date by one year, reallocate
   funds between disbursement categories, change disbursements arrangements, and change the
   implementation schedule. According to the ICR (paragraph 22) the extension of the closing date was
   needed to allow the cooperatives more time "to complete the agreed investments, fully operationalize their
   value chains, and start making profit to achieve the project objectives."

    The targets for two PDO indicators were revised ICR (Tables 1). The target for PDO indicator 1 i.e., ‘Direct
   project beneficiaries’ was increased to reflect the exchange rate gains which would benefit more people
   whereas the target for the PDO indicator 2 i.e., ‘Share of project-supported cooperatives making profit in
   each year was revised from 40 to 30%’ due to the weak capacity of some counties. Since the original and
   revised targets were exceeded, a split rating will not be applied to assess the project outcome.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Context at Appraisal. In 2013, about 83 million people were still living in poverty, especially in the western
and inland provinces of China. The agriculture sector potential to stimulate rural transformation and reduce
rural-urban inequality was constrained by the large number of unorganized household farms, poorly
organized and scattered value chains, low technology and management standards, substandard product
quality, lack of marketing, low production volumes, and inadequate public infrastructure and services. This
project aimed to address the aforementioned challenges through investing in: developing professional
farmer cooperatives; aiding partnerships between cooperatives and the private sector for value chain


                                                                                                    Page 3 of 19
                       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                       Poverty Alleviation in Poor Areas (P133326)



development and marketing; providing public infrastructure, advisory, and extension services; and providing
capacity building, training, and research.

Previous Bank Experience. The Bank and China have had a long history of cooperation in different
sectors including infrastructure, environment, irrigation and agriculture. This project builds on a body of
Bank-funded project experiences and knowledge that was built up in recent years on pro-poor value chain
development, emphasizing the complementary roles of the public and private sectors.

Consistency with Bank Strategies. At appraisal, the PDO was in line with the Bank Group’s Country
Partnership Strategy (CPS, FY2013–FY2016) for China. The project supported the CPS’ strategic theme
two: promoting more inclusive development, by geographically focusing on lagging regions and small towns
and by supporting policies and demonstration projects that address inequalities. It also contributed to the
CPS outcome 2.3: enhancing opportunities in rural areas and small towns, by piloting new ways to boost
rural incomes and reduce poverty under the umbrella of the new Poverty Reduction for China’s Rural Areas
Strategy (2011-2020) and by promoting inclusive innovation to decrease disparities.
At completion, the PDO continued to be in line with Bank Group's Country Partnership Framework (CPF,
FY2020-FY2025). Specifically, it supported two of three CPF engagement areas, namely, promoting
greener growth and sharing the benefits of growth. The project also supported three objectives:
2.3. Demonstrating sustainable agriculture practices and improving food system quality and safety; 2.4:
Strengthening Sustainable Natural Resource Management; and 3.2. Enhancing the quality of early learning
and skills development programs.

Consistency with Government Strategies/ Priorities. At appraisal, the PDO was in line with China’s 12th
Five Year Plan. The PDO was also in line with the Outline for Development-oriented Poverty Reduction for
China’s Rural Areas (2011- 2020) issued by the CPC Central Committee, and the Views on Promoting
Rural Poverty Alleviation through Innovative Mechanism, issued by the General Office of the CPC Central
Committee and the General Office of the State Council, as well as provincial strategies and programs for
rural development and poverty reduction of Sichuan, Guizhou and Gansu Provinces.

At completion, the PDO continued to be in line with the national priorities outlined in China’s 14th Five Year
Plan (2021–2025). The plan recommended agriculture modernization and integrated rural development,
including development of agricultural value chains led by farmer cooperatives in collaboration with private
sector investments. The PDO was also in line with China’s national Outline for Development-oriented
Poverty Reduction for China’s Rural Areas (2011–2020)’, which sought to capitalize on the potential of the
agriculture sector to stimulate further rural transformation and modernization. The plan featured three main
areas: (a) the use of agriculture value chains to capture opportunities for poverty reduction; (b) development
of specialized farmer organizations /cooperatives; and (c) expansion of the existing system of geographical
poverty targeting of nationally or provincially designated national poverty counties and villages. The projects
supported the aforementioned three areas and promoted a multi-sectoral development-oriented poverty
reduction approach in which rural industrialization was the key element.

Summary of Relevance of Objectives Assessment. The PDO statement was pitched at an adequate
level of ambition. At completion, the PDO continued to be in line with the Bank strategies and the
Government priorities, as explained above. Therefore, the Relevance of Objectives is rated High.


Rating Relevance TBL




Rating

                                                                                                    Page 4 of 19
                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                      Poverty Alleviation in Poor Areas (P133326)



               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                OBJECTIVE 1
                Objective
                To develop rural value chains.

                Rationale
                Theory of Change (ToC). To achieve the stated objective, the project would establish/strengthen farmer
                cooperatives, establish community-based production arrangements, and provide business, management and
                technical training and services to farmers, cooperatives, and enterprises through qualified agricultural
                enterprises. The expected outputs of these activities included: establishing 415 legally registered
                cooperatives, 451 cooperatives received CDF support, 30% of cooperatives paying out dividends, 85
                cooperatives established joint production arrangements with enterprises, and e-commerce platforms
                developed. This was expected to result in functional business-oriented cooperatives and the creation of
                productive value chains. The expected outcome would be the development of agricultural value chains.

                The achievement of the PDO was underpinned by the following four critical assumptions: 1. The enabling
                policy environment for cooperative management and sustainability would continue, 2. Farmers would be
                interested and willing to join the cooperatives, 3. Pro-poor cooperatives would be able to prepare and execute
                their commodity development and marketing plans, and 4. Private sector enterprises would be willing for
                business partnerships with the cooperatives.

                Overall, the activities stated in the ToC were linked to the outputs and the outcomes in a plausible causal
                chain. The critical assumptions were logical and realistic.

                Outputs/Intermediate Results

                        408 cooperatives were established and registered legally substantially achieving the target of
                         415. The project provided support to strengthen cooperatives by establishing systems for governance
                         and management such as holding regular cooperative assemblies, appointing a board of directors and
                         supervisors, having transparent fiduciary arrangements, and capacity building of staff. The project also
                         supported the introduction of an online financial accounting software adopted by all cooperatives.
                         This improved their financial management (FM), business planning, and decision-making processes,
                         and promoted transparency and benefit sharing with members. The cooperatives were provided with
                         equipment, quality training, and business advisory services for value chain development and
                         marketing.
                        The market linkages formed by the cooperatives were productive as evidenced by the fact that 61.5%
                         of members bought their inputs and marketed their products through the cooperatives exceeding the
                         end target of 60%. The CDF funds, in Gansu Province, the cooperatives installed 161,224 sets of
                         production equipment, constructed 14 breeding farms, and purchased production materials such as
                         high-quality seedlings, breeding stock, and organic fertilizer.


                                                                                                                   Page 5 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Poverty Alleviation in Poor Areas (P133326)




        994 km of roads were improved by the project exceeding the end target of 700 km. The counties
           reported that the improved roads reduced their travel time, production/marketing cost, and operation
           and maintenance (O&M) cost (ICR, paragraph 29).
          The cooperatives received brand names or registration for 64 products exceeding the end target of 50,
           these included: 45 green agriculture, 12 organic, and 7 Geographical Indication (GI)
           products. Branded and certified products opened new marketing opportunities for cooperatives in
           niche domestic and international markets (ICR, paragraph 30).
          The project provided 252,983 person-days of services, which was 2.5 times higher than the end target
           of 100,000 person-days.
          14 analytic studies and assessments were commissioned by the project to improve performance and
           disseminate the project learning and experience, exceeded the end target of 6.
          47 provincial/national-level knowledge-sharing seminars and workshops were organized, exceeding
           the end target of 40.

Outcome(s)

        This outcome was measured through PDO outcome indicator #4: the average score of project-
         supported cooperatives in the Management Effectiveness Tracking Tool (METT). By project
         completion, the METT average score was 63.28 significantly exceeding the original target score of 40
         (158% achievement). The METT tracked mainly the cooperatives’ development objective, business
         plan, inclusion of poor, market information and strategy, enforcement of regulations and production
         infrastructure, among other things (ICR, paragraph 26).
        The above-mentioned achievement suggests that the project was able to raise the cooperatives’
         management capacity to a higher level than anticipated at appraisal. The ICR (paragraph 27) reported
         that the improved quality/management capacity was evident in 103 cooperatives in Sichuan Province.
         These were regarded as "exemplary cooperatives with competent management, large-scale
         operations, and solid business plans." Also, in Guizhou province, 21 cooperatives were recognized
         as demonstration cooperatives, with 2 at the county, 9 at the municipal, 8 at the provincial, and 2 at
         the national level (ICR, paragraph 27).

Summary of Efficacy Assessment. The project exceeded its PDO outcome target as well as all
intermediate results indicator targets. The evidence provided in the ICR and discussed above point to the
success of the project in developing effective rural value chains. Therefore, the efficacy with which this
objective was achieved is rated High.



Rating
High


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To demonstrate the promotion of equitable organizational arrangements and participation in the project-
supported value chains.

Rationale

                                                                                                  Page 6 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Poverty Alleviation in Poor Areas (P133326)



Theory of Change (ToC). To achieve the stated objective, the project would organize cooperative
management training, and support business, management and technical training and services to farmers,
cooperatives, and enterprises through qualified agricultural enterprises. As a result of these
activities, cooperatives would have received organized management training, cooperatives would qualify to
receive CDF support, the percentage of cooperative members who would buy inputs or market production
through cooperatives would increase, and the percentage of poor households joining the cooperatives would
increase. The expected outcome would be demonstrating the promotion of equitable organizational
arrangements and participation in the project-supported value chains.

The achievement of the PDO was underpinned by the following four critical assumptions: 1. The enabling
policy environment for cooperative management and sustainability would continue, 2. Farmers would be
interested and willing to join the cooperatives, 3. Pro-poor cooperatives would be able to prepare and execute
their commodity development and marketing plans, and 4. Private sector enterprises would be willing for
business partnerships with the cooperatives.

Overall, the activities stated in the ToC were linked to the outputs and the outcomes in a plausible causal
chain. The critical assumptions were logical and realistic.

Outputs/Intermediate Results

      408 cooperatives had organized management training substantially achieving the target of 415.
      407 cooperatives received CDF support substantially achieving the target of 415.
      The project provided needs-based training and skills enhancement opportunities that benefited more
       women and poor households. The project overachieved in terms of the total amount of training and
       skills enhancement opportunities provided to cooperative members (199,654 person-times compared
       to the end target of 150,000 person-times). The proportion of female and minority members who
       received training was also higher than targeted by 149% and 148%, respectively. Also, 80% of the
       recipients of technical and production and management training were from poor households (ICR,
       paragraph 33).

Outcome

      The project put in place mechanisms to ensure equitable organizational arrangements and
       participation of women, the poor and ethnic minorities in value chains. This included eligibility criteria
       for accessing the CDF which required the cooperative’s articles of association and implementation
       plan to contain preferential policies and conditions in favor of poor households, and limits on the
       proportion of shares that non-poor households could hold. In addition, to discourage elite capture, the
       cooperatives’ management posts were voluntary with no salary and benefits; selection of tenure-
       based cooperative board and management were through ballot to improve equity and governance;
       and inclusion of women and ethnic minorities to cooperatives’ board and management positions (ICR,
       paragraph 32). As a result of these measures, 82.9% of poor households joined the cooperatives
       exceeding the end target of 60%.
      The cooperative model enhanced the members’ production skills, management capabilities, and
       business decisions and helped small holders, females and minorities overcome the market failure.
       This was demonstrated in Sichuan Province with the farmers’ successful production systems included
       1,706 ha of walnuts, 757 ha of sweet oranges, 428 ha of white konjac, 569 ha of potatoes, 23,000
       heads of Simmental cattle, 10,000 chickens, and 202,000 running pheasants. Finally, 60% of

                                                                                                   Page 7 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Poverty Alleviation in Poor Areas (P133326)



       cooperative had their members buying inputs or marketing production through cooperatives
       substantially achieving the target of 61.5%.

Summary of Efficacy Assessment. The project fully achieved or substantially achieved all the intermediate
results indicators pertaining to this objective. The evidence provided in the ICR and discussed above point to
the success of the project in demonstrating the promotion of equitable organizational arrangements and
participation in the project-supported value chains. Therefore, the efficacy with which this objective was
achieved is rated Substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
To achieve sustained increase in incomes of target households.

Rationale
Theory of Change (ToC). The activities under objectives 1 and 2 pertain to this objective. In addition, the
project would construct road, irrigation and drainage, and market infrastructure, establish communication and
information infrastructure, develop food testing certification facilities, and carry out agriculture and market
research and support technology transfer. The project would also conduct analytical studies on poverty
reduction and value chains, build value chain development capacity of government line agencies and
entrepreneurs, and provide policy and appraisal guidelines for public sector support to rural areas. The
outputs of the afore-mentioned activities included: 700 km of production roads built/improved, e-commence
platforms established, 64 agriproducts issued branding names or receiving certification, advisory services
provided to cooperatives on regular basis, the completion of 14 analytical studies completed and
disseminated, and 40 national/provincial-level workshop and seminars completed. This would contribute to
functional business-oriented cooperatives, creation of productive value chains, and increase access of
cooperatives to infrastructure and services to optimize value chains. The expected outcome was achieving a
sustainable income increase of target households.

The achievement of the PDO was underpinned by the following four critical assumptions: 1. The enabling
policy environment for cooperative management and sustainability would continue, 2. Farmers would be
interested and willing to join the cooperatives, 3. Pro-poor cooperatives would be able to prepare and execute
their commodity development and marketing plans, and 4. Private sector enterprises would be willing for
business partnerships with the cooperatives.

Overall, the activities stated in the ToC were linked to the outputs and the outcomes in a plausible causal
chain. The critical assumptions were logical and realistic.

Outputs/Intermediate Results

      217 cooperatives with production arrangements with enterprise partners significantly exceeding the
       target of 100.


                                                                                                  Page 8 of 19
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  Poverty Alleviation in Poor Areas (P133326)




     199,654 cooperative members were trained, by gender and ethnic minority (person-times, cumulative)
        significantly exceeding the target of 150,000.
       994 km of production/tractor roads were built or improved by the project significantly exceeding the
        target of 700 km.
       252,983 persons-days of advisory services provided to cooperatives (cumulative) significantly
        exceeding the target of 100,000.
       63 agro-products received brand naming or certification issued under the project exceeding the target
        of 50.
       41 analytical studies were completed/and disseminated exceeding the target of 6.
       47 provincial/national seminars/workshops were completed exceeding the target of 40.
       48,371 training (person-times) in project management were completed by PMO staff at all levels
        significantly exceeding the target of 10,000.

Outcome(s)

     The project promoted a productive partnership (company + cooperative + farmer) model and contract
        farming along with a stable production/sales relationship for farmers’ integration into the market. By
        project completion, 289 out of 408 cooperatives were profitable (71.2% exceeding the end target of
        30%, PDO Indicator 2). In Gansu, 77.2% of cooperatives were profitable, followed by 62.5% in
        Guizhou and 59.2% in Sichuan (ICR, paragraph 34). Attracting private investments by
        the cooperatives was demonstrated by more than double the number of private enterprises signing
        contracts with cooperatives than targeted (217 enterprises against the end target of 100). A total of
        US$208.4 million was invested in the comprehensive value chain development, exceeding the end
        project investment target by 4.9%.
       The e-commerce platform promoted and supported by the project allowed the cooperatives in remote
        areas to access remunerative markets. The success of the value chains was also demonstrated by
        the fact that 63% of cooperatives were paying dividends to their members against the end target of
        30%. In Sichuan, 38 of the 61 profitable cooperatives paid dividends to their members. In Guizhou, 21
        of the 25 profitable cooperatives paid a dividend of US$60 per member to 6,627 members (ICR,
        paragraph 34).
       The ICR (paragraph 35) reported that incomes of member households increased sustainably, with
        24.5% contribution to the incremental increase in the farm income against the end target of 25% (PDO
        Indicator #3). Household income increases mainly resulted from: cooperatives providing cheaper
        production materials to members, households providing raw materials and labor to the cooperatives,
        value chains providing full-time/partial employment opportunities, farmers receiving higher farm gate
        prices, and dividend income accruing to the members (ICR, paragraph 35).
       According to the ICR (paragraph 36) "the cooperatives accorded higher priority to poor households
        and offered them more income earning and employment opportunities." Under the project support,
        80% of poor households received training in production technology and 81% benefitted from
        production and operation information services. Also, 56% of ethnic minority members obtained their
        means of production from the cooperatives with a saving of US$507 in production costs.
       The poor households also benefited from the cooperatives' provision of product protection prices with
        the flexibility to sell their produce at a higher price in the market. In 2021, poor households were paid
        an average dividend of US$30 per household which was 7.4% higher than the average dividend of
        US$28 paid to non-poor households. In Sichuan, the ratio of cooperatives with preferential equity and
        dividend allocation to poor households was 42.9 and 41.8%, respectively (ICR, paragraph 36).

                                                                                                   Page 9 of 19
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Poverty Alleviation in Poor Areas (P133326)




                                  The number of direct beneficiaries reached 699,163 members exceeding the end target of 500,000 by
                                    140%. The project also exceeded the end target of poor and minority direct beneficiaries by 116 and
                                    145%, respectively (PDO Indicator #1). Finally, a 97% majority of the beneficiaries were satisfied with
                                    the services and benefits provided by the project against a target of 80% satisfaction (PDO Indicator
                                    #5).

                            Summary of Efficacy Assessment. The project exceeded its PDO outcome indicator targets pertaining to
                            this objective. Also, most of the intermediate results indicator targets were either met or exceeded. Overall,
                            the evidence provided in the ICR pointed to the success of the project in achieving an increase in incomes of
                            target households. However, more time is needed to demonstrate that the increase in household income is
                            sustainable. In a further communication, the project team explained that "by organizing farmers into business
                            oriented cooperatives and linking cooperatives to enterprises (for value addition and access to market) the
                            project helped beneficiaries increase income. This contractual arrangements between cooperatives and
                            enterprises can help sustain farmers’ incomes." Therefore, the efficacy with which this Objective was
                            achieved is rated Substantial.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Overall efficacy is rated Substantial. The project was successful to develop rural value chains(Objective 1),
                            demonstrate these were equitable and inclusive (Objective 2), and achieve an increase in incomes of target
                            households, that was expected to be sustainable (Objective 3).



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



   5. Efficiency
   Economic and Financial Analysis (EFA)

   ex ante

                               The overall Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR), taking into account all overhead costs, was
                                estimated at 17.3%, with a Net Present Value (NPV) of RMB721 million. Financial rates of returns
                                (FRRs) at the production level ranged from 6.1% to 38.8%.



                                                                                                                             Page 10 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Poverty Alleviation in Poor Areas (P133326)



      The analysis featured a standard cost-benefit analysis of various value chain production systems in the
       project areas was carried out to assess the project’s economic impact. The analysis has therefore
       calculated the financial and economic viability of a range of typical farming activities for the identified
       value chains on a household or per hectare basis.
      Benefits would result from: (a) the adoption of new production standards and technology packages,
       leading to increased output and increased factor productivity; (b) reduced post-harvest losses; (c)
       improved produce processing and/ or packaging; (d) better access to services, markets,
       and information; (e) reduced transaction costs; (f) improved product quality and producer (farmgate)
       prices; (g) higher production values through market differentiation (e.g., through product certification,
       brand naming etc.), and (g) advantages from economies of scale.
      Sensitivity analysis. The economic return was not very sensitive to increases in the project investment
       costs. A cost increase of 10% would reduce the EIRR by 1.6% and a cost increase of 20% would reduce
       the EIRR by 3.1%. The project’s economic viability, however, was sensitive to changes in the agricultural
       product prices. For example, if all output prices would drop by 10% the EIRR would drop from 17.3% to
       11.3%.
      Overall, the PAD included a robust EFA that provided a solid justification of the project investments.

ex post

      The overall project EIRR was estimated at 17% which was above the discount rate of 6%, indicating that
       the project was economically viable and robust. The results also showed that 90% of the cooperatives
       (66 out of the 73 sampled) were financially viable with a financial internal rate of return (FIRR) above 8%.
       However, the ex post EIRR could not be compared with the EIRR at appraisal as two different
       methodologies were used (ICR, Annex 4).
      The ex post financial analysis was conducted based on the operation of the cooperatives, which adopted
       a value chain approach instead of the farm/crop models of specific commodities approach used at the
       appraisal stage. Among the 408 project-supported cooperatives, 73 representative cooperatives (18% of
       the total with 32, 20, and 21 cooperatives from Gansu, Guizhou, and Sichuan, respectively) were
       selected for the analysis based on coverage of major value chains; scope, size, and age of cooperatives;
       and duration of operation and geographic location.
      There was no ex post sensitivity analysis because according to the ICR (Annex 4) "the output prices
       were conservatively estimated and the cooperative investment costs were actual, which did not give rise
       to more variations to be assumed."
      Overall, the ex post analysis provided enough justification for the project investments.

Implementation efficiency. The project required a one-year extension. The ICR (paragraph 42) noted that the
extension was needed to "fully complete all planned investments and realize the intended objective of
institutional learning and demonstration."

Summary of Efficiency Assessment. The ex post EIRR was estimated at 17% which was higher than the
discount rate at 6%. While the ex post EIRR was almost similar the estimate at appraisal (17.3%), both rates
were not comparable due to different methodologies. Overall, Efficiency is rated Substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial

                                                                                                     Page 11 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Poverty Alleviation in Poor Areas (P133326)




a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)            *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                       0
Appraisal                                                   17.30
                                                                                        Not Applicable
                                                                                       0
ICR Estimate                                                17.00
                                                                                        Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of Objectives was rated High. The project was successful to develop rural value chains (Objective 1),
demonstrate these were equitable and inclusive (Objective 2), and which achieved an increase in incomes of
target households, that was expected to be sustainable (Objective 3). Efficiency was rated Substantial.

Based on the assigned ratings for the three outcome criteria, the Outcome of the project is rated Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The ICR discussed the following risks that could potentially impact the Development Outcome:

1. Institutional risk. This risk relates to the need for continued institutional support and capacity building for
farmer cooperatives. Many of the farmer cooperatives supported by the project have not yet established
sustainable sales and marketing channels as they have focused more on investing in the production process
than on developing market linkages. With farmer cooperatives at various stages of development, they are
expected to require further guidance, technical backup, and training to be sustainable. The provincial PMO is
committed to providing continued management, technical, and business support to the cooperatives,
including linking them to markets. Also, the provincial governments issued a directive in August 2022 for the
O&M and management of assets created by the poverty reduction programs for sustainability (ICR,
paragraph 63).

2. Financial risk. This risk relates to the cooperatives’ financial sustainability. By project completion, many
farmer cooperatives are still not financially sustainable enough to absorb the market risks. This risk is
expected to be mitigated through private-sector linkages and co-financing arrangements, which would
provide the cooperatives with clear business rationale, sound management, and business planning to
enhance market competitiveness for longer-term sustainability. The provincial governments have committed


                                                                                                      Page 12 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Poverty Alleviation in Poor Areas (P133326)



to facilitating partnerships between the cooperatives and private enterprises going forward (ICR, paragraph
64).




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
        Strategic Relevance and Approach. The project was strategically relevant and in line with Bank
            strategies and Borrower priorities for the agriculture sector (see section 3 for more details). The
            project supported three elements of the China’s poverty reduction strategy (2011-2020)
            namely, the use of agriculture value chains to capture the opportunities for poverty reduction, the
            development of specialized farmer organizations, and supporting poor households.
           Technical, Financial, and Economic aspects. The project addressed a number of market
            failures related to barriers to entry, stakeholder diversity in combination with weak organizational
            structures, and imbalance in access to knowledge and information of poverty households. The
            project design featured an integrated development approach, combining infrastructure investment,
            institutional strengthening, and value chain development for poverty reduction. Design aimed to
            leverage private sector investments, for viability and sustainability of the value chains. The PAD
            included a robust economic and financial analysis that justified the project investments.
           Poverty, Gender, and Social development aspects. The project aimed to reduce rural
            poverty by capitalizing on the agriculture sector potential for stimulating modernization of
            agriculture and reducing rural-urban inequality. Design supported targeting of benefits to
            specifically include poor households to ensure inclusion. This included eligibility criteria for
            receiving CDF support, where a cooperative’s articles of association and implementation plan
            must reflect preferential policies and conditions for poor households. Design also featured a
            gender-sensitive approach to ensure women’s equal participation and empowerment.
           Environmental and Fiduciary Aspects. The project design included appropriate environmental
            and social risk assessments with adequate mitigation strategies.
           Implementation Arrangements. Implementation arrangements at the central, provincial
            municipality, and county levels were adequate. The PAD reflected clear articulations of
            responsibilities for each management level. According to the ICR (paragraph 49) "the
            implementation arrangements were effectively designed with responsibilities clearly defined for
            the PMOs at all levels."
           Risk Assessment. The overall risk rating was Substantial. Identified risks related to three main
            areas: stakeholders, implementing agency and project risks. According to the ICR (paragraph 49)
            "risks to the PDO achievement were well identified, along with the mitigation measures
            incorporated into the project design."
           M&E Arrangements. Institutional responsibilities for M&E were well defined. However, M&E
            design had suffered from minor shortcomings in the formulation of PDO indicators and IRIs (see
            section 9a for details).

  Summary of QAE Assessment. The project was strategically relevant with a clear PDO. The project
  design relied on an integrated development approach, combining infrastructure investment, institutional
  strengthening, and value chain development for poverty reduction. Design reflected adequate


                                                                                                     Page 13 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Poverty Alleviation in Poor Areas (P133326)



  environmental and fiduciary aspects. Also, poverty and gender aspects were adequately covered.
  Implementation arrangements were clearly articulated, and risks were well identified along with adequate
  mitigation measures. M&E had some design shortcomings. Overall, QAE is rated Satisfactory with minor
  shortcomings.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
       The Bank team conducted 14 implementation support missions (ISMs) throughout the project.
        These included regular missions with field visits. ISMs were conducted virtually during the COVID-
        19 restrictions. Overall, all the Bank provided careful review and rating of the project implementation
        progress (ICR, paragraph 61).
       The Bank team provided guidance and support for institutional strengthening especially in fiduciary
        management and safeguards. The team also provided strategic and operational guidance to
        improve project performance through identifying implementation shortcomings and recommending
        appropriate solutions (ICR, paragraph 61).
       However, the project could have benefited from an earlier attention to M&E shortcomings.

 Summary of Quality of Supervision Assessment. The Bank team successfully guided the project to
 achieve the project objectives. The team provided support to address implementation bottlenecks and
 virtually guided the project through the COVID-19 restrictions. However, the Bank could have addressed
 M&E shortcomings at an earlier stage. Overall, Quality of Supervision is rated Satisfactory.

 Based on the assigned rating to QAE and Quality of Supervision, Bank Performance is rated Satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
      The PAD did not include a Theory of Change (ToC) as it was not required by the Bank at the time of
        appraisal. Nonetheless, the ICR included a ToC that was constructed based on the project
        activities, outputs, and outcomes as described in the PAD. The ToC also included the underlying
        assumptions that underpinned the achievement of the PDO. Overall, the ToC had clear links
        between the stated activities, outputs, intermediate outcomes and project development outcomes.

                                                                                                   Page 14 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Poverty Alleviation in Poor Areas (P133326)



        The PDO was measured through four PDO outcome indicators: (i) Number of beneficiaries by
         gender, poverty level and ethnic status (outreach indicator); (ii) Share of project-supported
         cooperatives making a profit (financial success and sustainability indicator); (iii) Incremental farm
         income generated by project activities (economic success indicator); and (iv) Cooperative
         management effectiveness, measured by the Management Effectiveness Tracking Tool
         (institutional development and sustainability indicator). These four indicators were directly
         connected to the PDO, measurable and had reasonable targets. However, equitable organizational
         arrangements and sustainable increase of income lacked clearly defined measurable indicators
         (ICR, paragraph 53).
        The Results Framework (RF) included fifteen intermediate results indicators (IRIs) to track the
         progress of the project and measure achievements of different activities. Overall, the IRIs were
         measurable and most were connected to the supported activities. However, the IRIs were
         disproportionately assigned with 8 IRIs covering activities under component 1, and 7 IRIs for
         components 2, 3, and 4 together (ICR, paragraph 53). However, some supported activities were not
         tracked including irrigation and drainage.
        According to the ICR (paragraph 53) "institutional responsibilities for M&E were well defined with
         the provincial PMO for overall planning, coordination, and M&E implementation; external agencies
         for independent assessments."
        Overall M&E design was adequate with some shortcomings related to the formulation of PDO
         indicators and the IRIs.



b. M&E Implementation
       The project contracted external entities to conduct an independent evaluation of project
           interventions at three stages: a baseline at project start, a follow-up before midterm, and a final
           round at completion (ICR, paragraph 54).
          Data on the implementation progress was entered into the management information system
           (MIS) with a delay. This resulted in a lag between the actual progress on the ground and the
           recorded progress through the MIS. The project adopted the METT tool to review cooperatives
           governance and management effectiveness.
          The project appointed one M&E officer in each PMO. The ICR (paragraph 54) noted there were
           some inconsistencies for a few IRIs in the MIS records and ISRs, which were verified and rectified
           during the preparation of the ICR.
          Restructuring and Revision of the RF. A level 2 project restructuring took place in January 2020. It
           included a revision of PDO indicators and intermediate results indicators. The four PDO indicators
           had minor revisions to simplify measurement and/or reflect changes in the implementation
           environment. Also, a fifth PDO "Percentage of beneficiaries satisfied with the services provided by
           the project" was added. In addition, 11 IRIs were revised to reflect new government priorities
           and/or new slightly increased/decreased targets that better reflect actual achievements on the
           ground.
          Overall, M&E implementation was adequate.



c. M&E Utilization

                                                                                                    Page 15 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Poverty Alleviation in Poor Areas (P133326)



        M&E data were used to assess the project’s implementation status and progress toward the
         achievement of the PDO achievement. Also, M&E reports informed project management on
         implementation issues that required additional efforts and resources (ICR, paragraph 55).
        M&E provided relevant information on the profitability of the cooperatives to assess their
         financial viability and sustainability. Furthermore, the METT data provided key information to
         assess cooperatives governance and management effectiveness.
        Finally, the M&E system facilitated the identification of the best practices for replication and
         scaling up. The ICR did not elaborate on the best practices that were scaled up. In a further
         communication, the project team explained that best practices included: “(a) Comprehensive
         inclusive pro-poor value chain development approach adopted by the project from mobilizing
         poor and marginalized farmers into business oriented cooperatives, establish industrial chain
         model (farmer + cooperative + company) from farm to fork has been very well received by the
         government and communities and has opened new avenues for poverty alleviation of poor
         communities/remote areas in China; (b) Cooperatives entering into business partnerships with
         private sector/enterprise and attracting investments, improved technology, better management
         practices and better access to markets and using the services of high quality
         professional/technical experts is a good practice of establishing competitive value chains of high
         quality; (c) Establishing farmer cooperatives with dual purpose of being commercially successful
         as well as equitable/pro-poor with higher percentage of benefits to the poor and minority
         households; and (d) Branding and certification of cooperative products as a sign of high quality
         and entry to niche markets earned higher profits for the cooperatives."

  Summary of M&E Quality. M&E design had some shortcomings that were mostly addressed at
  restructuring. M&E implementation was effective and gathered enough information to assess the
  achievement of the PDO. M&E utilization was adequate as M&E data informed management decisions
  and helped to identify best practices for scaling up. Overall, M&E Quality is rated Substantial.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as an environmental Category B-partial assessment since the project
   interventions were primarily of small scale, and any negative environmental impacts would be readily
   avoided and mitigated. The project triggered three environmental safeguards policies: Environmental
   Assessment (OP/BP 4.01), Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04), and Pest Management (OP 4.09). In addition,
   the project triggered two social safeguards policies: Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) and Involuntary
   Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12). The following documents were prepared as part of the mitigation measures:
   Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF), An Ethnic Minority Development Plan (EMDP), an Environmental
   Management Plan (EMP) Environmental Management Framework (EMF) and a Pest Management Plan
   (PMP).

   Compliance with Environmental and Social Safeguards. According to the ICR (paragraph 57) "all
   applicable environmental and social safeguards policies were complied with, and the overall performance

                                                                                                  Page 16 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Poverty Alleviation in Poor Areas (P133326)



   was Satisfactory." The project provided capacity-building support and training to strengthen the initially
   limited safeguards implementation capabilities of PMOs. "No major safeguards issues arose during
   implementation (ICR, paragraph 57)."




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management (FM). The project's FM performance was adequate and provided accurate and
   timely information throughout the implementation period (ICR, paragraph 58). Financial reporting was in
   line with the Ministry of Finance regulations and requirements of the Loan Agreement. FM benefited
   from regular guidance, training, and support by the Bank. According to the ICR (paragraph 58) "all project
   audit reports came with unqualified audit opinion."

   Procurement. The project followed procurement procedures and complied with the Bank's guidelines
   (ICR, paragraph 59). Procurement mitigation measures were implemented, and no significant procurement
   issues were noted throughout implementation (ICR, paragraph 59).




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None.



d. Other
   The ICR notes that the project demonstrated "building a foundation for rural revitalization". The project
   interventions and cooperatives’ businesses created many job opportunities for young people to work close
   to home, which increased their household income, enabled them to take care of their families (that is, left-
   behind children and aged family members), and also built (young) local human resource for rural
   development (ICR, paragraph 48).



11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                   IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                          Satisfactory         Satisfactory

Bank Performance                 Satisfactory         Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                   Substantial          Substantial

Quality of ICR                   ---                  Substantial




                                                                                                    Page 17 of 19
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Poverty Alleviation in Poor Areas (P133326)



12. Lessons

The ICR included four lessons. The following three are emphasized with some adaptation of
language:

1.The METT proved to be a useful instrument to systematically assess the cooperatives’ in
order to establish professional farmer institutions. Building professional farmer institutions
takes time and concerted efforts including capacity building and business development plans duly
supported by technical and advisory services. The METT allows targeted guidance and support
to farmer institutions for improving capacity. This needs to proceed at a pace and in a manner
according to the knowledge/skills base and absorptive capacity of the target group which is often
overestimated.

2.Improving public infrastructure and services not only enhanced local connectivity and
mobility, but also achieved economies of scale; and reduced production and transport costs.
Farmer cooperatives benefitted from the improved infrastructure and support services provided by
the provincial governments to complement the project investments. Improved roads, irrigation and
drainage, internet, utilities, quality testing and certification facilities, and extension services improved
local farmers’ and cooperatives’ mobility, product processing and value addition, and access to input
and output markets; and reduced pre- and post-harvest losses.

3. Effective links to markets is a critical element to ensure sustainable business success.
Through developing the entire value chain and establishing successful market connections, the
cooperatives were able to sell their products at better prices in the niche domestic and international
markets and earn higher profits. There are several key ingredients to this success including:
business contracts with the private sector to invest in their value chains; registration of the
trademark/brand name as a mark of high quality and recognition of the product; quality certification,
that is, green product and organic product; and the use of all avenues (traditional wholesale
markets, direct sales to supermarkets and businesses, and e-commerce channels) to access local,
regional, national, international, and niche markets.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

Quality of Evidence. The ICR relied on the M&E data to assess the project outcomes. Overall, the quality of
M&E data was adequate.

Quality of Analysis. The ICR provided a clear linkage between evidence and findings and used the evidence
base to serve the arguments under the different sections, particularly the discussion on outcomes.




                                                                                                        Page 18 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Poverty Alleviation in Poor Areas (P133326)



Lessons. Lessons reflected the project experience and were based on evidence and analysis.

Results Orientation. The ICR included a comprehensive discussion on the achievement of the PDO. The
outcome discussion was well balanced between what the project achieved on the ground and the achievement
of outcome indicators.

Consistency with guidelines. The ICR used the available data to justify most of the assigned ratings. The ICR
did not report why a split rating was not applied even though the PDO outcome indicators were revised.

Conciseness. The ICR provided a thorough yet concise coverage of project activities, and candidly reported
on shortcomings. However, the ICR did not elaborate on the best practices that were scaled up.

Summary of the Quality of ICR Assessment. The ICR was well written. It used the available M&E data
to discuss the project achievements. The discussion on the achievement of outcomes was detailed, and the
ICR reflected relevant lessons. Reporting on M&E could have benefited from further details. Overall, the Quality
of the ICR is rated Substantial with minor shortcomings.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                  Page 19 of 19
