     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Swachh Bharat Mission Support Operation (P153251)



                                                                               Report Number : ICRR0023495

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Program Name
 P153251                                    Swachh Bharat Mission Support Operation

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 India                                      Water


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)           Total Program Cost (USD)
 IBRD-85590                                 31-Jan-2021                                    1,259,050,833.61

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 15-Dec-2015                                30-Sep-2021

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                   Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                        1,500,000,000.00                                             0.00

 Revised Commitment                         1,259,050,833.61                                             0.00

 Actual                                     1,259,050,833.61                                             0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator       Group
 Kishore Laxmikant          Vibecke Dixon                 Ramachandra Jammi            IEGSD (Unit 4)
 Nadkarni




2. Program Context and Development Objectives

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Program Development Objective (PDO) was "to reduce open defecation in rural areas and strengthen
   MDWS capacity to manage the national SBM-G Program" (Loan Agreement Schedule 1, dated January
   15,2016 and the Project Appraisal Document para. 42, dated November 16, 2015). MDWS referred to the
   Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation. SBM-G Program referred to the national Swacch Bharat Mission -
   Gramin Program.



                                                                                                Page 1 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Swachh Bharat Mission Support Operation (P153251)



   For the ICRR, the PDO is parsed into the following objectives:

   Objective 1: To reduce open defecation in the rural areas.

   Objective 2: To strengthen the capacity of MDWS to manage the national SBM-G Program.

   The original PDO remained unchanged during project implementation. The Program-for-Results (PfR)
   operation underwent four restructurings during the implementation period. While changes were made to some
   of the PDO Indicators and Intermediate Results Indicators (IRIs), these did not lower the ambition of the
   operation. Consequently, the ICRR does not include a split evaluation.

   For the ICRR, the Government of India's (GoI) national Swacch Bharat Mission - Gramin Program will be
   referred to as the SBM-G Program and the Bank-financed Swacch Bharat Mission Support Operation
   (SBMSO) will be referred to as the SBMSO Program or simply "the Program".



b. Were the program objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during
   implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   (Reference PAD paras. 36 to 39, Annex 1 and Annex 9).

   The program scope, activities, and classification into Results Areas, as defined at appraisal, are given
   below. Changes in scope, activities, indicators and targets during implementation are discussed below in
   the sections on restructurings.

   Category 1: Performance incentives for sanitation improvements in rural areas: (PfR): (estimated cost
   at appraisal US$1,475 million; actual cost at completion US$1,249 million). This component aimed to
   provide funds to support the SBM-G's objective of recognizing and rewarding the performance of states and
   to help leverage investments made under their respective Annual Implementation Plans (AIPs). On
   achievement of key results, the Program funds were to be disbursed to MDWS to be used to incentivize the
   states based on their performance in reducing Open Defecation (OD), sustaining an Open Defecation Free
   (ODF) status, and increasing the population using Solid and Liquid Waste Management (SLWM) practices.
   Indicative activities within this category included: (i) construction and use of safe and functional individual
   household latrines; (ii) construction and use of functional community sanitary facilities; (iii) use and
   maintenance of sanitation facilities in schools, child-care centers, and public sanitation facilities; (iv)
   construction of liquid waste management facilities and systems; (v) construction of solid waste management
   facilities and systems; and (vi) behavior change related communication activities.



                                                                                                     Page 2 of 19
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Swachh Bharat Mission Support Operation (P153251)



  Category 2: Program Management and Capacity Building Support (IPF): (estimated cost at appraisal
  US$25 million; actual cost at completion US$10 million). The activities aimed to strengthen MDWS's
  capacity for effective management of the Program at the national level through development of systems and
  processes for coordination and management of the SBM-G and the Bank-financed Program. The support
  would include: (a) strengthening of the existing Project Management Unit (PMU) with key experts to
  enhance the management capacity and role of MDWS; (b) policy development; capacity
  building; communication strategies; monitoring and evaluation; (iii) introducing and strengthening the
  process of third-party independent verification and assessment of achievement of the Disbursement Linked
  Indicators (DLIs) in the Program; (iv) establishment of a robust and credible verification mechanism for
  assessment of program results; and (v) capacity building and training in thematic areas.

  The planned scope and activities above were classified into four Results Areas along with associated DLIs.
  (The DLIs are discussed later below in Section 3 on Relevance of Objectives).

  Results Area 1: Increased access to safe and functional sanitation facilities. (Supported by DLI-1: Reduction
  in the prevalence of open defecation).

  Results Area 2: Sustaining community wide Open Defecation Free (ODF) status. (Supported by DLI-2:
  Sustaining ODF status in villages).

  Results Area 3: Increased population with Solid and Liquid Waste Management (SLWM). (Supported by
  DLI-3: Increase in the rural population with improved SLWM).

  Results Area 4: Strengthened MDWS capacity in program management, advocacy, monitoring and
  evaluation. (Supported by DLI-4: Operationalization of Performance Incentive Grant Scheme by MDWS).



e. Comments on Program Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  (Reference ICR Data Sheet, ICR paras. 16 to 19).

  Program cost: The estimated program cost at appraisal was US$22,000 million. The actual cost at
  completion was US$14,640 million. (ICR Data Sheet).

  Financing: At appraisal, the Program was to be supported by an IBRD loan of US$1,500 million. At
  completion, US$1,259 million had been disbursed. (ICR Data Sheet).

  Borrower contribution: At appraisal, the contribution from the Borrower was planned at US$20,500 million.
  At project completion, the actual contribution was US$13,381 million. (ICR Data Sheet).

  Dates: The Program was approved in December 2015 and became effective in April 2016. The planned
  closing date was January 31, 2021. Following two extensions totaling eight months, the actual closing date
  was September 30, 2021. (Discussed below under Restructurings).

  Mid-Term Review (MTR): An MTR was carried out in December 2018.




                                                                                                  Page 3 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Swachh Bharat Mission Support Operation (P153251)



   Restructurings: The Program underwent four Level 2 restructurings. No changes were made to the
   Program scope and the PDO. Targets for some of the results indicators were updated. (ICR paras. 16 to
   18).

   First restructuring (July 1, 2020, disbursed amount US$1,261.80 million). An amount of US$233.77 million
   was cancelled from the IBRD loan as a result of (i) cost savings resulting from exchange rate variations
   between the INR and the USD, and (ii) the inability of MDWS to transfer more funds to the states than were
   permissible under the budgets approved in INR terms by the Government of India's (GoI's) Expenditure
   Finance Committee.

   Second Restructuring (January 28, 2021, disbursed amount US$1252.46 million). The closing date was
   extended by five months to June 30,2021 to enable the states to spend funds transferred to them by the
   Department of Drinking Water Supply (DDWS) under the Ministry of Jal Shakti (MoJS) - the implementing
   entity.

   Third Restructuring (April 12, 2021, disbursed amount US$1255.30 million). An amount of US$7 million
   was cancelled from the IBRD loan as a result of cost savings realized from exchange rate variations
   between the INR and the USD.

   Fourth Restructuring (June 30, 2021, disbursed amount US$1,255.30 million). The closing date was
   extended by three months to allow the states more time to spend the funds transferred to them.

   Changes in Intermediate Results Indicators (IRIs): The targets for some of the IRIs were updated to
   account for higher baseline estimates than originally estimated at appraisal. As a result of delays in the start
   of implementation of the National Annual Rural Sanitation Survey (NARSS) which was the principal source
   of information on the results of the Program, the baseline values for the key results indicators were
   established only in Year 3 of the Program (instead of Year 1 as originally expected). The resulting baseline
   estimates were higher than anticipated at appraisal. The end targets were updated accordingly by using the
   revised baseline values and adding the same increase or decrease as planned in the original estimates.
   Thus, there was no reduction in the original ambition of the Program. The ICR indicates (para. 18) that,
   after consulting with the Bank's Legal and OPCS departments, it was determined that no formal
   restructuring was required. The updated end targets were used to assess achievement of the results and
   outcomes.

   Other Changes: A new Ministry of Jal Shakti (MoJS) was created in May 2019 through a merger of two
   ministries, the Ministry of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation and the Ministry
   of Drinking Water Supply and Sanitation (MDWS). The DDWS replaced the former MDWS and continued to
   be responsible for program implementation. Therefore, the ICR continued to refer to MDWS as the
   implementing entity (ICR para. 19).




3. Relevance   TBL




a. Relevance of Objectives    New




                                                                                                      Page 4 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Swachh Bharat Mission Support Operation (P153251)




Rationale
(Reference PAD paras. 1 to 19 and ICR paras. 1 to 5).

Country and Sector Context: At appraisal in 2015, India had been one of the world's fastest growing
economies. The economic growth was accompanied by significant rates of poverty reduction. However, while
India had performed well in extending coverage for water supply in its rural areas, only about one-third of
India's rural households had access to improved sanitation and nearly 600 million people living in the rural
areas were defecating in open. India was home to the world's largest number of people practicing open
defecation (OD). Up to that time, sanitation programs to address the situation were largely supply-driven and
focused on individual household toilet provision. Rural sanitation is a state subject in India, but the central
government provides the bulk of the investments in the sub-sector. Progress under these earlier programs
was slow and achievements were limited as a result of weak monitoring systems, poor coordination between
the district and village administrations, and lack of attention to stimulating behavior change. To address the
situation, the Government of India (GoI) had launched in 2014 its flagship rural sanitation program - the
Swacch Bharat Mission - Gramin (SBM-G) Program with a vision to achieve Swacch Bharat (Clean India) by
targeting universal sanitation coverage in rural areas and elimination of open defecation by October 2019.
The Program transformed the situation into a peoples' movement and marked a fundamental shift in
approach by underlining the coupling of investments in physical infrastructure with stimulation of behavior
change to promote toilet use. SBM-G, the rural arm of SBM, put emphasis on a demand-driven approach to
sanitation with a strong focus on community-led behavioral change, social mobilization, and decentralized
implementation. The Program's approach to sanitation was comprehensive, including household sanitation
and hygiene, community solid and liquid waste management (SLWM), and institutional sanitation in schools,
childcare centers and public places. The World Bank financed Swacch Bharat Mission Support Operation
(SBMSO) was designed in support of the GoI's flagship SBM-G Program with a key focus on helping
incentivize states to achieve targeted results and on strengthening relevant institutional capacities at the
central, state and community levels. The SBMSO had two windows: (i) an incentives financing window to
provide funds to the MDWS to be made available to states as incentives payments and (ii) an Investment
Project Financing (IPF) window to finance technical assistance and related activities.

Alignment with National Priorities: (PAD paras. 1 to 14 and ICR paras. 3, 4). The Program Development
Objective (PDO) was consistent with the national priorities at appraisal and the GoI's flagship SBM-G
Program launched in 2014. The Bank-financed SBMSO was specifically designed to support the GoI's
national level SBM-G Program. The PDO remains consistent with the prevailing national priorities under
which the SBM-G Program continues to be a high priority. The second phase of the national SBM-G Program
(SBM-G Phase 2) was launched in March 2020 to sustain and deepen the achievements of SBM-G Phase 1.

Alignment with the Country Partnership Strategies/Frameworks (CPS/CPF): The SBMSO's PDO was
well-aligned, and remains well-aligned, with the priorities in the CPS FY2013-2017 prevailing at appraisal
and in the CPF for FY2018-2023 which remains in effect at present. The CPS for FY2013-2017 noted that
"Access to adequate water and sanitation is critical to improving the quality of life and economic potential of
all Indians". "Improved access to water supply and sanitation services" was one of the transformational
pillars of the CPS. The SBMSO's PDO remains well-aligned with the CPF FY2018-2023 currently in effect,
including the twin goals of ending extreme poverty and boosting shared prosperity. Under its Focus Area 3
(Investing in Human Capital), the CPF includes the objective "to improve access to rural water supply and
sanitation services" which are "critical prerequisites to developing human capital to unleash the growth
potential in rural areas". The SBMSO's emphasis on performance incentive grants to the states to achieve


                                                                                                   Page 5 of 19
                              Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                              Swachh Bharat Mission Support Operation (P153251)



                       results and to strengthen delivery institutions and systems at the national level are in line with the CPF's
                       approach of "engaging a federal India".

                       Relevance of PDO: Given the country and sector context, the PDO continues to be relevant in regard to the
                       currently prevailing national and CPF priorities. Considering the multi-year, multi-phase nature of the GoI's
                       overall Program, the SBMSO's PDO was pitched at an appropriate level to address the priorities under the
                       overall SBM-G Program.

                       Rationale for Program for Results (PfR) Support: The Bank financed SBMSO PfR Program was a sub-
                       part of the GoI's larger SBM-G Program. The use of a PfR approach enabled the Bank to support and help
                       incentivize key aspects of the overarching GoI program. The PfR boundaries were defined by a six-year
                       (2015-2021) implementation period as well as by the prevailing sectoral priorities. The Bank financed PfR
                       Program was designed to support the GoI's objectives of strengthening planning, implementation and
                       monitoring capacities in the MDWS and related state level institutions with a focus on community-driven and
                       demand-responsive approaches to sanitation improvement in rural areas.

                       Prior Bank Experience: The SBMSO was the result of the Bank's decades-long partnership with the GoI in
                       advancing policy dialogue, supporting investments, and providing technical assistance in the rural sanitation
                       space in India. Prior to the SBMSO, the Bank had financed several projects at the state-level in the water
                       and sanitation sector in India, including some PfR operations. At the national level, the current PfR operation
                       was preceded by the India National Ganga River Basin Project (P119085) which was completed in 2022.


       Rating Relevance TBL




                       Rating
                       High


b. Relevance of DLIs                           New




DLI RELEVANCE TBL




                DLI 1
                DLI
                Reduction in prevalence of open defecation (OD) in rural areas.

                Rationale
                The Program's Objective 1 (parsed from the original PDO) was "to reduce open defecation in rural areas".
                DLI-1 was highly relevant as it was directly linked to achievement of Objective 1 as measured by the
                reduction in open defecation in the rural areas.



                Rating
                High

                DLI 2
                DLI

                                                                                                                           Page 6 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Swachh Bharat Mission Support Operation (P153251)



Sustaining Open Defecation Free (ODF) status in villages.

Rationale
Achievement of Objective 1 (to reduce open defecation in rural areas) required a combination of (i) safe and
functional toilets and sanitary facilities at the individual household and community institution levels; and (ii)
sustained behavioral change on the part of the users of the sanitary facilities. Evidence from India and other
countries has shown that individual sanitation behaviors are significantly influenced by community norms and
behaviors. By supporting incentivization, including community-led Behavior Change Campaigns (BCCs),
aimed to achieve and maintain ODF status at a village or community-level, DLI-2 was highly relevant to
achievement of Objective 1.



Rating
High

DLI 3
DLI
Increase in the rural population with improved Solid and Liquid Waste Management (SLWM).

Rationale
In addition to a reduction in open defecation and achievement of an ODF status at the community/village
level, SLWM is critical to ensure safe and adequate water supply and sanitation to the population
concerned. Experience in India had shown that SLWM levels and practices varied widely between and within
states with serious impacts on the health and well-being of the population. DLI-3 reinforced the gains under
Objective 1 by supporting further improvements in sanitation practices and facilities
and rewarding improvements in SLWM.



Rating
High

DLI 4
DLI
Operationalization of Performance Incentive Grant Scheme by MDWS.

Rationale
A well-conceived and implemented performance-related incentive grant scheme was assessed to be
essential for incentivizing the states to satisfactorily implement the national SBM-G Program. DLI-4
contributed to Objective 1 by placing emphasis on the institutional actions and critical actions required to
operationalize the provision of performance incentive grants and the robust verification of results under DLIs
1, 2 and 3. DLI-4 also contributed to the SBMSO's Objective 2 ("to strengthen MDWS's capacity to manage
the national program" by supporting (i) issuance of SBM-G performance incentive grant scheme guidelines;
(ii) communication of verification protocols to the states; and (iii) disclosure of the Independent Verification
Agency (IVA) results.



                                                                                                    Page 7 of 19
                                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                  Swachh Bharat Mission Support Operation (P153251)




                  Rating
                  High


      OVERALL RELEVANCE DLI TBL




                  OVERALL RELEVANCE RATING
                  Rationale
                  The relevance of the PDO is rated High as it was well-aligned, and continues to be well-aligned, with the
                  national and CPS/CPF priorities at the time of appraisal and those prevailing at present. The relevance of the
                  DLIs is rated High based on the following:

                                    DLI-1 focused on achieving the targeted reduction of open defecation in rural areas.
                                    DLI-2 focused on incentivizing sustainability of toilet use through community-supported measures,
                                     including communication campaigns aimed at behavior change.
                                    DLI-3 focused on increasing the population in the rural areas that practice SLWM which is a key
                                     requirement for improved sanitation.
                                    DLI-4 focused on institutional strengthening and capacity building in MDWS and related state
                                     institutions including in planning; implementing; monitoring and evaluation; and independent
                                     verification of the Program's results.




                  Rating
                  High



   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
EFFICACY_TBL




                       OBJECTIVE 1
                       Objective
                       To reduce open defecation in the rural areas.

                       Rationale
                       At appraisal in 2015, despite India being one of the world's fastest growing economies, only about one-third of
                       its population in the rural areas had access to safe and functional sanitation services and over 600 million
                       people living in the rural areas were defecating in open. Lack of adequate sanitation facilities was adversely
                       impacting the health and well-being of the population in the rural areas. To address the situation, the GoI
                       launched an ambitious national program aimed at attaining a Swacch Bharat (Clean India) and eliminating
                       open defecation by 2019. The Bank financed PfR SBMSO was designed to support achievement of the
                       national Swacch Bharat Mission - Gramin (SBM-G) Program by (i) helping incentivize states to

                                                                                                                              Page 8 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Swachh Bharat Mission Support Operation (P153251)



achieve targeted results and (ii) strengthening relevant institutional capacities at the central, state and
community levels. In regard to Objective 1, the theory of change (TOC) was that the SBMSO would provide
inputs through provision of (i) incentive grants to be made available to the states against achievement of
targeted results and (ii) technical assistance. The outputs in regard to achievement of Objective 1 were
expected to include (i) construction and use of safe and functional individual household latrines and
community-level sanitary facilities in schools and public institutions; (ii) construction of solid and liquid waste
management facilities and systems; and (iii) carrying out of training and awareness-building activities aimed
at promoting behavioral change in the communities and population concerned to achieve an ODF status at
the community/village level. However, the states would have the discretion to use the funds according to their
needs to meet their targets with no designated targets under the SBMSO as to specific outputs. The outcome
would be a reduction in open defecation in the rural areas in the states. The longer-term outcome would be
an improvement in the health and well-being of the population in the rural areas.

Key assumptions were that (i) the GoI's priorities in regard to the national SBM-G Program would continue
into a second phase and beyond; (ii) the states would be adequately incentivized to achieve the targeted
results; (iii) communities and villages would internalize the behavioral changes required to achieve and
maintain an ODF status; and (iv) the constructed toilets and sanitation facilities would continue to be
functional and well-maintained.

The PDO indicators and IRIs associated with Objective 1 were relevant and measurable. As discussed earlier
in Section 2, the three DLIs (1,2,3) linked to Objective 1 were all relevant and measurable.

Outputs and Outcomes: (based on ICR paras. 30 to 35 and Annex 1 - Results Framework).

The outcomes for Objective 1 were to be assessed on the basis of the following PDO indicator "Reduction in
the prevalence of open defecation" (baseline 0; target 95 million persons; actual 206 million persons; target
substantially exceeded). The outputs and outcomes are discussed below under the respective Results Areas.

Results Area 1: Increased access to safe and functional sanitation facilities.

Achievements were as follows:

      Increase in the rural population having access to safe and functional sanitation facilities. (% of
       beneficiaries): (baseline 57.6%; target 87.1%; actual 74.0%; target underachieved).
      Percentage of female beneficiaries (baseline 47.8%; target 47.8%; actual 48.0%; target achieved).
      Increase in percentage of the poor and vulnerable (PAV) rural population having access to safe and
       functional sanitation (baseline 66.1%; target 88.1%; actual 87.8%; target achieved).

Results Area 2: Sustaining community wide ODF status.

Achievements were as follows:

      Number of villages sustaining ODF status (baseline 89,790; target 137,790; actual 453,292; target
       substantially exceeded). A village was verified as ODF if it met the following criteria: (i) usage of toilets
       is sustained by all households; (ii) all household and institutional toilets are maintained to remain safe
       and functional; and (iii) reduction in OD is sustained and there are no visible signs of feces in the
       village environment.


                                                                                                      Page 9 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Swachh Bharat Mission Support Operation (P153251)



Results Area 3: Increased population with Solid and Liquid Waste Management.

Achievements were as follows:

        Rural population with SLWM (baseline 255.78 million; target 371.78 million; actual 482.5 million; target
         substantially exceeded).
        Number of villages with SLWM (baseline 227,754; target 311,754; actual 371,058; target exceeded). A
         village was considered to have SLWM if (i) sampled households in the village practiced safe disposal
         of solid waste; (ii) village level observations of public places and drains showed minimal littering with
         solid wastes; and (iii) village level observations of public places and drains showed minimal signs of
         waterlogging and flooding.

Outcomes: The SBMSO achieved its Objective 1 of "reduction in the prevalence of open defecation".
Achievement of this Objective was linked to DLIs 1, 2, and 3. The target under the single PDO
indicator "reduction in the prevalence of open defecation" was substantially exceeded: (baseline 0; target 95
million persons; actual 206 million persons). Access to safe and functional toilets was a necessary but not a
sufficient condition for sustainability of the results. Thus, the achievement of Objective 1 was supported by
most of the supporting Intermediate Results Indicators (IRIs) being achieved or exceeded under each of the
three Results Areas contributing to achievement of Objective 1. The target for the percentage of poor and
vulnerable (PAV) households having access to safe and functional sanitation was almost achieved. Targets
for the number of villages maintaining ODF and SLWM status were exceeded. The one area where the target
was underachieved (74% vs 87%) was in regard to the indicator "percentage of rural households having
access to safe and functional sanitation facilities". In measuring this indicator, only access to the households'
own safe and functional toilets was considered. When shared or public targets were included, the access rate
increased to 87.8 percent. Overall, access to households' own toilets nearly doubled during the three-year
period 2015-2018. (ICR para. 30). Assessment of the achievement of targeted results was based on data
collected under the National Annual Rural Sanitation Surveys (NARSS) and verified by an Independent
Verification Agency (IVA) set up under the SBMSO. The extent of the achievements is also supported by
other household surveys that are part of the GoI's official statistics. (ICR para. 32).



Rating
High


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To strengthen the capacity of MDWS to manage the national SBM-G Program.

Rationale
Prior to the introduction of the GoI's national SBM-G Program in 2014, earlier programs and interventions in
regard to reducing open defecation and other unsatisfactory sanitation practices had generally proved
unsuccessful. One of the contributing reasons was the lack of adequate institutional capacity and systems at
the central, state, and provincial levels. In regard to Objective 2, the theory of change (TOC) was that, for
successful implementation of the SBM-G Program, it was essential to strengthen the relevant institutional
capacities and systems at the central, state and provincial levels. Under the IPF window of the SBMSO,
inputs were to be provided to MDWS for financing of technical assistance and related equipment and

                                                                                                    Page 10 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Swachh Bharat Mission Support Operation (P153251)



facilities. Principal outputs would include: (i) strengthening of planning, implementation, and monitoring and
evaluation (M&E) systems; (ii) strengthening of the PMU, including through engagement of a qualified
Program Management Consultant (PMC) firm; (iii) strengthening of the M&E system at the national level; (iv)
carrying out of National Annual Rural Sanitation Surveys (NARSS) by third parties in all states and union
territories; (v) establishment of a robust and credible verification system for assessment of the Program's
results; and (vi) assorted capacity building and training areas. The intermediate outcome would be
strengthened capacity in MDWS to implement the national SBM-G. The outcome would be improved
implementation of the SBM-G Program. The longer-term outcome would be improvement in the health and
well-being of the rural population.

Key assumptions were that (i) the states would be receptive and internalize the institutional improvements;
and (ii) the GoI's priorities regarding the SBM-G would continue into a second phase and beyond to support
sustainability of the institutional strengthening gains.

Outputs and Outcomes: (based on the ICR paras. 36 to 40 and Annex 1 - Results Framework).

The outputs and outcomes in regard to Objective 2 are discussed below under Results Area 4 (as defined at
appraisal).

Results Area 4: Strengthened MDWS capacity in program management, advocacy, monitoring and
evaluation. (Supported by DLI-4: Operationalization of Performance Incentive Grant Scheme by MDWS).

Intermediate Results Indicators (IRIs)

      Program Management Unit (PMU) strengthened and functional (baseline no; target yes; actual yes;
         target achieved).
        Integrated Management Information System (IMIS) improved and functional (baseline no; target yes;
         actual yes; target achieved).
        Behavior Change Campaign (BCC) implemented at the national level (baseline no; target yes; actual
         yes; target achieved).
        Report on grievances received and addressed (baseline no; target yes; actual yes; target achieved).
        Reports on annual program performance prepared and shared (baseline no; target yes; actual yes;
         target partially achieved).

PDO Indicator

      National Annual Rural Sanitation Survey (NARSS) conducted, and results published (baseline no;
         target 5; actual 3; target underachieved).

Outcomes: The target for the single PDO indicator was partially achieved. Against the target of five
annual rounds of the NARSS, only three were conducted due to the delay in hiring the IVA. This led to the
first NARSS starting 20 months later than planned. The ICR notes (para. 36) that, as a result,
operationalization of the performance incentive grant scheme to the states was also delayed. Subsequent to
the hiring of the IVA, a robust data generation and verification process was put in place and resulted in timely
public disclosure of results and disbursements of the performance incentive funds. The achievement of PDO
2 was supported by Intermediate Results Indicators (IRIs) as listed above which resulted in strengthening of
MDWS's capacity for implementing the SBM-G Program. Most targets under the IRIs were

                                                                                                  Page 11 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Swachh Bharat Mission Support Operation (P153251)



  achieved. However, the ICR (para. 37) notes that, while the PAD listed the criteria to measure these
  indicators, there was no systematic reporting against these criteria during the implementation of the SBMSO.
  A PMU comprising of experts across many fields was hired using the IPF funds. It supported MDWS in
  several key activities in implementation such as developing guidelines, progress monitoring through regular
  field visits, implementing BCC campaigns at the national level, and conducting training and workshops. The
  technical assistance also supported MDWS in policy development, capacity building, assessing SBM-G
  delivery capacity across states, media management, and rolling out BCC campaigns. However, the ICR notes
  that several activities related to capacity building, advocacy and training were implemented by MDWS with
  the support of other development partners primarily because of the flexibility in the use of grant financing
  offered by them and the strong field presence for local implementation support in the states. (As a result, only
  US$6 million of the US$25 million allocated under the IPF funds were utilized by MDWS). (ICR para. 40).

  Rating: Based on the foregoing, the ICRR rates the efficacy of Objective 2 as Substantial with some
  shortcomings.



  Rating
  Substantial




 OVERALL EFFICACY
 Rationale
 As discussed in Section 4, the efficacy of Objective 1 ('to reduce open defecation in rural areas") is rated
 High and the efficacy of Objective 2 ("to strengthen the capacity of MDWS to implement the SBM-G
 Program") is rated Substantial with some shortcomings.

 Based thereon, the ICRR rates the overall efficacy as Substantial.



 Rating
 Substantial


5. Outcome

The rating of the Outcome is based on underlying ratings for (i) relevance of the PDO; (ii) relevance of DLIs;
and (iii) efficacy of the PDO.

As discussed in Section 3, the relevance of the PDO is rated High and the relevance of the DLIs is rated High.

As discussed in Section 4, the efficacy of Objective 1 ("to reduce open defecation in rural areas") is rated High
and the efficacy of Objective 2 ("to strengthen MDWS's capacity to implement the SBM-G Program" is rated
Substantial with some shortcomings. Together, these yield an overall efficacy rating of Substantial.


                                                                                                    Page 12 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Swachh Bharat Mission Support Operation (P153251)



Based on the foregoing, the ICRR rates the SBMSO's outcome as Satisfactory.


    Outcome Rating
    Satisfactory


6. Risk to Development Outcome

(Reference ICR paras. 74 to 75).

Sustainability: This risk is rated High. The ICR acknowledges (para. 74) that the risk to development
outcome is sizeable. While there was a substantial reduction in open defecation during the implementation
period of the SBMSO, both quantitative and qualitative assessments conducted for the ICR show that
sustaining these achievements is a key challenge. Since 2018-2019, regular toilet use decreased by 13
percent on average in rural India. The declines were higher for the poorer sections of the rural communities.
The qualitative assessments confirmed that usage and sustainability of toilets constructed under the SBM-G
remain a challenge. The ICR observes that, while the GoI is committed to its ODF goals, the sense of
urgency, proactive leadership across administrative levels, the intensity of BCC promotion and public
messaging that were distinctive of SBM-G have eased. Further, the quality of the data collection efforts to
monitor toilet use and identify drivers of sustainability need to be enhanced.

Institutional Capacity and Commitment: These risks are rated Moderate. MDWS has recognized the
challenge to ODF sustainability and has launched SBM-G Phase 2 to implement "ODF Plus" interventions to
reinforce ODF behaviors and to deepen SLWM initiatives. While SBM-G Phase 2 has retained some of the
institutional strengthening efforts initiated under SBSMO such as hiring a PMU within MDWS, making the
PFMS and Social Audits mandatory for the states, and continued implementation of collection of citizens'
feedback at the community-level, the required commitment and effort at the state level can decline if
appropriate incentivization activities are not adequately maintained under SBM-G Phase 2.




7. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  (Reference ICR paras. 69 and 70).

  For the World Bank, the SBMSO was the first PfR operation at the national level in the sanitation sector.
  The strategic relevance and approach were sound and the operation was well-aligned (and continues to
  be well-aligned) with the national and CPS/CPF priorities. The substantial increase in the operation's
  scale and scope during preparation made the SBMSO the Bank's largest PfR operation in India. As the
  first PfR operation in the sanitation sector in India, the SBMSO introduced results-oriented and
  performance-based financing in the sector. Design of the operation recognized that construction of
  safe and functional toilets and SLWM sanitation facilities were a necessary but not a sufficient condition
  for improved sanitation practices, and placed emphasis on a consolidated approach combining provision
  of sanitation facilities along with promoting and incentivizing behavioral change at the community/village

                                                                                                   Page 13 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Swachh Bharat Mission Support Operation (P153251)



  level and institutional strengthening at the central and state government levels. In providing performance
  incentive grants to the states through MDWS, the design allowed the states to exercise discretion in
  allocating the grant proceeds to different activities subject to the states meeting the targets set under their
  Annual Implementation Plans (AIPs). The DLIs were relevant and measurable and appropriate for
  incentivizing the achievement of the targeted sanitation outcomes. The two-window approach (PfR for
  providing performance incentive grants to the states and IPF/BETA for providing funds to MDWS and the
  states for institutional strengthening activities) was appropriate in the context of the operation. One
  shortcoming during the preparation stage was that an appropriately designed evaluation system to
  systematically assess the operation's impact was not included as part of the design.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 (Reference ICR paras. 71 to 72).

 The Bank supervision team was generally proactive in the program implementation over the duration of the
 SBMSO. Given the size and scope of the overall Program, and the multiplicity and diversity of states, the
 Bank deployed significant resources to provide supervision support. This included proactive efforts to
 provide implementation support to MDWS and to selected states through the IPF and BETA components of
 the SBMSO. The Bank made special efforts to ensure the quality and credibility of the NARSS through the
 IVA which was crucial to assessment of the achievement of the targeted results and outcomes. However,
 after the planned targets were achieved and the PfR funds were fully disbursed, the NARSS was
 discontinued. The ICR acknowledges (para. 71) that more efforts could have been made to institutionalize
 the NARSS or retain its key features like the high-powered EWG (Expert Working Group) for independent
 review and quality assurance. At the request of the MDWS, the Bank team agreed to the shift in the
 BETA's focus from the states selected for support to the center, and rapid assessments of states' needs
 were suspended thereafter. While this indicates flexibility on the part of the Bank, the ICR also
 acknowledges (para. 72) that this raised questions of adequacy of the funding to support BETA activities in
 the states most in need due to their weak capacity. The ICR also reports (para. 50) that attention to PAP
 compliance was limited in the initial years of the SBMSO's operation. While the MDWS eventually complied
 with the PAPs it was responsible for, state-level compliance with the Environmental Management PAP was
 mixed.

 During the implementation period of nearly seven years, the Bank supervision team carried out a total of
 15 missions. An MTR was carried out in December 2018. The team was well-staffed with environmental,
 social and fiduciary specialists. The team had a total of three Task Team Leaders (TTLs) over the
 implementation period, and it benefited from the TTL being based in the field which allowed for better
 communication and interaction with the counterparts. The team's reporting was regular and candid with
 detailed Aide Memoires being discussed with the counterparts, and Implementation Status and Results
 Reports (ISRs) being filed in a timely manner.

 Overall, the Bank' supervision activities contributed significantly to the satisfactory achievement of the
 planned outcomes.


                                                                                                      Page 14 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Swachh Bharat Mission Support Operation (P153251)




  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


8. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 (Reference ICR paras. 55 and 56).

 The M&E design was modelled to upgrade the existing system to an Integrated Management Information
 System (IMIS) using a state-of-the -art information technology platform to monitor and track the Program's
 results related to toilet use, ODF status, and capture details of program management, financial flows,
 grievance redress mechanism (GRM), and field level implementation data. An Independent Verification
 Agency (IVA) was expected to conduct five rounds of the NARSS during the implementation period to
 collect data on key sanitation outcomes using robust and credible survey methods in line with international
 practice. The focus in M&E design was on strengthening the institutional capacity of MDWS to plan and
 monitor SBM-G activities and put in place M&E experts as required. M&E activities included thematic
 concurrent assessments, IMIS data analysis to inform program management, preparation of reports for
 MDWS, and providing the necessary oversight of the NARSS through the IVA.



b. M&E Implementation
  (Reference ICR paras. 57 to 59).

  Implementation of the M&E system was the responsibility of the PMU. While there were initial delays in
  hiring experts, the M&E unit was functional at the time of the SBMSO's MTR in December 2018. The unit
  monitored implementation through field visits; developed and ensured adoption of protocols for the
  NARSS by the IVA; designed and monitored implementation of the SSG (Swacch Survekshan Gramin)
  surveys to obtain citizens' feedback; held videoconferences with the states to assess progress; and
  appointed national level monitors to visit districts and report to MDWS on implementation progress and
  issues. The ICR reports (paras. 58 and 59) that there were some shortcomings to the IMIS related to
  adoption of Geographic Information System (GIS) based field monitoring and reporting; continued
  emphasis on physical progress (number of toilets constructed) over outcome indicators such as toilets
  use; reporting on a smaller set of indicators to track progress in MDWS capacity enhancement efforts
  than envisaged at appraisal; limited public access to IMIS; and weak documentation of indicators
  reported, data collection methods, and ODF verification protocols.



c. M&E Utilization


                                                                                                  Page 15 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Swachh Bharat Mission Support Operation (P153251)



  (Reference ICR paras. 60 and 61).

  Despite the shortcomings mentioned above, the IMIS did help strengthen SBM-G monitoring including
  through real-time data made available through publicly available dashboards (e.g. number of toilets
  constructed, number of villages with ODF status, etc.) and dashboards restricted for government use
  only (e.g. information on funds flow allocations and expenditures; progress on sanitary facilities
  construction; etc.). These were complemented by regular field supervision visits by the PMU; surveys to
  collect citizens' feedback; and robust data collection and results verification using the NARSS.

  Rating of Overall M&E Quality: Based on the foregoing, the ICRR rates M&E quality as Substantial on
  the margin.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

9. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Environmental and Social Safeguards

   (Reference ICR paras. 62 to 65).

   The IPF component of the SBMSO was classified as Category B - Partial Assessment (ICR para. 62). The
   reporting in the ICR focuses on the environment and social compliance under the PfR component of the
   program. An Environmental and Social Systems Assessment (ESSA) was carried out during program
   preparation. The ESSA found that environmental compliance risks could arise during implementation
   because of improper choice of location, and weak planning and execution of schemes. It found that the
   national and state governments had enabling policies and legislations to address environmental and social
   management issues, but the implementation capacities needed to be strengthened. It was also found that
   the states' social policies and procedures were generally adequate, including in safeguarding the interests
   of the vulnerable sections including women, and tribal communities. The Program Action Plans (PAPs)
   included PAPs related to Environmental Management (PAP 7) and Social Audits (PAP 5). Implementation
   was the responsibility of the states with support from MDWS. PAP 7 required the adoption of environmental
   management in the design and implementation of safe sanitation technologies under the SBM-G. MDWS,
   with some delays, prepared the necessary manuals, technical guidelines, and capacity building measures.
   Adoption of environment management by the states was delayed considerably. (ICR para. 64). PAP 4
   required MDWS to seek citizen's feedback for which community-level surveys were carried out in 2018 and
   2019. PAP 5 required the states to prepare Social Audits. MDWS provided support by developing the Social
   Audit manual, providing field support, and capacity building measures. At closure, some states were more
   advanced in the implementation of social audit while others were yet to begin. The ICR reports (para. 65)
   that, overall, environmental and social safeguards compliance was Moderately Satisfactory.




                                                                                                Page 16 of 19
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Swachh Bharat Mission Support Operation (P153251)




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  (Reference ICR paras. 66 to 69).

  A Fiduciary Systems Assessment was carried out during the preparation of the program. It identified the
  need for capacity building interventions at all levels, from state to village. A separate account was opened
  by MDWS for the Program funds that allowed fiduciary oversight. The incentive funds flowed from the
  MDWS account to the states' separate accounts for Program funds and then to the districts and villages.
  The states followed their respective General Financial Rules. Public Works Department manuals, and
  Store rules to guide procurements. The bulk of these were highly decentralized and relatively low
  cost. Individual households were responsible for the construction of their toilets. At Program closure, the
  achievements of all DLIs exceeded targets, but only 84 percent of the original program financing was
  disbursed. This was due to savings resulting from exchange rate differences between the INR and the
  USD. The MDWS could not transfer more funds than those allocated in INR terms under the applicable
  budgets. During implementation, as a part of fiduciary compliance, MDWS executed the rolling out of the
  fiduciary management practices as required under PAP 2. By Program closure, 25 states had registered,
  and 13 states had operationalized the system. Audited annual reports received for the initial years did not
  raise any major procurement and financial management issues. Audited annual reports were yet to be
  received for the years FY20-21 and FY21-22 at the time of the ICR preparation. The ICR reports (para. 68)
  that, overall, the fiduciary compliance was Satisfactory.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  The ICR does not report any significant unintended impacts.



d. Other
  (Reference ICR paras. 44 and 45).

  Gender: The gender impacts of the SBM-G were significant. In addition to health benefits, access to toilets
  at home were expected to provide privacy and safety to women. A study on the impact of SBM-G on violent
  crimes against women showed that there was a 15 percent reduction in sexual assaults on women due to
  construction of toilets in the SBM-G implementation period. The SBM-G also envisioned a key role for
  women in community support mobilization, BCC, and leadership in village communities and institutions.
  Women's self-help groups were an integral part of the sanitation workforce at the village level. It was
  required that each village have at least one frontline worker who was a woman. It was also required that
  women comprise 50 percent of the members in the village water and sanitation committees. (ICR para. 44).

  Poverty Reduction and Prosperity Sharing: The SBM-G targeted financial incentives to the Poor and
  Vulnerable (PAV) households for constructing and using toilets. While the increase in access and use of
  toilets during the SBM-G period was across the board, it was more pronounced for the poor and socially
  disadvantaged. In 2015-2016, only 7 percent of the rural population in the bottom quintile were estimated to
  be regularly using toilets but this had increased to 43 percent by 2019-2021. (ICR para. 45).



                                                                                                 Page 17 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Swachh Bharat Mission Support Operation (P153251)




10. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                   IEG
                                                                                Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Satisfactory         Satisfactory

Bank Performance                Satisfactory         Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                  Substantial          Substantial

Quality of ICR                  ---                  Substantial


11. Lessons

(Reference ICR paras. 76 to 80).

The ICR lists a number of lessons from which IEG derives the following lessons that are relevant for
similar projects carried out in comparable environments.

Strong leadership and a whole-of-government approach may enable successful
program implementation: Proactive political and administrative leadership was a distinctive feature
of SBM-G and were critical to align the country behind a common goal and sustain momentum for a
large and complex program with ambitious and time-bound targets.

Strong institutional capacity and systems at all levels may increase the potential for
successful program delivery: The SBM-G experience revealed that while proactive central
leadership was critical for implementation at scale, weak institutional capacity and systems at the
local level adversely impacted delivery of the facilities and services. Absence of robust data systems
and M&E capabilities at the local level posed challenges to correctly identifying beneficiaries and
setting targets at the start of the SBM-G Program. A lack of adequate integration of the PFMS
across different levels of the government led to delays in allocation and transfer of funds and
delayed payments to the beneficiaries. Future national government programs need to carefully
assess the institutional and system capacities at local levels prior to program implementation and
take necessary measures to address weaknesses.

ODF sustainability requires sustained efforts to promote and maintain behavior change:
Behavior change promotion was a significant aspect under the SBM-G. While a range of BCC
interventions were deployed, those found to be led by communities or those that involved inter-
personal communication such as door-to-door campaigns were found to be most effective in
mobilizing communities to construct and use toilets. However, behavior change is a long-term
process and requires a long-term strategy to ensure its sustainability. Without support from the
government, the burden of repairing and maintaining toilets and sanitation facilities falls on
households which can influence their behavioral patterns on usage. Appropriate policy and clarity in
institutional responsibilities for infrastructure upkeep are needed. The SBM-G monitoring systems
need to track toilet use and infrastructure quality in a reliable manner and on a regular basis.



                                                                                                  Page 18 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Swachh Bharat Mission Support Operation (P153251)




12. Assessment Recommended?

  Yes
  ASSESSMENT_TABLE
  Please Explain
  The SBMSO was the Bank's first national-level PfR operation in the sanitation sector carried out during the first
  phase of the GoI's flagship multi-phase SBM-G Program. The GoI launched in 2020 the second phase of the
  SBM-G. An assessment of the SBMSO implementation could provide important lessons and insights that could
  feed into the implementation of the second and subsequent phases of the national SBM-G Program. In
  addition, it would be useful to explore the deeper reasons behind the decrease in toilet use in rural India since
  2018-19 for the follow-up project to better address these challenges directly.



13. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is well-written, clear, and candid, and generally complies with the relevant OPCS guidelines (except in
regard to length - 27 pages instead of the recommended 15 pages or less). The ICR presents a clear theory of
change and the causal results chain from activities to outcomes. The analysis and conclusions are generally
supported by evidence but constrained to some extent by weaknesses in the Program's M&E system. The ICR
provides lessons and recommendations derived from the implementation experience which are relevant for
similar operations undertaken in comparable environments.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                   Page 19 of 19
