     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Afghanistan Digital CASA Project (P156894)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0023478

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P156894                                    Afghanistan Digital CASA Project

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Afghanistan                                Digital Development


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-D2820                                  31-Mar-2023                                           3,364,437.98

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 28-Mar-2018                                31-Mar-2023

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                              51,000,000.00                                            0.00

 Revised Commitment                               51,000,000.00                                            0.00

 Actual                                            3,364,437.98                                            0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Ranga Rajan                 Christopher David            Avjeet Singh                   IEGSD (Unit 4)
 Krishnamani                 Nelson




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) as stated in the Financing Agreement (Schedule 1, page 4) and in
   the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, page 6) is:

   " To increase access to more affordable internet, crowd in private investment in the Information and
   Communication Technology (ICT) sector and improve the Government's capacity to deliver digital



                                                                                                  Page 1 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Afghanistan Digital CASA Project (P156894)



   government services, by contributing to the development of a regionally integrated digital
   infrastructure and enabling environment ".

   For the purpose of this Implementation Completion and Results Report (ICR) Review, the PDO objectives are
   taken to be:

   PDO 1. Increase access to more affordable internet by contributing to the development of a regionally
   integrated digital infrastructure and enabling environment.

   PDO 2. Crowd-in private investment in the ICT sector by contributing to the development of a regionally
   integrated digital infrastructure and enabling environment.

   PDO 3. Improve the government's capacity to deliver digital government services by contributing to the
   development of a regionally integrated infrastructure and enabling environment.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   This project was part of the Digital Central Asia and South Asia (CASA) regional program. The program
   goal was to integrate the landlocked countries of Central and South Asia into the global and regional digital
   economy, thereby helping them reap digital dividends. This project in Afghanistan was prepared alongside a
   similar project for the Kyrgyz Republic.

   There were four components (PAD, pages 9 - 13).

   1. Regional and Domestic Connectivity. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$30.00 million. The
   actual cost was US$0.51 million. This component aimed to improve the regional and domestic fiber-optic
   infrastructure, connect public institutions and priority target groups to Internet services at affordable rates.
   There were three sub-components:

   (1) pre-purchase of international bandwidth for the government and priority target groups; (2) provide a one-
   time capital subsidy through a reverse auction to create incentives for the public and private sectors to roll-
   out fiber-optic networks in selected remote and commercially unviable areas; (3) Install a network to provide
   broadband connectivity to targeted government offices in Kabul, provincial capitals, schools, hospitals,
   research institutions and post offices and develop an enterprise service bus (ESB) architecture to serve as
   an integration platform for various systems across the targeted public institutions; and (4) operationalize an
   Internet Exchange Point (IXP) for faster exchange of internet traffic between central and south Asian
   countries.

   2. E-Government. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$10.00 million. The actual cost was US$0.06
   million. This component planned to finance e-Government foundations that comprised the government
   Cloud, common e-service enablers and the Disaster Recovery Data Center (DRDC), enhance the national


                                                                                                        Page 2 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Afghanistan Digital CASA Project (P156894)



   portal and develop prioritized e-services to enable citizens and businesses to gain access to information
   and e-services through mobile devices. There were two-subcomponents.

   (i) establish a cost-efficient cloud-based hosting station for government data for implementing effective e-
   services by key line ministries; and (2) capacity building for developing: (i) a national portal to serve as a
   single window for e-services offered by the government; (ii) two high priority online services for citizens; and
   (iii) two high priority e-services for businesses and the public sector.

   3. Enabling Environment (Policy and Regulatory Frameworks). The estimated cost at appraisal was
   US$3.00 million. The actual cost was US$0.17 million. This component planned to finance technical
   assistance (TA) to the Ministry of Information and Communication Technology (MICT) and the Afghanistan
   Telecom Regulatory Authority (ATRA). There were two components:

   (1) TA to MICT and ATRA to address the policy, legal and regulatory modifications for implementing an
   open access policy and creating an enabling environment for private sector involvement; and (2). TA to
   review and assess ICT policies, standards and regulatory frameworks to address gaps and weaknesses
   and harmonize with regional commitments and frameworks.

   4. Project Management and Institutional Strengthening. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$8.00
   million. The actual cost was US$0.71 million. This component planned to provide TA and training for the
   institutional strengthening of government at the regional and national levels.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project cost. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$51.00 million. The actual cost was US$4.63 million
   (ICR, page 38). The difference between the estimated cost and actual cost was due to the non-completion
   of most planned activities.

   Financing. The project was financed by an International Development Association (IDA) credit of US$51.00
   million. The amount disbursed was US$3.36 million (ICR, footnote page 14). Following the takeover of
   government in mid-August 2021, the World Bank paused disbursements and suspended its operations in
   Afghanistan.

   Recipient contribution. Recipient contribution was not planned at appraisal. There was no recipient
   contribution during implementation.

   Dates. The project was approved on March 28, 2018, became effective on May 15, 2018, and closed as
   scheduled on March 31, 2023 following the suspension due to the political transition on August 15, 2021. A
   reverse split evaluation approach was not undertaken due to the very early stage of the project when it was
   suspended.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale


                                                                                                      Page 3 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Afghanistan Digital CASA Project (P156894)



Country context. Afghanistan, a landlocked country is South-Central Asia, is one of the most
underdeveloped countries in the world. This is due to a combination of factors, such as decades of war and
conflict within its borders, political instability, weak state institutions, governance deficiencies and
dysfunctional societal relations leading to violent conflict between groups.

Sector context. Afghanistan's telecommunication sector had shown significant network expansion in the
2000s. By late 2017, Afghanistan had cross-border links with all neighboring countries (except China), 25 of
its 34 provincial capitals were connected to the optical fiber backbone ring, five mobile operators were
active and the Afghanistan Regulatory Authority (ATRA) was functional.

However, the ICT sector faced several challenges. The government-owned Afghan Telecom remained the
sole optical fiber operator for international and domestic fiber-optic connectivity, leading to limited
competition and high retail prices. The internet service quality was poor with average speeds of 1.3
Megabits per second (Mbps). The retail price for a mobile internet package was 500 Afghanis (AFN) about
7 to 14% of gross national product (GNP) per capita (as compared to the South Asian average of one to
two percent). Less than 10% of the population had internet access and there were wide disparities between
Kabul where 16% of households had internet access and rural remote areas where less than two percent of
households had access. Although the MCIT had a national e-government strategy, its implementation was
slow and digital government services were nascent. Therefore, the increasing access to quality and
affordable internet services, providing an enabling environment for private sector involvement in the sector
and improving the government's capacity to deliver digital government services was important to the
government strategy.

Government strategy. The Afghanistan National Peace and Development Framework (ANPDF) for 2017 -
2021 recognized the ICT sector as an enabler of economic development. The framework highlighted the
sector's potential to strengthen civil society, improve government efficiency and promote private sector
development. Specifically, this framework acknowledged the sector as a vital tool for combating
Afghanistan's institutionalized corruption, with the ability to enable major reforms to increase transparency
and accountability.

World Bank Country Strategy. The PDO was well-aligned with both the Bank's Systematic Country
Diagnostic (SCD, 2016) and the Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for 2017 - 2020. The CPF pointed
out the extreme fragility and high risk of operating in Afghanistan. The CPF recognized the pivotal role that
telecommunications and ICT could play in achieving some of the most important national priorities, which
would help the Government in managing the critical transition from security and development dominated by
the international community to one led by the Government. More specifically, the Digital CASA program
was expected to support inclusive growth by enhancing connectivity infrastructure and private sector
development that would contribute to economic diversification. The Digital CASA Regional Program was
aligned with the Bank's recommendations of the "World Development Report 2016, Digital Dividends". This
report highlighted the potential role of internet access for achieving inclusive economic growth and
sustained poverty reduction.

World Bank Regional Strategy. The program supported two of the three strategic pillars of the Bank's
regional strategy for the South Asia region (updated in March 2015). While the first pillar articulated the
need for accelerating economic growth through infrastructure investments, the second pillar highlighted the
need for enhancing social inclusion by addressing the severest exclusions. The PDO was aligned with the
Bank's Regional Update 2018 (originally for the 2017 - 2020 period, extended to 2022 by means of the
Performance and Learning Review) for the South Asia region). This update underscored the need for


                                                                                                   Page 4 of 15
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Afghanistan Digital CASA Project (P156894)



               scaling up private sector-led growth for enhancing connectivity. The World Bank's COVID-19 Response
               Approach Paper views digital connectivity as an enabler to build back better from the pandemic as well in
               its immediate response. As of July 2022, the Bank's strategy towards Afghanistan was documented in
               "Afghanistan Approach Paper 2.0: Options for World Bank Engagement to support the Afghan People".
               Four sectors were included for Bank support: agriculture, education, health and livelihoods.

               Bank experience. When this project was being prepared, the Bank had completed two ICT projects in
               Afghanistan (The Emergency Communication Development Project and the ICT Sector Development
               Project). The main difference between the Digital CASA project and the two previous projects was that
               while the previous projects aimed to promote competition in domestic and international optical fiber
               connectivity, the PDO of the Digital CASA project was to promote private sector investment and competition
               in the optical fiber market, which was a monopoly of the government-owned operator.

               That said, the ICT sector is likely a low priority for the current Bank strategy for Afghanistan, given the other
               pressing needs of the country. Therefore, overall relevance is rated as substantial.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             PDO 1. Increase access to more affordable internet by contributing to the development of a regionally
                             integrated digital infrastructure and enabling environment.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of change. The causal links between project activities, outputs and outcomes were clear. Activities
                             such as the pre-purchase of international bandwidth for the government and priority target groups, providing a
                             one time capital subsidy to create incentives for the public and private sectors to roll out fiber-optic networks
                             in remote and commercially unviable areas, installing a network to targeted offices in Kabul, schools, hospital
                             and operationalizing an internet exchange point were likely to help in improving regional and domestic
                             connectivity. The outputs were likely to help in lowering the wholesale prices for international bandwidth and
                             thereby increase access to affordable internet services. The intended outcomes were monitorable.

                             Outputs (ICR page 14 and pages 22 - 35).

                                        The Internet Exchange Point (IXP) was operational when the project closed as targeted.
                                        Although the total length of fiber optic network increased from 4,700 kilometers (Km) at the baseline to
                                          6,265 km in June 2021 and the cost of entry level broadband package in 2020 was 500 AFN when the
                                          project closed (lower than the cost at appraisal, when costs exceeded 1,000 AFN), these
                                          changes were not attributable but to the adoption of the open access policy and the award of optical

                                                                                                                                   Page 5 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Afghanistan Digital CASA Project (P156894)



       fiber licenses to private operators under a previous Bank funded ICT project in Afghanistan. (ICR,
       para 28).

The following outputs were not realized as targeted.

      The number of institutions and government agencies that were connected to the Government Network
       (GovNet) increased from six at the baseline to 100, far short of the target of 346.
      There were no new cross-border links when the project closed (target ten).
      The number of international internet bandwidth pre purchased by Government did not increase (target
       20 giga bytes per second).

Outcomes.

The activities described above were expected to increase the number of people with access to affordable
internet services.

      Although 12,900,000 people had internet access on June 2021 (target 12,000,0000), 38.90% of the
       population had internet access, (target 35%) and the percent of population using internet increased
       from less than 10% at appraisal to 18.4% in 2020, these outcomes were not attributable to the project
       but to the adoption of the open access policy and the award of optical fiber licenses to private
       operators under the previous Bank funded ICT project (ICR, para 28).
      The international internet bandwidth per capita increased from 1.20 Kilobits per second (Kbps) to 4.33
       Kbps, far short of the target of 10 Kbps.
      The wholesale transit pricing per Mega bytes remained the same as at the baseline (US25), and did
       not decrease to US$10 as per the target.
      The average retail price for one Giga Bit (GB) pre paid mobile package decreased from 1.40 to
       1.07, far short of the target of 0.65.

Therefore, efficacy of this PDO is rated as negligible.



Rating
Negligible


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
PDO 2. Crowd-in private investment in the ICT sector by contributing to the development of a regionally
integrated digital infrastructure and enabling environment.

Rationale
Theory of change. The causal links between project activities, outputs and outcomes were logical. Activities
such as developing a regionally integrated digital infrastructure and TA activities aimed at providing
institutional strengthening and capacity building of the Ministry of Communication and Information Technology
(MICT) and the Afghanistan Telecom Regulatory Authority (ATRA) for regulatory oversight and providing an


                                                                                                 Page 6 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Afghanistan Digital CASA Project (P156894)



enabling environment for private sector involvement were likely to aid in crowding-in private investment in the
ICT sector. The intended outcomes were monitorable.

These activities were completed as targeted.

      These regulatory procedures were approved and adopted by ATRA: (i) Optical Fiber interconnection
       Regulatory Procedure; (ii) Quality of Service Regulatory Procedure; (iii) Reference Interconnection
       Offer Regulatory Procedures; (iv) Optical Fiber Wholesale Tariff Regulatory Procedure; and (v) Right
       of Way Regulatory Guideline for Optical Fiber Cable.
      Few feasibility studies for private sector investment were supported under the project. No targets were
       specified for this indicator.

When this project was under preparation, with support from the Bank, the Government enacted legislation for
open access policy aimed at allowing licensed operators to access wholesale broadband network
infrastructure on equal and nondiscriminatory terms and at fair and reasonable prices. Afghan Telecom
however did not follow the government's open access policy by not sharing critical infrastructure and trying to
block the competition. Despite these challenges, the private sector was able to lay around 1,000km of optical
fiber amounting to a US$30 million investment.

These activities were not completed as targeted.

      The 4G spectrum was not allocated and the National Broadband Policy was not submitted for
       approval.
      No MCIT and ATRA staff were trained under the project (Target 500, 30% women).

Outcomes.

The project was expected to increase private sector investments in the ICT sector.

      There was no increase in new private sector commitments under the project (target US$30.00 million).
      There was no user survey as targeted to indicate the extent to which the project contributed to
       providing an enabling environment for the ICT sector.

Thus, the efficacy of this objective is rated as negligible.



Rating
Negligible


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
PDO 3. Improve the government's capacity to deliver digital government services by contributing to the
development of a regionally integrated infrastructure and enabling environment.

Rationale

                                                                                                  Page 7 of 15
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Afghanistan Digital CASA Project (P156894)



                            Theory of change. The causal links between project activities, outputs and outcomes were logical. Activities
                            associated with establishing a shared e-Government infrastructure, capacity building for developing a national
                            portal, and developing prioritized e-services to enable citizens and businesses gain information and e-
                            services through mobile devices, were likely to help in improving the Government's capacity to provide digital
                            services in a more cost-effective and efficient manner. The intended outcomes were monitorable.

                            Outputs.

                                   The bidding documents for the development of e-services incorporated specific provisions to train
                                    female staff as targeted.

                            These outputs were not completed as targeted.

                                   The number of Government agencies using the G-cloud shared infrastructure remained the same as
                                    at the baseline (target 20).
                                   The number of national portal visitors per year remained the same as at the baseline (target four).
                                   No e-services were developed under the project (target four).

                            Outcomes.

                                   The number of e-services and applications utilizing the shared services platform did not increase
                                    (target 25).

                            Efficacy of this PDO is rated as negligible.



                            Rating
                            Negligible


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Overall efficacy is negligible.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating                                  Primary Reason
                            Negligible                                               Low achievement


    5. Efficiency
   Economic analysis. An economic assessment was conducted at appraisal for the connectivity
   components. This component accounted for 78% of the appraisal estimate. The methodology entailed an
   econometric model developed by the Global System for Mobile Communications Association. The model

                                                                                                                              Page 8 of 15
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Afghanistan Digital CASA Project (P156894)



correlated the growth in mobile broadband penetration to increase in per capita income. The model showed that
a 10% increase in mobile broadband penetration would increase Gross Domestic Product (GDP) by 0.15
percentage points. Calculations under a pre-feasibility study for the Digital CASA project showed that mobile
broadband subscriptions would increase from three million in 2016 to 12 million due to lower prices and
increased internet access with project investments. Applying this model, mobile penetration was expected to
increase to 28.5% of the population by 2026. The results suggested that the GDP per capita would grow from
US$521 to US$631 between 2016 and 2026 with the broadband effect, significantly higher than the US$619
without the broadband effect. The PAD estimated a net economic impact of US$877.00 million assuming a 12%
discount rate.

However, as there was no disbursement for the connectivity component, efficiency analysis was not conducted
when the project closed.

Administrative and operational issues during implementation. Although a Project Preparation Grant had
been provided, it was not used and preparatory studies did not get underway until effectiveness of the project
grant. The project implementation was stymied due to a combination of factors such as: (i) political instability at
the ministerial level (with as many as five ministers appointed during this project); (ii) inadequate staffing of the
Project Implementation Unit (PIU); (iii) weak human resources capacity of the MCIT, which contributed to
procurement delays; and (iv) procurement delays due to the change in implementing agency arrangements for
activities associated with e-services and the national portal from the MCIT to the National Statistics
Implementing Agency (NSIA); These factors were exacerbated by external factors over which the project had no
control such as the restrictions in the wake of the COVID - 19 pandemic. These factors led to the non-
completion of most of the project activities.

Only 6.65% (US$3.36 million) of the Bank financing for this project was disbursed. The ICR (page 15) notes that
there was no disbursement after August 15, 2021.

Overall efficiency is rated as negligible.


Efficiency Rating
Negligible


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                 Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                       0
 Appraisal                                                    0
                                                                                        Not Applicable
                                                                                       0
 ICR Estimate                                                 0
                                                                                        Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.




                                                                                                        Page 9 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Afghanistan Digital CASA Project (P156894)



6. Outcome

The relevance of the PDO is substantial. Overall efficacy and efficiency are rated as negligible. Given the
severe shortcomings in the project's achievement of its objectives and in efficiency, overall outcome is rated
Highly Unsatisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Highly Unsatisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Political risk. There is substantial risk to the development outcome. The current political situation in
Afghanistan poses a significant risk to institutional building, as evidenced by the recent takeover of the post
of ATRA chairman by an MCIT minister. This could undermine the independence of ATRA. Further, there is
significant risk to gender-related aspects such as promotion of women within the ICT sector, owing to the
prevailing authorities' position on women in the workplace.

Macroeconomic risk. There is substantial macroeconomic risk, given the substantial budget constraints
faced by the government in the wake of the country's post-August 2021 economic collapse. The ICR (para
55) notes that due to the low aid provided to Afghanistan by the donor community, even basic needs are not
being provided by the administration. In such a scenario, a digitization program or even maintenance of
existing digital systems are likely to be low priorities.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The Bank prepared this project based on the experiences from previous Bank-financed Public-Private-
  Partnership (PPP) programs such as the Regional Communications Program in Eastern and Southern
  Africa, West Africa Regional Communications Program, the Central Africa Backbone Program and the
  Caribbean Regional Communications Infrastructure Program. Key lessons incorporated included the
  need to focus on country/regional priorities and the need for building a strong regulatory environment for
  the ICT sector (PAD, para 48).

  The Bank identified several risks at appraisal such as political and governance risk, macroeconomic risk,
  technical design risk and stakeholder risk. Several mitigation measures were incorporated such as
  advisory services to ATRA, adjusting allocation of financing if the security situation were to deteriorate
  and hiring and training staff to undertake fiduciary functions. Even with mitigation measures, the overall
  project risk was rated as substantial at appraisal, in view of the fragile country context. The arrangements
  made at appraisal for safeguards and fiduciary compliance were appropriate (discussed in section 10).




                                                                                                     Page 10 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Afghanistan Digital CASA Project (P156894)



  There were significant shortcomings at Quality-at-Entry. One, the project components (which combined
  ICT infrastructure investments, institutional strengthening activities aimed at attracting private sector
  investment, and supporting e-Government foundations, were technically complex and ambitious, given
  the weak implementation capacity in the fragile country context. Two, the Bank significantly
  underestimated the weak technical capacity of the MICT. The ICR (para 52) noted that the project was
  mostly prepared by the Bank and heavy reliance on international consultants. Finally, given the weak
  country capacity, complex procurement methods could have been addressed at the preparation stage.
  Procurement delays all through the implementation period contributed to the eventual non-completion of
  several of the project activities. Thus, Quality-at-Entry is rated as Moderately Unsatisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The Bank conducted regular supervision missions. The missions were supplemented with biweekly
 meetings and weekly virtual meetings when travel was suspended due to the COVID-19 pandemic. In late
 2019, at MICT's request, the Bank approved Hands-on-Extended Implementation Support (HEIS) for
 procurement and technical issues related to three activities: (i) Pre-purchase of international Bandwidth
 under an Indefeasible rights of use (IRU); (ii) Government Network; and (iii) Government Cloud and
 Disaster Recovery Center. Under HEIS, an international procurement advisor was hired and three
 international experts provided short-term technical assistance to MCIT. The Bank provided further
 assistance through the Afghanistan Reconstruction Trust Fund (ARTF) - supported Advisory Services
 Implementation Support Technical Assistance (ASIST) program. This enabled the bank team to provide
 support throughout the bid stage. As discussed in Section two, following the takeover of government in
 mid-August 2021, the World Bank paused the disbursements and suspended its operations in Afghanistan.

 There were moderate shortcomings. Given the weak implementation capacity in the fragile country context,
 the presence of Bank technical team in Kabul could have helped in M&E implementation. The project
 design underestimated the technical capacity challenges and the challenges of working within
 Afghanistan's complex institutional development. Once the design was set during preparation, the
 challenges during implementation could not be overcome even with the proactive efforts made by the
 supervision team.

 Overall Bank performance is rated as moderately unsatisfactory mainly due to the shortcomings at Quality-
 at-Entry.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


                                                                                                  Page 11 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Afghanistan Digital CASA Project (P156894)



9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 To enable program level monitoring and evaluation, the Digital CASA program-level indicators were kept
 the same for the two projects under the program (Afghanistan and the Kyrgyz Republic). The outcome
 indicators were: (i) International Internet Bandwidth per capita; (ii) people with internet access; (iii) average
 retail price for prepaid mobile data package; (iv) private sector investments committed through the
 project; and (v) number of e-services and applications using the shared services platform. The indicators
 were directly linked to each objective and measurable. The MCIT was responsible for M&E.



b. M&E Implementation
  Monitoring and Evaluation was undermined due to limited human resources at the PIU. This contributed
  to several delayed responses to to data requests, frequent conflicting data responses from the MCIT and
  ATRA, reliance on third-party sources and informal data collection by Bank-led consultants. For instance,
  data on the price of international internet bandwidth was never publicly disclosed by the Government.
  Changes to the M&E specialists at the PIU due to frequent changes in leadership contributed to delays
  and limited implementation. Also the Bank team did not have technical staff based in Kabul to provide
  M&E guidance.



c. M&E Utilization
  There is very little evidence of the extent to which M&E data was utilized.

  Although the M&E design was appropriate, overall M&E is rated as modest, in view of the M&E
  shortcomings during implementation and utilization.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as a Category B (partial assessment) project under the World Bank Safeguard
   policies. Two safeguard policies were triggered at appraisal: Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01); and
   Involuntary Resettlement (PAD, page vii).

   Environmental Assessment. The PAD (para 72) noted that the physical work under component one
   activities could have adverse environmental and social impacts such as occupational health and safety
   issues. As the project locations were not known at appraisal, the MCIT developed and publicly-disclosed an
   Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) to address the environmental impacts.



                                                                                                       Page 12 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Afghanistan Digital CASA Project (P156894)



   The ICR (para 48) notes that there were no environmental compliance issues as components one and two
   activities were not completed.

   Involuntary Resettlement. This safeguards was triggered as the physical infrastructure activities under the
   project included excavation, which could lead to partial loss of productive assets and temporary loss of
   access to commercial establishments and residential properties (PAD, para 68). The MCIT prepared and
   publicly-disclosed a separate Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) to address these impacts.

   The ICR (para 48) notes that there were no involuntary resettlement issues as components one and two
   activities were not completed.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management. The Bank conducted an assessment of the financial arrangements of the MCIT at
   appraisal. MCIT had implemented previous Bank-financed projects and was familiar with Bank financial
   procedures. However, the financial management risk was still rated as substantial, given the fragile country
   context (PAD, page 47).

   The ICR (para 50) noted that there were no major financial compliance issues during implementation.

   Procurement. The Bank conducted a procurement assessment of MCIT at appraisal. MCIT had
   experience in implementing previous Bank-financed projects. However, the procurement risk was rated as
   substantial due to the weak implementation capacity (PAD, page 47).

   The ICR (para 49) noted the procurement performance was rated as unsatisfactory. There were significant
   procurement delays during implementation. Due to the low capacity, the quality of procurement
   documentation was slow and materials had to be reviewed several times by the Bank team, despite
   support from international consultants to the project for preparing the major bid documents.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   Not applicable (ICR, para 39).



d. Other
   None.



11. Ratings
                                                                               Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                   IEG
                                                                               Disagreements/Comment

                                                                                                  Page 13 of 15
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Afghanistan Digital CASA Project (P156894)



                                                                                   There were severe shortcomings
Outcome                           Unsatisfactory       Highly Unsatisfactory       in the project's achievements
                                                                                   and in its efficiency.
                                  Moderately           Moderately
Bank Performance
                                  Unsatisfactory       Unsatisfactory
Quality of M&E                    Modest               Modest

Quality of ICR                    ---                  Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR draws the following three main lessons from the experience of implementing this project,
with some adaptation of language.

1. A long term approach might be required for addressing the limited institutional capacity in
fragile settings. This project experienced delays in decision making on key activities due to the
limited technical and operational capacity. For example, lack of familiarity with global practices in
procuring bulk international and domestic connectivity through the Indefeasible rights of use contract
(IRU) led to significant delays and ultimately the decision by the government to not follow the
method. This resulted in missed opportunity for efficiency and savings. The lesson is that building
the technical and operational capacity in fragile settings needs to begin during preparation to avoid
delays during implementation.

2. Combining regulatory reforms with stricter compliance enforcement can help in projects
aimed to attract private sector investment in the ICT sector. This project sought to enable and
mobilize private capital in a high-risk environment. While the project's legal agreements did have
disbursement conditions (such as ensuring that an optical fiber license was issued to at least one
private operator and issuing right-of-way guidelines by the Afghanistan Telecom Regulatory
Authority), these conditions were not sufficient for attracting private sector investment. The lesson is
that along with disbursement conditions, the Bank could advise governments to complement these
conditions with stricter enforcement such as through contractual obligations.

3. Significant attention and investment could help in institutional coordination when project
activities encompass multiple ministries, departments and agencies. In this project activities
aimed at cross-sector infrastructure sharing the telecommunications network and adoption of e-
Government entailed institutional coordination across different agencies. The lesson is that for such
projects involving institutional coordination the Bank could help in developing mechanisms through
formal and informal means to encourage ministries, departments and agencies to work together.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

                                                                                                     Page 14 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Afghanistan Digital CASA Project (P156894)




The ICR is well-written and for the most part adheres to the recommended length. The theory of change
articulated in the text is clear and shows the logical causal links between project activities, outputs and
outcomes. The ICR is candid about the challenges on the ground in a fragile setting. The ICR draws reasonably
good lessons from the experience of implementing this project.

There is a discrepancy in the ICR on the overall rating for M&E. While the ICR (para 47) rates M&E as
negligible, M&E is rated as modest in the data sheet (page 2).



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                 Page 15 of 15
