     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PAISA (P168266)



                                                                               Report Number: ICRR0023505

1. Project Data



 Project ID                               Project Name
 P168266                                  PAISA

 Country                                  Practice Area(Lead)
 Afghanistan                              Finance, Competitiveness and Innovation


 L/C/TF Number(s)                         Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-D4530,TF-B0027                       31-Oct-2024                                           5,014,813.12

 Bank Approval Date                       Closing Date (Actual)
 25-Apr-2019                              31-Oct-2024

                                          IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            45,000,000.00                                 35,000,000.00

 Revised Commitment                              9,980,051.92                                  4,380,211.26

 Actual                                          5,014,813.12                                  3,911,554.26




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                 ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Antonio M. Ollero          Christopher David           Avjeet Singh                   IEGSD (Unit 4)
                            Nelson




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Project Appraisal Document (page 13) and the Financing Agreement (page 5), the project
   development objective of the Payments Automation and Integration of Salaries in Afghanistan Project was "to
   support the development of digital government-to-person payments in Afghanistan." The project development
   objective was retained at restructuring.




                                                                                                Page 1 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PAISA (P168266)



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  24-Dec-2020

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   Biometric Identification System of Civil Servants and Pensioners (US$9 million at appraisal, US$5
   million after partial cancellation and restructuring as of August 15, 2021) would support the establishment
   and operationalization of a Biometric Information System for civil servants and pensioners (i.e., recipients of
   government salaries and transfers) through the: (a) use of biometric technologies to identify and enroll civil
   servants and pensioners; (b) issuance of a unique registration number to each civil servant and pensioner,
   both processes to be administered by the National Statistics and Information Authority; (c) establishment of
   the legal and regulatory framework for the biometric information system, including provisions for data
   protection and privacy rights; (d) acquisition of hardware and software for the system, including its
   configuration, customization, and the upgrading of existing infrastructure (other than those related to the e-
   Tazkira electronic national identity card system introduced in 2014 to verify the citizenship of residents); (e)
   funding of operational costs for the rollout of the biometric registration; and (e) extension of technical
   assistance to the National Statistics and Information Authority and other entities for the management of the
   Biometric Information System.

   Integration of the Identification, Verification, and Payment Systems (US$14 million at appraisal,
   US$9.6 million after partial cancellation and restructuring as of August 15, 2021) would focus on the
   integration of various systems in the payments process to achieve full-fledged straight-through
   processing (i.e., the automated end-to-end processing of trades and/or payment transfers, including the
   automated completion of confirmation, matching, generation, clearing and settlement of instructions, without
   the need for re-keying or reformatting data). This component would support the achievement of the
   objective in two parts.

          Integration of the Public Financial Management Infrastructure with the Digital ID and Payments
           Ecosystems (US$6.5 million at appraisal, US$3.5 million after partial cancellation and restructuring
           as of August 15, 2021) would support the Ministry of Finance to: (a) develop an enhanced payment
           module within the Afghanistan Financial Management Information System; (b) integrate
           the Afghanistan Financial Management Information System and the Human Resource Management
           and Information System; (c) run diagnostics and design an integration roadmap for the Pensions
           Management Information System and the Martyrs' Survivors and the Disabled Management
           Information System; and (d) build institutional capacity at the Ministry of Finance for government
           payments management.
          Integration of the National Payments Infrastructure with the Digital ID Infrastructure (U$$7.5million at
           appraisal, US$6.1 million after partial cancellation and restructuring as of August 15, 2021) would
           support the Da Afghanistan Bank (the central bank) to: (a) integrate the Afghanistan Payments

                                                                                                      Page 2 of 17
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    PAISA (P168266)



         System with the Biometric Information System; (b) integrate Da Afghanistan Bank's core banking
         system (i.e., the back-end system that processed daily banking transactions and posted updates to
         accounts and other financial records) with those of financial institutions including e-money providers;
         (d) develop Da Afghanistan Bank's National Domestic Electronic Payment Card
         scheme (AfPay scheme); and (e) build institutional capacity at Da Afghanistan Bank for the
         integration of the central bank's operating and information systems to the Afghanistan Payments
         System.

  Expansion of Financial Services and Access Points (US$18 million at appraisal, US$8.4 million after
  partial cancellation and restructuring as of August 15, 2021) aimed to convey the benefits of electronic
  payments to civil servants and pensioners (e.g., withdraw cash from their accounts from safe and
  convenient locations or use their accounts to make cashless payments for goods and services). This
  component would support the: (a) development of the access point expansion strategy; (b) development of
  an agent/cash-out point monitoring platform; (c) development of financial access points; (d) expansion of
  cashless payments (including by offering financial incentives to payment service providers to expand their
  electronic payment system); (e) provision of technical assistance to the Da Afghanistan Bank and the
  Afghanistan Payments System to strengthen the cashless ecosystem; and (f) extension of technical
  assistance and training to financial institutions to expand their agent networks, improve their product
  portfolio, and strengthen their liquidity management.

  Project Management (US$4 million at appraisal, US$2 million after partial cancellation and restructuring as
  of August 15, 2021) would support the management of the project by Ministry of Finance..



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost. The project was estimated to cost US$45 million at appraisal. A restructuring, which
  reduced the scope of the project, and partial cancellations reduced the project cost to US$25 million
  on August 15, 2021 and US$9.98 million after August 15, 2021.

  Financing. The project was financed by: (a) an IDA grant of SDR 7.2 million (US$10 million equivalent), of
  which SDR 3.6 million (US$4.4 million equivalent) was cancelled in June 2020 (to release funds for the
  emergency response to the COVID-19 pandemic), reducing the available resources to US$5.6 million, of
  which US$1.1 million was disbursed; and (b) an Afghanistan Reconstruction Trust Fund grant of US$35
  million, of which US$15 million was cancelled in June 2020 (to release funds for the emergency response to
  the COVID-19 pandemic) and US$15.6 million was cancelled in March 2022 (to release funds for the
  delivery of humanitarian services through the United Nations), reducing the available resources to
  US$4.4 million, of which US$3.9 million was disbursed. Of the original financing of US$45 million, the
  revised financing (after partial cancellations of parts of the grants) was US$25 million on August 15, 2021
  and US$9.98 million after August 15, 2021, of which US$5.014 million was disbursed.

  Dates. The project was approved on April 25, 2019, became effective on September 25, 2019, and was
  restructured on December 24, 2020. The Bank suspended all disbursement to Afghanistan on August 25,
  2021, following the takeover by the Taliban of the government on August 15, 2021. The original project
  closing date was October 31, 2024.




                                                                                                   Page 3 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PAISA (P168266)



   Restructuring. The restructuring in December 2020, with US$5.0 million disbursed: (a) reduced the scope
   of the project and changed the project costs; and (b) revised the results framework. The project
   development objective was not changed.

   Split Evaluation. This ICR Review will conduct a split evaluation of the project, the first, to account for
   changes in the output and outcome indicators and targets at restructuring in December 2020 (although the
   project development objective was not revised), and the second, to account for the takeover by the Taliban
   of the government in August 2021 and the project closed prematurely before completion.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Binding Constraint to Development. The Afghanistan Systematic Country Diagnostic
2016 identified improving and modernizing the national payment system and developing a digital finance
infrastructure as a priority. For a country caught in a decades-long violent conflict and highly dependent on
foreign aid flows, Afghanistan remained a weak state unable to capably execute administrative functions as
elementary as delivering government payments to private parties. A digital payment system, overlain on
ongoing efforts by Da Afghanistan Bank to progressively develop the country's financial market
infrastructure, would help address this binding constraint. A digital, rather than manual payment system,
would also help overcome the impediments to connectivity and mobility posed by the country's forbidding
landscape of mountains and deserts – while the urban population (one fourth of the total population of 32
million) was concentrated in roads linking Kabul, Kandahar, Herat, and Mazar el Sharif, the rural population
(three fourths of the total population) was unevenly distributed across the rest of the landlocked country.

Country Priorities. The project objective was consistent with the national development strategy of the
Government. The Afghanistan National Peace and Development Framework 2017–2021
(ANPDF) advanced three development priorities: Governance and state effectiveness, Social capital and
nation building, and Economic growth and job creation. The third ANPDF priority focused on eleven
national priority programs. The project objective was consistent with the third national priority program,
Private Sector Development Program, which argued for financial sector reform among others: "Successful
development of any type requires a stable, efficient financial sector. We have a two-pronged strategy for
financial sector reform. First, it must consolidate financial stability by addressing sectoral weaknesses, and
provide a credible system for banking regulation and oversight to rebuild public confidence. These actions
will advance the banking sector and provide incentives for growth-friendly initiatives. We will focus on
improving sustainability, increasing efficiency and facilitating access to financial services."

Bank Group Strategy. The project objective was aligned with the Bank Group strategy in
Afghanistan. The Country Partnership Framework for the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan for the Period
FY17 to FY20 (CPF) committed Bank Group support for the country's development priorities organized
around three pillars: Building strong and accountable institutions, Supporting inclusive growth, and
Expanding and deepening social inclusion. The project objective was aligned with the second CPF pillar,
specifically with the goal to "lay the foundation for private sector development over the medium to longer
term, including [by] strengthening the financial sector and [by providing] more inclusive access to finance for
micro, small, and medium enterprises."


                                                                                                     Page 4 of 17
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      PAISA (P168266)



               Shortcomings. Although the relationship of this government payments digitization project to the larger
               program to develop the country's financial market infrastructure was well vetted, the relationship of the civil
               servants' and pensioners' biometric identification system to the government's e-Tazkira electronic national
               identity card system was less robustly assessed and clarified.




               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To support the development of digital government-to-person payments in Afghanistan

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change. Mired in a decades-long violent conflict and highly dependent on foreign aid flows,
                             Afghanistan was unable to capably execute many basic administrative functions including delivering
                             government payments to private parties, notably civil servants and pensioners. A digital payment system,
                             paired with ongoing efforts by Da Afghanistan Bank to gradually develop the country's financial market
                             infrastructure, would help address this binding constraint. The digital payment system would be developed in
                             three stages: first, a biometric information system would be implemented for civil servants and pensioners;
                             second, the identification system would be integrated with both the Government salary and pension payment
                             systems and the Afghanistan Payments System's national payment infrastructure; and third, financial firms
                             would be assisted to expand their network of access points for cash transactions (additionally, the central
                             bank and the Afghanistan Payment System would be assisted to begin to develop an ecosystem for cashless
                             payments). The principal outcomes of this project were that: (a) civil servants and pensioners
                             were biometrically registered; (b) they received government payments electronically; and (c) they could
                             transact in more financial access points than in the past. The results chain rested on three crucial
                             assumptions: (a) that the Government, the Da Afghanistan Bank, and the Afghanistan Payments System had
                             the technical, staff, and institutional capacity to implement the project activities (e.g., procure the computer
                             hardware, software, and services, install and connect the operating systems, operate the electronic
                             processes); (b) that civil servants, pensioners, and financial firms were willing to participate in the project and
                             use the digital payment system; and (c) that a modicum of peace, order, and security prevailed in the country
                             to allow this project to be implemented.

                             Outputs. The project did not make headway with any of the outputs defined for the objective to support the
                             development of digital government-to-person payments in Afghanistan.

                                        The unified biometric identification system for civil servants and pensioners was not implemented by
                                         August 15, 2021, failing to meet the target. A Government request to use the e-Tazkira electronic

                                                                                                                                  Page 5 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   PAISA (P168266)



        national identity card system for the biometric registration of civil servants and pensioners derailed the
        implementation of the first component of this project (Biometric Identification System of Civil Servants
        and Pensioners), substantially departing from the original plan designed at appraisal for a dedicated
        biometric registry for civil servants and pensioners. In response to the Government request, the
        Bank and the National Statistics and Information Authority conducted a rapid diagnostic assessment
        of the e-Tazkira platform, focusing on the infrastructure, operating systems, and utility. TA planned
        discussions of the findings, conclusions, and recommendations of the joint assessment with the
        Government were overtaken by the Taliban takeover on August 15, 2021.
       A "comprehensive" legal and regulatory framework for the Biometric Information System, including
        provisions for data protection, was not established by August 15, 2021, failing to meet the target. The
        legal and regulatory framework for the system remained "inadequate" as at baseline.
       The percentage of civil servants that were active users of digital payments was zero percent by
        August 15, 2021, failing to meet the target of 5 percent. The third component of this project
        (Expansion of Financial Services and Access Points) was not started as Da Afghanistan Bank
        was unable to finalize the strategy for the expansion of financial access points, a key document that
        would have provided the framework to design an incentive structure for market participants to
        adopt digital payments.
       The percentage of female civil servants that were active users of digital payments was zero percent by
        August 15, 2021, failing to meet the target of 5 percent.
       The number of agents at licensed financial institutions was 1,879 on August 15, 2021, the same as
        at the baseline, failing to meet the original target of 2,500.
       The number of female agents at licensed financial institutions was 180 on August 15, 2021, the same
        as at the baseline, failing to meet the original target of 250.
       The percentage of civil servants who were satisfied with the level of service was zero percent by
        August 15, 2021, failing to meet the target of 75 percent.
       The percentage of women civil servants who were satisfied with the level of service was zero percent
        by August 15, 2021, failing to meet the target of 75 percent.
       The percentage of grievances that were addressed within stipulated time was 0 percent by August 15,
        2021, failing to meet the target of 80 percent.
       The percentage of grievances raised by women that were addressed within stipulated time was 0
        percent by August 15, 2021, failing to meet the target of 80 percent.

Outcomes. The project did not make headway with any of the expected outcomes either.

     The percentage of civil servants and pensioners who were biometrically registered and issued a
      unique identifier for payment purposes was zero percent by August 15, 2021, failing to meet the
      original target of 95 percent.
     The percentage of female civil servants and pensioners who were biometrically registered and issued
      a unique identifier for payment purposes was zero percent by August 15, 2021, failing to meet the
      original target of 95 percent.
     The percentage of civil servants and pensioners who received government payments through
      electronic channels (bank accounts and mobile wallets) was zero percent by August 15, 2021, failing
      to meet the target of 80 percent.
     The percentage of female civil servants and pensioners who received government payments through
      electronic channels was zero percent by August 15, 2021, failing to meet the target of 80 percent.


                                                                                                    Page 6 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   PAISA (P168266)




      The number of financial access points (branches of commercial banks and licensed electronic money
       institutions, active agents of licensed financial institutions, in-service automated teller machines of
       commercial banks, and point-of-sale terminals accepting electronic payments) was 2,890 on August
       15, 2021, the same as in the baseline, failing to meet the original target of 3,500.

The project did not achieve the objective to support the development of digital government-to-person
payments in Afghanistan. Civil servants and pensioners were not biometrically registered; they did not
receive government payments electronically; and they could not transact in more financial access points than
in the past.



Rating
Negligible


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
To support the development of digital government-to-person payments in Afghanistan.

Revised Rationale
Theory of Change. The project development objective and the theory of change remained the same at
restructuring, which reduced the scope of the project and changed the results framework (i.e., downwardly
revised many targets). It was argued at restructuring that changes in the scope of the project would "not
materially affect the attainment of the project development objective" – the project activities dropped at
restructuring would still be implemented by the Government, Da Afghanistan Bank, and the Afghanistan
Payments System, but outside the scope of, and without funding by, the project. The other material change
to the scope of the project – the expansion of financial access points in two rather than three stages – would
reduce the volume of financial access points expected (for which the results target was lowered) but did not
alter the theory of change either.

Revised Outputs. The project made some progress with the Integration of the National Payments
Infrastructure with the Digital ID Infrastructure (the second part of the second component of the project). The
partial achievement would have been counted for Objective 1 as well, except it was not part of the results
framework for Objective 1. The associated outputs – government systems integrated with the Afghanistan
Financial Management Information System and digital transactions facilitated through the Afghanistan
Payments System – were added at restructuring.

      The number of government systems integrated with the Afghanistan Financial Management
       Information System was two by August 15, 2021, exceeding the target of one (this was a new
       indicator introduced at restructuring). The second component of the project (Integration of the
       Identification, Verification, and Payment Systems) achieved meaningful progress with the integration
       of financial institutions (banks and mobile network operators) with the Afghanistan Payments System,
       advancing interoperability in the financial sector. According to Da Afghanistan Bank, 68 percent of
       all targeted financial institutions were onboarded onto the Afghanistan Payments System by May 15,
       2021. Moreover, Da Afghanistan Bank systems were successfully connected to the major systems of
       the Ministry of Finance – the Afghanistan Financial Management and Information System, the
       customs management system, SIGTAS, and the revenue collection system, ASYCUDA – and to that

                                                                                                   Page 7 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   PAISA (P168266)



       of the utility company, De Afghanistan Brishna Shirkat, to enable the digitization of government
       payments. By August 15, 2021, the Afghanistan Payments System had processed around 240,000
       digital transactions, from 40,000 in the baseline. The project, however, did not make progress with the
       procurement of goods, consultancy services, and other services to maintain or upgrade the
       Afghanistan Payments System infrastructure at Da Afghanistan Bank. The project also did not make
       progress with the procurement of servers and licenses to enable the Ministry of Finance to integrate
       its systems with those of other government agencies – procurement was initiated but never
       completed.
      The number of digital transactions facilitated through the Afghanistan Payments System
       increased from 37,811 in the baseline to 239,601 by August 15, 2021, partially achieving the target
       of 419,063 (this was a new indicator introduced at restructuring).

A downward revision of the targets for the number agents licensed at financial institutions did not make a
difference – the less ambitious targets adopted at restructuring were not met.

      The number of agents at licensed financial institutions was 1,879 on August 15, 2021, the same as in
       the baseline, failing to meet the downwardly revised target of 2,250.
      The number of female agents at licensed financial institutions was 180 on August 15, 2021, the same
       as in the baseline, failing to meet the downwardly revised target of 225.

The performance on the rest of the output indicators carried over from the original results framework were
unchanged (see Section 4 - Objective 1).

Revised Outcomes. The project partially achieved the outcome for financial institutions connected to
the Afghanistan Payments System, an outcome newly introduced with the restructuring. Otherwise, the
project failed to achieve all other outcomes defined for the objective, even as the results targets were
downwardly revised.

      The percentage of financial institutions connected to the Afghanistan Payments System increased
       from 14 percent in the baseline to 68 percent by August 15, 2021, partially meeting the target of 100
       (this was a new indicator introduced at restructuring).

A downward revision of the targets for civil servants and pensioners who were biometrically registered and for
the number of financial access points did not make a difference – the less ambitious targets adopted at
restructuring were not met.

      The percentage of civil servants and pensioners who were biometrically registered and issued a
       unique identifier for payment purposes was zero percent by August 15, 2021, failing to meet the
       downwardly revised target of 70 percent.
      The percentage of female civil servants and pensioners who were biometrically registered and issued
       a unique identifier for payment purposes was zero percent by August 15, 2021, failing to meet the
       downwardly revised target of 70 percent.
      The number of financial access points (branches of commercial banks and licensed electronic money
       institutions, active agents of licensed financial institutions, in-service automated teller machines of
       commercial banks, and point-of-sale terminals accepting electronic payments) was 2,890 on August
       15, 2021, the same as in the baseline, failing to meet the downwardly revised target of 3,250.


                                                                                                 Page 8 of 17
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                PAISA (P168266)



                            The performance on the rest of the outcome indicators carried over from the original results framework were
                            unchanged (see Section 4 - Objective 1).

                            Notwithstanding some partial progress with connecting financial institutions with the Afghanistan Payments
                            System, the project did not achieve the objective to support the development of digital government-to-person
                            payments in Afghanistan. Civil servants and pensioners were not biometrically registered; they did not
                            receive government payments electronically; and they could not transact in more financial access points than
                            in the past.



                            Revised Rating
                            Negligible


                            OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 2
                            Revised Objective
                            To support the development of digital government-to-person payments in Afghanistan.

                            Revised Rationale
                            Theory of Change. The project development objective and the theory of change remained the same
                            following the Taliban takeover of the government and until project closing as at restructuring (see Objective 1
                            - Revision 1).

                            Revised Outputs. The project outputs remained the same following the Taliban takeover of the government
                            and until project closing as at restructuring (see Objective 1 - Revision 1).

                            Revised Outcomes. The project outcomes remained the same following the Taliban takeover of the
                            government and until project closing as at restructuring (see Objective 1 - Revision 1).



                            Revised Rating
                            Negligible


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The project did not achieve the objective to support the development of digital government-to-person
                            payments in Afghanistan.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating                                  Primary Reason
                            Negligible                                               Low achievement


                                                                                                                              Page 9 of 17
             Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
             PAISA (P168266)



 OBJR1_TBL




         OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
         Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
         The project did not achieve the objective to support the development of digital government-to-person
         payments in Afghanistan.



         Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating                      Primary Reason
         Negligible                                              Low achievement
 OBJR2_TBL




         OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 2
         Overall Efficacy Revision 2 Rationale
         The project did not achieve the objective to support the development of digital government-to-person
         payments in Afghanistan.



         Overall Efficacy Revision 2 Rating                      Primary Reason
         Negligible                                              Low achievement


 5. Efficiency
Economic Efficiency. The Project Appraisal Document estimated an economic rate of return for the project,
ex-ante, of 24 percent in the base case. With the project unable to implement the Biometric Identification
System of Civil Servants and Pensioners and the Expansion of Financial Services and Access Points, the ICR
did not calculate an economic rate of return for the project, ex-post.

Operational Efficiency. The project disbursed US$5.014 million – 20 percent of the revised project cost of
US$25 million on August 15, 2021 or 50.2 percent of the revised project cost of US$9.98 million after August 15,
2021. The original implementation period of five years was reduced to two years following the takeover by the
Taliban of the government on August 15, 2021 and the suspension by the Bank of all disbursements to
Afghanistan on August 25, 2021. Policy reversals derailed the implementation of the Biometric Identification
System of Civil Servants and Pensioners and the Expansion of Financial Services and Access Points (see
Section 4). Moreover, institutional deficiencies at the implementing agencies hampered progress with the
project activities – the Ministry of Finance implementation unit was not fully staffed until August 2021, while the
Da Afghanistan Bank only managed to have a fully staffed implementation unit in the last six months of the
project and staff turnover was frequent.


Efficiency Rating
Negligible


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:

                                                                                                        Page 10 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PAISA (P168266)




                              Rate Available?             Point value (%)            *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     0
Appraisal                                                24.00
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     0
ICR Estimate                                              0
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome



                                                      Pre-August 2021                     Post-August
                                                                                          2021
                                                      Original          Restructured
Relevance of Objectives                               Substantial
Efficacy
Objective 1 - To support the development of digital   Negligible        Negligible        Negligible
government-to-person payments in Afghanistan
Efficiency                                            Negligible
Outcome Rating                                        Highly            Highly            Highly
                                                      Unsatisfactory    Unsatisfactory    Unsatisfactory
Amount Disbursed, cumulative, US$ million             5.000             5.014             5.014
Amount Disbursed, period, US$ million                 5.000             5.014 - 5.000 =
                                                                        0.014
Disbursement, percent                                 5/25* = 20%       0.014/25* =       100 - 20 - 0.06 =
                                                                        0.06%             79.94%
Weight Value                                          1 * 0.2 = 0.2     1 * 0.0006 =      1 * 0.7994 =
                                                                        0.0006            0.7994
Total Weights                                         1
Outcome Rating                                        Highly Unsatisfactory

* Commitment after cancellation and restructuring, US$ million, as of August 15, 2021 = 45 - 4.4 - 15.6 = 25
(see Section 2.E).


a. Outcome Rating
   Highly Unsatisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

There are no outcome sustainability risks for the Biometric Identification System for Civil Servants and
Pensioners, the Integration of Public Financial Management Infrastructure with the Digital ID and Payments

                                                                                                   Page 11 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      PAISA (P168266)



Ecosystems, and the Expansion of Financial Services and Access Points as the project did not achieve any
of the expected outcomes for these project components.

For the limited results achieved under the Integration of the National Payments Infrastructure with the Digital
ID Infrastructure, the sustainability risk is high. Reports from the Da Afghanistan Bank indicate that since
August 2021 the automated payment infrastructure is not fully utilized because the central bank cannot pay
for the maintenance of the system. Similarly, the interoperability that was achieved from the integration of
banks, mobile network operators, and other electronic money institutions (financial institutions that primarily
operate online and facilitate digital or e-money transactions on behalf of its clients) to the Afghanistan
Payments System is not fully functional as Da Afghanistan Bank has failed to sustain the external
maintenance contract. Clearing and settlements, including for interbank transactions, have
been impaired. Moreover, only a handful of automated teller machines remain functional because of the
liquidity crisis. The use of mobile money remains extremely low in Afghanistan, which has a predominantly
cash-based economy, and people have become even more reliant on cash since August 2021.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  With this project designed as part of a larger program to digitize government services
  throughout Afghanistan, the project team consulted and collaborated closely with other Bank teams as
  well as with external donors preparing and implementing related digitization projects in the country.

         According to the Project Appraisal Document, project activities pertaining to the Biometric
          Identification System of Civil Servants and Pensioners (see Section 2.D) were aligned with the
          preparation by the Civil Service Commission of a national Human Resource Management
          Information System under the Bank's Tackling Afghanistan’s Government Human Resource
          Management and Institutional Reforms Project as well as with the automation of the Education
          Management Information System under the Bank's Education Quality Reform in Afghanistan
          Project.
         Additionally, the Bank coordinated with the United States Agency for International Development,
          which supported the development of a Management information System for the Ministry of
          Health. The Ministry of Education and the Ministry of Health systems would be the largest civil
          servant databases in the Government's Human Resource Management and Information System.
         The project team reported considering relevant lessons learned from a related Bank operation in
          Afghanistan, the Mobile Salary Payments Pilot implemented by the Ministry of Labor, Social
          Affairs, Martyrs, and the Disabled, including that identification, authentication, and payment be
          integrated as a unitary process.
         The project team also engaged the Bank's Identification for Development Initiative (ID4D) for
          technical advice on digital identification systems and the Payment Systems Development Group
          for technical advice on digital and mobile payments solutions.

  However, when taking into account the challenging context and political risks, the operational design
  appeared quite ambitious. It sought to integrate (i) support for digital infrastructure, (ii) identification,
  authentication, and payment systems, and (iii) the expansion of access points. Although these elements

                                                                                                      Page 12 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PAISA (P168266)



  were essential for long-term sustainability, such a comprehensive approach proved to be ambitious within
  the Afghan context. Moreover, recognizing the complexity of the project and the involvement of multiple
  stakeholders in its implementation, the design incorporated several layers of coordination, which hindered
  effective implementation.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Supervision. The Bank supervised the project regularly. The Bank team filed seven Implementation
 Status and Results Reports (ISRs) and three Aide Memoires, the latter covering the implementation
 support missions of August-September 2019, January 2020, and July-September 2020. While the ISR
 were fairly straightforward and cited the latest values of the results indicators (mostly zero or unchanged
 from the baseline), the Aide Memoires were more informative and discussed the missions' findings about
 implementation issues and recommendations or moving forward. The Aide Memoires documented
 agreements reached between the Bank and the Government on action plans.

 Adaptation. The Bank was responsive to changed conditions in Afghanistan during project
 implementation.

       The restructuring in December 2020 introduced new output and outcome indicators. The new
        results indicators were relevant to the project objective as they provided a measure to
        illustrate achievement of the second part of the second component of the project - Integration of the
        National Payments Infrastructure with the Digital ID Infrastructure (see Section 4 - Objective 1
        Revision 1). The restructuring also downwardly revised the targets for several results indicators.
       Thereafter, the Bank agreed to a government request in June 2020 to cancel US$4.4 million of the
        IDA grant and US$15 million of the Afghanistan Reconstruction Trust Fund grant to release funds
        for Afghanistan's response to the COVID-19 pandemic. The first case of COVID-19 in Afghanistan
        was reported on February 2020, when 15,000 nationals returned from the Islamic Republic of Iran
        to Herat. By October 2020, there were 39,422 confirmed cases and 1,466 deaths. The Ministry of
        Health predicted an 80 percent infection rate and "upward of 125,000 deaths in Kabul alone if
        preventative measures were not followed" (World Health Organization, September 2020, "Early
        Responses to COVID-19 in Afghanistan," Eastern Mediterranean Health Journal, Volume 26, Issue
        12).
       In March 2022, the Bank cancelled US$15.6 million of the Afghanistan Reconstruction Trust Fund
        grant to release funds for the delivery of humanitarian services through the United Nations. The
        decision followed the Bank policy, adopted in coordination with the international community,
        development partners, and the Afghanistan Resilience Trust Fund donors, to unlock the funds of
        the Afghanistan Resilience Trust Fund to support the Afghan people and deliver critical health,
        education, and livelihood support.




                                                                                                   Page 13 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PAISA (P168266)




  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The results indicators were relevant to the project development objective. They would have been mostly
 adequate (except for missing indicators for the second part of the second component of the project -
 Integration of the National Payments Infrastructure with the Digital ID Infrastructure) to measure the impact
 of the project activities – biometric identification of civil servants and pensioners, integration of identification
 and payment systems, and expansion of financial service access points – toward the achievement of the
 project objective, namely, the development of digital government-to-person payments.



b. M&E Implementation
  Because many project activities were not implemented, and those that were started made very slow
  progress, the M&E plan could not be implemented as conceived. Nonetheless, according to the ICR, the
  Ministry of Finance and the Da Afghanistan Bank reported monthly on the status of project activities for
  which they were responsible. The Bank also filed regular ISRs, although the Bank could only report that
  there was "no change in value" in the listed results indicators, and that the "relevant activities have not
  started."



c. M&E Utilization
  The M&E data supplied evidence that the project achieved little to no progress with the project activities
  and the project outputs and outcomes.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Environmental Safeguards. The project was classified as an environmental assessment category "C"
   project at appraisal and did not trigger any Bank environmental safeguards policy.



                                                                                                         Page 14 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PAISA (P168266)



   Social Safeguards. The project did not trigger any Bank social safeguards policy either. The
   Government planned to hire a safeguards specialist and develop a Grievance Redress Mechanism. Neither
   was done. Despite pressure from the Bank, the Ministry of Finance was unable to recruit a
   safeguards specialist or develop a Grievance Redress Mechanism




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Procurement. The Da Afghanistan Bank completed only two of 21 planned procurement activities. The
   Bank was aware of limitations with the capacity of the central bank, based on past projects and the early
   record with this project. To achieve efficiency, the Bank and the central bank agreed that all
   procurement above $100,000 would be processed by the National Procurement Authority beginning
   on January 1, 2021 – the details were specified in a checklist also agreed to by the National Procurement
   Authority. Nonetheless, no substantial progress was achieved, as the capacity of the National
   Procurement Authority was limited as well.

   Financial Management. Overall disbursement for the project was low. Budget utilization by the Ministry
   of Finance was zero percent, and by the Da Afghanistan Bank, 11 percent. Neither implementing agency
   had the required financial management staff.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                               Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                   IEG
                                                                               Disagreements/Comment
                                                                               Negligible ratings for both
Outcome                        Unsatisfactory        Highly Unsatisfactory     efficacy and efficiency result in a
                                                                               highly unsatisfactory result.
                               Moderately
Bank Performance                                     Moderately Satisfactory   .
                               Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                 Modest                Modest

Quality of ICR                 ---                   High


12. Lessons


                                                                                                  Page 15 of 17
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       PAISA (P168266)



Three lessons are drawn from the ICR, with some adaptation.

Firm levels of government commitment and consistency of government policy with regards
to activity approaches are paramount especially to ambitious government projects. In this
project, which aimed to develop a digital payments ecosystem for the Government and recipients of
government salaries and transfers, the Government wanted, midway during project implementation,
to enroll civil servants, pensioners, and other payees in the controversial e-Tazkira Electronic
National Identity Card system, launched earlier in 2018 to verify the citizenship of residents, rather
than establish a separate biometric registry as designed at appraisal. The decision derailed the
implementation of the Biometric Identification System for Civil Servants and Pensioners. Separately,
the installation of new management at Da Afghanistan Bank derailed the implementation of
the Expansion of Financial Services and Access Points as the component was no longer the priority
for the new managers. None of the related project activities could commence thereafter.

Countries with high levels of institutional and social fragility require a careful sequencing of
project activities. In this project, the three components to a digital payments system were pursued
simultaneously. Instead, support to the digital ID infrastructure could have been tackled first, as the
ability to reliably verify identities would be a prerequisite for a workable digital payment system. The
integration of the identification, verification, and payment systems could have been pursed next, or
packaged as a separate project, as this phase would focus on the integration, at the wholesale level,
of large institutions into the infrastructure of the biometric identification and the digital payments
system. Finally, the expansion of access points could have been addressed last, or similarly
packaged as a separate operation, as this phase would now enable more and more customers, at
the retail level, to receive and make small-value payments digitally.

Institutional capacity pertains not just to the ability of individual agencies to implement
discrete projects but to the joint ability of multiple agencies to collaborate among
themselves. In this project, there were multiple implementing agencies working to link their
information and payment systems with the Biometric Information System for civil servants and
pensioners and the Afghanistan Payments System – the Ministry of Finance, Da Afghanistan Bank,
the National Statistics and Information Authority, the Independent Administrative Reform and Civil
Service Commission, the Asan Khedmat (the one-stop shop for public services), and numerous line
ministries and independent agencies. Where a government's ability to coordinate
implementation across agencies is generally limited, a high level of implementation readiness should
be assured by the time of project approval, both in the individual agencies and in the coordinating
agency, through intensive institutional capacity building efforts, including staff recruitment,
appointment, and training. The decision to create a coordinating unit at the Ministry of Finance
would have helped except that the unit was not fully staffed until August 2021.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR


                                                                                                    Page 16 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PAISA (P168266)



The ICR's account of changes made to the project scope, the results framework, the project cost and financing,
and the discussion of disruptions caused by the COVID-19 pandemic and the Taliban takeover of the
government, were informative and allowed for a clear understanding of the project narrative.

The ICR was candid about the political and institutional problems that plagued the implementation of this
project – essentially, the Government reversed project design decisions that were agreed upon with the Bank at
appraisal or was otherwise unable to execute basic administrative functions such as procurement and financial
management (see Section 4, Section 8.A, and Section 12). The ICR's discussion of the risk to the development
outcome was also candid, especially about how the partial gains made with connecting financial institutions to
the Afghanistan Payments System have since been undermined (see Section 7).

The lessons drawn by the ICR would be helpful to Bank operations in countries where politics is unsettled, and
institutions are weak.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      High




                                                                                                 Page 17 of 17
