     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GN Power Sector Recovery Project (P146696)



                                                                                    Report Number: ICRR0023387

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                    Project Name
 P146696                                       GN Power Sector Recovery Project

 Country                                       Practice Area(Lead)
 Guinea                                        Energy & Extractives


 L/C/TF Number(s)                             Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-54990,IDA-61830,IDA-H9690                31-Dec-2019                                          67,617,132.17

 Bank Approval Date                           Closing Date (Actual)
 16-Jun-2014                                  31-Mar-2022

                                              IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                               50,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                                74,891,108.74                                              0.00

 Actual                                            67,617,132.17                                              0.00




 Prepared by                   Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Dileep M. Wagle               Christopher David            Ramachandra Jammi               IEGSD (Unit 4)
                               Nelson




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The project’s development objective, as cited on p.5 of the Financing Agreement, as well as on p.7 of the
   PAD, was “to improve the technical and commercial performance of Electricité de Guinée (the national power
   utility)”.

   In assessing the efficacy of the project, the PDO will be parsed as follows:

          a. “to improve the technical performance of the national power utility”
                                                                                                     Page 1 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GN Power Sector Recovery Project (P146696)



        b. “to improve the commercial performance of the national power utility”



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Component 1: Financing of a Management Services Contract (MSC) to support EDG performance
   improvement (Estimated Cost at Appraisal: US$14 million; revised budget; US$16 million in 2018; Actual
   Cost at Closing: US$12.53 million). The component intended to fund an MSC between the Ministry of
   Energy and Hydraulic (MEH) and a private firm (the “Operator”) with sufficient technical capacity to provide
   management, operation and capacity building services to EDG over a 3 to 5-year period. Selection of the
   operator was to be based on a rigorous and competitive process, taking into account technical capacity and
   a proposed business plan. Project resources would cover fees to be paid to the Operator, including costs of
   mobilizing a full-time team of senior managers to run EDG, with specialized expertise in utility management.

   Component 2: Selected investments to support improvement of Conakry distribution network and
   commercial performance of EDG (Estimated Cost at Appraisal: US$33.7 million, revised budget US$46.7
   million in 2018; Actual Cost at Closing: US$46.77 million). The component had three sub-components, as
   follows:

   (a) Investments to: rehabilitate and upgrade the dilapidated infrastructure in Dixinn District in Greater
   Conakry; provide operation and maintenance equipment and tools; install the protection system of
   hydropower plants to ensure safe and sustainable supply of power; provide equipment to compensate for
   reactive power and improve power factor in the system; and finance the owner’s engineer for rehabilitation
   of household connections and standardization of informal and illegal connections.

   (b) Investments to: Implement a census of all EDG customers and revision of client database; upgrading of
   EDG’s integrated IT management system; and rehabilitation of household connections, including
   standardization of informal and illegal connections in Kaloum, Ratoma and Matoto districts,

   (c) Investments to cover costs related to the utilization of experts and equipment for the efficient operation
   of the Project Implementation Unit (PIU) within EDG.

   Component 3: Technical Assistance to MEH and Project Implementation Support (Estimated Cost at
   Appraisal: US$2.3 million, revised amount: US$12.3 million in 2018 and US$7.05 million in 2020; Actual
   Cost at Closing: US$4.35 million). This had two sub-components:

   (a) This supported MEH’s supervision of the Operator and provision of technical assistance to MEH to carry
   out other sector policy and oversight activities, including implementation of a financial restructuring of EDG;
   independent auditing of the monitoring of the operator’s performance; and developing the government’s

                                                                                                      Page 2 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GN Power Sector Recovery Project (P146696)



   anti-fraud policy and the legal instrument to enforce it.

   (b) This covered the costs related to utilization of experts and equipment for the efficient operation of the
   PIU within MEH.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Initial project costs were of the order of US$50 million, financed through an IDA credit of US$22.6 million
   equivalent and an IDA grant of US$27.4 million equivalent. The project was restructured in June 2018, to
   provide an Additional Financing (AF) of US$25 million equivalent. The additional funds were intended to
   construct a new substation in Kissosso, install new consumption meters for customers and provide capacity
   building support to EDG’s human resources. A second restructuring in December 2020 resulted in a
   US$5.25 million reduction in the budget under Component 3, on account of exchange fluctuations. Actual
   costs at project closing amounted to US$67.66 million, or 97 percent of the revised budget of US$69.75
   million.

   Borrower contribution

   No borrower contribution was envisaged for the project.

   Dates

   The project was approved on June 16, 2014, becoming effective on January 30, 2015. A Mid-Term Review
   was held on April 30 26, 2018. The project was originally set to close on December 31, 2019, but was
   extended by 12 months under the first restructuring, to allow for the completion of activities proposed under
   the AF. On account of delays triggered by the Covid-19 pandemic, the project’s closing was further
   extended to March 31, 2022. The AF expanded the scope of the project; thus a split evaluation will not be
   required in this instance.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country and Sector Context

Despite an abundance of natural resources, Guinea is one of the poorest countries in the world. The
economy is dominated by the mining sector, particularly bauxite, iron ore, gold, uranium and
diamonds. The lack of a reliable supply of electricity from the grid has meant that existing mining
operations have depended largely on self-supply of power. In 2010, some 139 MW of thermal capacity in
island systems was operated by mines compared to approximately 235 MW available on the national grid.

At the time of appraisal, the electricity sector in Guinea was performing poorly and unable to deliver a level
of service adequate to support economic growth and social development. Key reasons for the poor
performance included: (a) weak planning and supervision capacity in MEH, resulting in inadequate
generation capacity being installed and maintained, (b) revenue shortfalls for the electricity utility, EDG, on

                                                                                                      Page 3 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GN Power Sector Recovery Project (P146696)



account of a lack of metering of households and illegal connections to the distribution network, (c)
inadequate tariff policies, (d) the rapid deterioration of distribution/generation assets on account of
insufficient maintenance, leading to frequent breakdowns,; and (e) the abysmal quality of service with 56
percent of demand unserved. As a result, access to electricity remained low, at only 12 percent on
average, with the large concentration of consumers located in Conakry, a second relatively interconnected
network in the center of the country, and isolated centers scattered throughout the other regions.

At the end of 2013, EDG had nearly 100,000 customers with illegal connections, compared to 227,027
officially registered customers, most (65 percent) of whom were located in Conakry. That year EDG lost
US$0.07 per kWh generated. The average cost of supplying end users was estimated at about US$0.19
per kWh, against a generation cost in excess of US$0.30 per kWh (PAD; p.3). In 2013, the actual supply in
urban areas reached 162 MW while unsuppressed demand was around 277 MW, resulting in continuous
rolling blackouts. EDG remained highly dependent on the government for survival. With only 58 percent of
total electricity generated being actually billed by EDG - reflecting high technical and non-technical losses
(power theft or fraud) - not all of which was collected, direct budget subsidies of the order of US$64 million
were required in 2013 to pay for fuel for EDG’s thermal plants, along with non-payment of tax liabilities to
the government of the order of US$46 million by the end of 2012. To address this issue, the World Bank
and Agence Française pour le Développment (AFD) jointly financed a comprehensive Power Sector
Diagnostic and Recovery Plan (PSDRP) which provided recommendations to improve the commercial
performance of EDG and restructure the organization. Based on the sector diagnostic, the Government
concluded that a Management Services Contract (MSC) was the best way to implement the medium term
power sector recovery to strengthen the performance of the utility.


Alignment with Country Strategies

The Project’s development objectives (PDO) were consistent with those of the World Bank Group (WBG)’s
Country Partnership Strategy (CPS), FY2014-17, for Guinea. Insufficient and unreliable supply of electricity
was one of the most severe constraints for business in Guinea, the cost of power shortages resulting in
large losses in terms of foregone sales, estimated at 14 percent of overall sales (PAD; p.6). The project
was expected to contribute to Strategic Objective 2: ‘Catalyzing shared growth and economic
diversification’, for which energy was the priority sector. The PDO was also consistent with the long term
vision for the country’s development, as articulated in the Government’s ‘Guinea Vision 2040’, approved in
April 2017 – especially Pillar 2 dealing with sustainable and inclusive economic transformation.

The PDO remained relevant in principle to the WBG’s Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for FY18-23,
which was applicable at project closing. In particular, CPF Objective 7 (CPF, p.25, May 2018) was focused
on achieving ‘Better access to energy and water through improved management of utilities’, under which
the World Bank would provide continued support to EDG’s on-going management service contract with a
private operator, and promote better performance by EDG through interventions in line with the 2012
National Power Sector Recovery Plan and the National Electricity Access Scale-Up Program. However, as
the ICR points out (p.13), the new Government, following a military coup in 2021, had not yet officially
confirmed the pursuit of the reform agenda, and if at all had signalled a reversal of some key activities (see
Section 7), which could affect longer-term project outcomes.

Based on the above, Relevance is rated Substantial.




                                                                                                    Page 4 of 15
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      GN Power Sector Recovery Project (P146696)


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             “To improve the technical performance of the national power utility”

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change (TOC)

                             The project supported efforts to bring about an improvement in EDG’s performance – technical and
                             commercial. Key activities included: (a) the financing of a management services (MSC) contract with a
                             private firm (Operator) with the necessary technical expertise and fiduciary capacity to manage the utility,
                             administer its assets and control all business functions for the duration of the contract. The MSC would be
                             designed to help improve staff skills and morale, data management and grid infrastructure, and a key
                             deliverable would be the implementation of a business plan proposed by the Operator; (b) Technical
                             assistance to the Ministry to support MEH’s supervision of the Operator and oversight activities; and (c)
                             Selected investments to support improvement of Conakry’s dilapidated distribution network, upgrade the
                             utility’s IT management system and cover the costs of experts and equipment relevant to EDG’s commercial
                             performance. These activities were likely to lead to lead to an improvement in EDG’s commercial and
                             technical performance, leading to improvement in the utility’s finances and expansion of energy services.

                             Critical assumptions included improved governance and transparency in the finance and management of the
                             utility, the need to mobilize enough financial resources to ensure a continued maintenance of the new
                             transmission and distribution (T&D) infrastructure, and the pursuit of the electricity utility and sector reform
                             agenda.

                             Outcome indicators included average annual electricity losses, electricity bill collection rates, average daily
                             hours of service, and numbers of direct project beneficiaries (including ratio of female beneficiaries).

                             While the causality of activities and outputs/outcomes appeared to be direct and straightforward, and could be
                             expected to lead to results, it should be mentioned that the TOC did not specifically address the question of
                             whether the activities were sufficient critical mass to achieve sustainable results for the sector.

                             Outputs

                             - The hiring of a private firm under a four-year performance contract was achieved on schedule. A consulting
                             firm (VEOLIA-SEURECA Group) was independently selected by a private form (Mazars Group) to undertake
                             the management of EDG under a contract with the Government. An audit firm (Price Waterhouse) was hired
                             to audit the implementation and performance of the contract. Various studies and reports were completed in
                             the context of the management services contract (MSC), which strengthened EFG’s ability to better organize
                             and manage the energy T&D network – including a production and transmission diagnosis report, a network

                                                                                                                                 Page 5 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   GN Power Sector Recovery Project (P146696)



protection plan, diagnostic of the distribution function report, etc. The private form also competitively hired
EDG’s Director General, 11 Sector Directors and 36 Heads of Departments.

- The Technical Auditor was appointed on schedule, and carried out half-yearly and quarterly audit missions
and various reviews of EDG’s Internal Recovery Plan. All deliverables developed under the MSC were
assessed by the Auditor, leading to the production of review reports.

- Reflecting an improvement in Conakry’s distribution network, 340,313 people were provided access to
electricity by rehabilitation and standardization of household connections in Kaloum, Ratoma and Matoto by
project completion, well in excess of the target of 216,150. A further 62,500 people were provided with
access to electricity by household connections through the rehabilitation and extension of the distribution
network in Dixinn - against a target of 74,178. The ICR argues (p. 36) that in practical terms, if meters
already installed by EDG were taken into account, together with installations in progress, this target would be
fully achieved.

- The number of cabin substations refurbished was only 22, all in the Municipality of Dixinn, against an
overall target of 67. However, in addition, a new substation was constructed at Kissosso, along with the
construction of 39 cabin substations.

- 39 transformers were installed as part of the RMT contract in Dixinn, against a target of 24).

- 97.43 distribution lines were constructed or rehabilitated under the project, against a target of 96.


Outcomes

Reflecting an improvement in technical performance as a result of the construction and rehabilitation of
substations, electricity losses were reduced considerably, from a baseline of 42 percent to 19 percent per
year – well in excess of the target of 23 percent.

The target for an increase in daily hours of service was similarly exceeded – at 20 hours, against a baseline
of only 12 hours and a target of 18 hours. It should be noted that this improvement was in part the product of
enhanced electricity generation, through the commissioning of hydroelectric power stations in Kaleta and
Souapiti and the thermal stations in Kaloum, Kipé, Té-Power and Kar Power, and the rehabilitation of the
hydro power plants of the Samou system – all of which contributed to increasing power generation from 92.43
GWh at end-2015 to 844 GWh by March 2022. Since investments in these generation activities did not
appear to have been financed under the project, it is not clear that all of the improvement in hours of service
can be attributed to this operation.

The target for average annual interruption frequency in the project area, an indication of system reliability,
was exceeded, achieving a level as low as 51, against a target of 351 (and a baseline of 941). According to
the ICR (p.14), the System Average Frequency Interruption Index (SAIFI) and the System Average
Interruption Duration Index (SAIDI) recorded parameters of 35 and 26 respectively by the end of March 2022.

While all of the outcome indicators appeared to have achieved their targets, achievement of one of the
indicators cannot be fully attributed to the project. In addition, achievement of one of the intermediate



                                                                                                     Page 6 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   GN Power Sector Recovery Project (P146696)



indicators (substations refurbished) saw a shortfall in achievement. Based on this, efficacy of Objective 1 is
rated as Substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
“To improve the commercial performance of the national power utility”

Rationale
The Theory of Change applicable to this objective is the same as for Objective 1. Relevant activities to meet
this objective included technical assistance to the Ministry and the costs of equipment and experts relevant to
EDG’s commercial performance. The achievement of the project in meeting the objective of improving EDG’s
commercial performance was measured by three PDO indicator and two intermediate indicators.

Outputs

Taking into account that appointment of the Operator for the Management Services Contract and of the
Technical Auditor was achieved on schedule, the following outputs were achieved:

- The number of large consumer smart meters installed by project closing was 65,895, against a target of
57,887.

- The average number of hours of training achieved per staff per year was of the order of 17, against an
original target of 17 (formally revised to 10)

- A Beneficiary Satisfaction Survey, which was to have been completed and published by mid-June 2018,
was not delivered.



Outcomes

Project-funded activities undertaken in support of Objective 2 included implementation of a census of all EDG
customers and codification of the clients; launch of an Information Management System (IMS) for EDG; and
implementation of a revenue protection program through supply and installation of smart meters and the
management system to permanently secure revenues from large consumers accounting for the bulk (60-70
percent) of annual revenues. In addition, pre-payment consumption meters for all consumers would be
supplied and installed.

EDG’s commercial performance benefited from improvements introduced during implementation of the
management services contract with the private Operator, which helped the utility better organize and manage
the commercial function. EDG was restructured from a public establishment into an incorporated company


                                                                                                  Page 7 of 15
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                GN Power Sector Recovery Project (P146696)



                            wholly owned by the Government and under the oversight of a Board of Directors. Finally, TA was provided
                            through the deployment of six experts, to serve as advisers to the Directors.

                            - Based on the above activities, the key achievement underpinning the commercial performance of the utility
                            was an increase in the bill collection rate. This improved from its baseline of 77 percent to 86 percent by
                            project closing. However, this performance fell short of the target set (96 percent – original as well
                            revised). As such, this indicator was only partially achieved.

                            - The target for direct project beneficiaries (3.2 million), including share of females, was exceeded (4.034
                            million). This reflected the fact that the customer base for EDG had grown from 240,690 in 2015 to 638,301
                            by the end-March 2022, following implementation of the census, regularization of connections and
                            implementation of anti-fraud policies. 52 percent of these beneficiaries were female (target achieved).

                            - The number of people provided with new or improved electricity service was 416,456, in excess of the
                            (formally revised) target of 318,000. The number of females receiving these services was 216,498, similarly
                            in excess of the target of 165,360.

                            Based on the above, and taking into account the fact that the key indicator of the bill collection rate was
                            underachieved, efficacy of Objective 2 is rated Substantial.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Project efficacy for PDOs 1 and 2 were rated Substantial on account of the fact that while many of the
                            indicators achieved or exceeded their targets, attribution of a key indicator for Objective 1 could not be
                            established for the project, and achievement of another key indicator, for Objective 2, was similarly sub-par.
                            The project did however substantially improve the technical and commercial performance of the electricity
                            utility through enhanced managerial and technical capacity of EDG.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



   5. Efficiency
   Economic and Financial efficiency

   There were limitations on the nature of the economic analysis that could be carried out on the project, on

                                                                                                                                Page 8 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      GN Power Sector Recovery Project (P146696)



account of the fact that project Components 1 and 3 (covering the MSC and the TA) could not easily be
valued. Hence, the analysis was essentially restricted to the investments financed under Component 2, which
were clearly identified and the benefits of which were measurable. On this basis, the economic net present
value of these investments (ENPV) at completion was estimated by the ICR US$61 million, at an assumed
discount rate of 10 percent, compared to an ENPV calculated at appraisal of around US$34 million at a similar
discount rate. The economic internal rate of return (EIRR) at completion was estimated, on this basis, at 65
percent at completion (increasing to 69 percent if environmental benefits – which were not considered at
appraisal – were added) versus 33 percent at appraisal.

Financial analysis was conducted at the ICR stage, but not at appraisal. The ICR estimated the financial
internal rate of return at completion at 11.7 percent, with an FNPV of US$81 million.

Operational/Administrative Efficiency

According to the ICR (p.19), project implementation was generally efficient, on account of an effective
PIU. From project inception until 2021, when there was a military coup, the Government was fully supportive of
the project’s activities. PIU staff were familiar with the management of World Bank operations. The 27-month
delay that did take place in the project’s original closing date was to allow for completion of activities under the
additional financing, plus the impact of the Covid-19 emergency. Notwithstanding this, the project’s
implementation cost remained within the budget envelope. Disbursements amounted to 97 percent of the
restructured project cost (revised downwards by US$5.25 million in December 2020, to adjust for exchange
fluctuations).

Based on the above, the efficiency of the project is rated Substantial. The project completed most of its
activities, and both economic and financial rates of return at completion – calculated on the basis of activities
under Component 2 - were higher than estimated at appraisal.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?              Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                       0
 Appraisal                                                  33.00
                                                                                        Not Applicable
                                                                                       0
 ICR Estimate                                               65.00
                                                                                        Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome



                                                                                                        Page 9 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      GN Power Sector Recovery Project (P146696)




The project’s development objectives were substantially relevant to the World bank’s Country Partnership
Framework and the Government’s National Power Sector Recovery Plan, 2012. Project efficacy was rated
Substantial for both development objectives. Project efficiency was also rated Substantial. On this basis, the
project’s overall outcome is rated Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

There are substantial risks to development outcome. A key risk is the continued commitment of the
Government to reform of the utility and the electricity sector. While this commitment was strong at the outset
and during much of the implementation of the project, it could no longer be taken for granted after the military
coup in 2021. The authorities have since not yet issued any official policy outlining the future of electricity
sector reforms. According to the ICR (p.27), the nomination of the Director-General, two deputies and six
directors to replace those who had been competitively selected to the posts for EDG, was not an
encouraging signal in this regard.

A second, similar, risk was the fact that the project could not finalize four key activities that were central to
the viability of the electricity sector and utility; i.e. the procurement of the Integrated Management System
(IMS); the financial restructuring of EDG; the tariff methodology and guidelines; and capacity in EDG’s
regional offices.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project was generally relevant to the Government’s priorities, which had included improvement in the
  performance of EDG, its restructuring and reorganization and improvement in the legal framework for the
  sector. The project’s design identified activities for restructuring the utility and strengthening its
  management, along with preliminary investments in the electricity distribution infrastructure, supporting
  improvement of EDG’s technical performance.

  Preparation of the operation was adequate, although project costs were underestimated at appraisal,
  thereby necessitating an additional financing to scale up project activities. Implementation arrangements
  were also adequate: an Inter-Ministerial Commission for Energy and its Technical Committee being made
  responsible for overall strategic guidance and oversight of project implementation. MEH was the overall
  coordinator of the project and the implementation agency for Components 1 and 3, including procurement
  and administration of the MSC. Two implementation units, located in MEH and EDG, were responsible
  for executing the project’s activities.



                                                                                                        Page 10 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GN Power Sector Recovery Project (P146696)



  Project risks were appropriately identified – the risk assessment in the PAD (p.14) rating project risk as
  High, principally on account of Stakeholder Risk and Implementing Agency Risk, reflecting socio-political
  tensions related to the democratization process in Guinea over the previous 5 years. Although risk
  mitigation measures were built into the project’s design and implementation arrangements, they
  ultimately proved inadequate to cope with the outcome of the military coup that took place in 2021, As a
  result of which the process of sector reform came to a halt.

  On the basis of the above, the project’s quality at entry is rated Satisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The Bank team conducted regular supervision missions (15, over an eight-year period) and closely
 oversaw project implementation. The presence of a resident task team leader (TTL), who was stable
 throughout most of the implementation period, was helpful in this context, allowing for constant contact and
 interface with staff of the PIU in the line ministry of energy and EDG, and with relevant Government
 representatives. This allowed the team to process the additional financing smoothly, whilst continuing to
 oversee implementation of the MSC.

 The team also responded well to the challenges arising from the Covid-19 pandemic and the military
 coup. During the pandemic, project activities continued and the Bank team worked closely with the PIU to
 try and ensure that the project could achieve its developmental objectives. The team also stayed the
 course after the military coup in 2021, which halted project disbursements. On a slightly negative note, the
 ICR notes (p.26) that Aide Memoires were not filed during 2019-22. It should be noted however that
 following the military coup and political changes that followed, the World Bank triggered OP 7.30, as a
 consequence of which interactions with the authorities were reduced and supervision missions suspended.

 Based on this, quality of supervision is rated Satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The project’s Theory of Change (ToC) was relatively straightforward, and consistent with the Results
 Framework. PDO indicators in the results chain were generally relevant and consistent with the PDOs,

                                                                                                    Page 11 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GN Power Sector Recovery Project (P146696)



 while also being achievable and measurable, as were the intermediate indicators specific to each project
 component. These indicators included percentage electricity losses per year, average daily hours of
 service, average interruption frequency per year, bill collection rates, and numbers of households with new
 or improved electricity service.

 According to the ICR (p.23) M&E design and arrangements were sound and embedded in the right
 institutions - the PIUs, embedded in the EDG and the line ministry, respectively. These institutions had the
 capability to collect, aggregate and report on the performance of the PDO indicators.



b. M&E Implementation
  According to the ICR (p. 23), reporting on project implementation was carried out through supervision
  missions and Implementation Status and Results Reports (ISRs), which were shared with key
  stakeholders. Fifteen ISRs were filed during the period, supplemented by a Mid-Term Review (MTR),
  during which the Bank team and PIUs assessed implementation progress, and agreed among other
  things on any corrective measures to ensure proper performance of the management contract. The MTR
  also agreed on the activities to be funded by the AF – including priority investments that were part of
  EDG’s recovery program, such as the construction of a new 110 KV/20 KV substation in Kissosso. The
  ICR did not however specify how, and to what extent, the data and impact evidence were actually
  collected and analyzed in a methodologically sound manner.



c. M&E Utilization
  Data reporting by the PIU, Aide Memoires and ISRs played an important role in monitoring the status of
  the Results framework and in establishing a dialogue among key stakeholders (ICR, p.23). They also
  informed key implementation decisions, including the 2018 and 2020 level-2 restructurings.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as Category B, since no significant environmental effects were expected from its
   activities. The following safeguards policies were triggered: Environmental Assessment, OP/BP 4.01, and
   Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12. An environmental and social audit of EDG and a Resettlement
   Policy Framework were also prepared.

   A social concern that was raised was in the context of the Kissosso construction sub-station, involving the
   need to relocate the market shed for the women of Kissosso and develop a football field for the young
   people, as a measure of social integration. EDG had launched a consultation with construction companies
   in this context, and it is expected that the works would be completed by end-2023.


                                                                                                  Page 12 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GN Power Sector Recovery Project (P146696)



   At closing, the management of overall safeguards was rated Moderately Satisfactory for the Environmental
   Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) and Satisfactory for Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12).




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   According to the ICR (para 74), the financial management (FM) team consisted of an Administrative and
   Financial Officer and an Accountant with over 14 years of experience in handling the financial
   management of World Bank-financed projects. The team produced Financial Monitoring Reports (FMRs)
   for transmission to the World Bank, the quality of which were considered generally satisfactory. The audit
   of the project’s financial and accounting statements was carried out by two firms. The audit for FY22 and
   the project’s final closing audit have yet to completed. All of the completed audit reports were approved by
   the Bank with a satisfactory rating. Project accounts were certified by the External Auditor with an
   unqualified opinion, but subject to a few recommendations, which were generally implemented.

   Performance of the FM function was rated as either Moderately Satisfactory or Satisfactory in the project
   ISRs throughout the implementation period.

   Since PIU staff were fairly familiar with World Bank practices, from projects managed in the past,
   procurement transactions were conducted in accordance with Bank guidelines. As such, procurement
   operations were rated Satisfactory in the last ISR.

   However, at project closing, mostly as a reflection of the governance and transparency issues facing the
   country and the halting of disbursements, the procurement of several activities could not be
   finalized. These included: acquisition of an integrated IT management system; completion of EDG’s
   financial restructuring; and completion of the capacity-building component for staff in EDG.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   Institutional Strengthening: According to the ICR (p.20), the project provided a good practice example of
   building capacity in the energy utility and sector. Most PIU staff were full-time employees of EDG, on the
   same terms and conditions as other staff in the utility, which ensured that the project was an integral part of
   the EDG reform program. The arrangement also strengthened internal technical capacity and reinforced
   EDG’s project management and environmental and social risk mitigation capabilities.



11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment


                                                                                                    Page 13 of 15
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       GN Power Sector Recovery Project (P146696)



Outcome                          Satisfactory         Satisfactory

Bank Performance                 Satisfactory         Satisfactory
                                                                                 M&E implementation
Quality of M&E                   High                 Substantial
                                                                                 arrangements not clear
Quality of ICR                   ---                  Substantial


12. Lessons

IEG derives the following lessons drawn from the ICR:

1. Successful reforms of the electricity sector call for Government commitment. Earlier World
Bank projects had attempted to reform the electricity sector and utilities in Guinea and other
countries, with limited success. The project in question was able to achieve some success toward
improving the technical and operational capacity of the utility because the Government had been
fully engaged in the reform. For instance, the competitive hiring of EDG’s Director General, and
other directors and department heads helped bring in stronger management to run the utility, and is
a case in point. Conversely, after the military coup in 2021, the commitment of the authorities
declined, and was accompanied by a halt in the implementation of the reforms – to the detriment of
the performance of the sector (and utility).

2. A PPP approach to the implementation of a management services contract (MSC) is often
an effective practice in building technical skills and institutional capacity. For the project in
question, multiple private firms were hired to diagnose EDG’s operational situation, select the firm to
take up a performance contract with the Government, and to audit the performance of the
contract. The MSC was successful in diagnosing weaknesses in the utility and in executing several
measures to address to improve its overall effectiveness and efficiency. The private auditing firm
played an important role in enforcing accountability and in assessing the actual achievements in the
context of the MSC.

3. The project and the reforms it supported exemplified the importance of shifting away from
a culture of non-payment of energy bills through increased service quality and active
communication with clients. The increase in EDG’s formal clients, and hence to its ability to
collect revenue, was linked to efforts to regularize informal electricity connections and improve the
performance of the overall electricity network, whilst actively educating the client through
deployment of an external communication plan.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR


                                                                                                    Page 14 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GN Power Sector Recovery Project (P146696)



The ICR is generally well written, candid, evidence-based and internally consistent, and provides a fair amount
of detail on the changes that took place during implementation of the project. The achievement of objectives is
adequately analyzed, as is the Risk to Development Outcomes and Monitoring & Evaluation. Some more detail
on compliance on environmental and social safeguards would have been useful. The overall lessons arising
from the performance of the project are however relevant, and reasonably comprehensive in scope.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                 Page 15 of 15
