     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Tax Administration Reform Project (P116696)



                                                                                   Report Number: ICRR0023158

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P116696                                    Tax Administration Reform Project

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Kazakhstan                                 Governance


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                 Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-78350                                 31-Dec-2014                                             7,066,451.99

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 16-Feb-2010                                31-Dec-2021

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                       Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                               17,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                                10,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Actual                                             7,066,451.99                                              0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Shahrzad Mobasher           Judyth L. Twigg               Jennifer L. Keller              IEGEC (Unit 1)
 Fard




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Loan Agreement (p. 4), the project development objectives (PDOs) were: (i) to reform and
   strengthen the Borrower’s tax administration in order to improve the level of voluntary taxpayer compliance
   with tax regulations; (ii) to enhance effectiveness to fight tax evasion; and (iii) to increase administrative
   efficiency and reduce the potential for corruption.

   Because the results chains overlap significantly for the three objectives listed in the Loan Agreement, this
   Review will assess the achievement of one objective that combines these three elements: to reform and

                                                                                                     Page 1 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Tax Administration Reform Project (P116696)



   strengthen the tax administration in order to improve the level of voluntary taxpayer compliance with tax
   regulations, enhance effectiveness to fight tax evasion, increase administrative efficiency, and reduce the
   potential for corruption.

   A 2016 restructuring led to the deletion of some results framework indicators, while the targets on other
   outcome indicators became less ambitious. However, because the efficacy ratings would be the same under
   both the original and revised indicators and outcome targets, a split rating is not warranted.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Component 1: Institutional Development (estimated cost: US$4.85 million [Bank funding: US$0.49
   million]; actual cost: US$0.46 million [Bank funding: US$0.41 million]). This component sought to
   modernize the organizational structure of the Tax Committee (TC), including human resources aspects. The
   main activities under this component included a comprehensive review and redesign of the organizational
   structure of the TC according to good practices, reorganization and consolidation of local offices,
   strengthening of human resources (HR) services, design and the implementation of a Human Resources
   Management Information System (HRMIS), and capacity building of tax officials.

   Component 2: Operational Development (estimated cost: US$14.78 million [Bank funding: US$6
   million]; actual cost: US$5.37 million [Bank funding: US$2.5 million]). This component sought to
   modernize the operational framework of tax administration. The activities under this component included the
   modernization of core operations, such as reengineering of business processes, development of a risk-
   based audit methodology and cameral control, reform of the departmental appeal system, development of
   a universal filing methodology, and improvements in enforced tax collection.

   Component 3: Information Technology (IT) Infrastructure Development (estimated cost: US$27.6
   million [Bank funding: US$8.7 million]; actual cost: US$6.45 million [Bank funding: US$2.46
   million]). This component aimed to modernize the IT infrastructure of the TC to support Component 1 and 2
   activities. It aimed to consolidate central, regional, and district centers and tax subsystems, which at the
   time of project start were fragmented and maintained by different vendors. The main activities under this
   component were installation of an Integrated Tax Management System (ITMS, a comprehensive,
   integrated, digitalized solution for tax administration with coverage of key business processes such as
   registration of taxpayers, reporting, collection, administration of excisable products, audit, and monitoring)
   and an Integrated Data Base (IDB, an integrated solution to consolidate all data related to taxpayers’
   transactions and to provide data to the State Revenue Committee [SRC] from other operational systems).




                                                                                                    Page 2 of 14
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Tax Administration Reform Project (P116696)



  Comment 4: Project Management (estimated cost: US$4.2 million [Bank funding: US$1.81 million];
  actual cost: US$2.09 million [Bank funding: US$1.69 million]). This component was to support project
  coordination, implementation, and management.

  Across five restructurings, project activities were reduced in number and in scope as a result of delays in
  project implementation and as a portion of the Bank loan was cancelled. The most notable changes in
  activities included dropping the ITMS from project financing (and shifting it to government
  funding); removing organizational redesign of the TC due to the government's 2016 decision to merge tax,
  customs, and investigation functions; dropping the feasibility study for establishing a new training institute
  and curriculum for tax staff professional development due to the government's decision to reformat existing
  Customs Training Centers into SRC Training Centers; and elimination of support data processing centers,
  call centers, and an automated value-added tax refund system due to other changes in government
  priorities.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Cost. The original approved amount for the project was US$56.7 million, including contingencies (US$5.14
  million) and a front-end fee (US$0.13 million). The actual total cost was US$7.1 million.

  Financing. The project was expected to be financed through an International Bank for Reconstruction and
  Development (IBRD) loan of US$17 million (IBRD-78350) and a Borrower contribution of US$39.7 million,
  for total funding of US$56.7 million. US$3.5 million of the IBRD loan was cancelled at a 2017 restructuring
  due to savings from the significant exchange rate depreciation in 2015. Another US$3.5 million was
  cancelled at a 2020 restructuring due to the government's request not to finance the ITMS from the loan;
  the contract was transferred to the E-Finance Center, a company owned by the Ministry of Finance (MOF).
  The actual amount disbursed by the Bank was US$7.1 million.

  Borrower contribution. There was a planned Borrower contribution of US$39.7 million at appraisal. No
  actual Borrower contribution was made by the project closing date.

  Dates. The project was approved on February 16, 2010 and became effective on February 17, 2011. The
  mid-term review was conducted on January 27, 2014. There were five restructurings:

        December 3, 2014: Delays in project implementation, particularly the information technology
         modernization activities (Component 3), led to an extension of the closing date by two years, from
         December 31, 2014 to December 31, 2016.
        September 26, 2016: Further delays in Component 3 activities led to another extension of the
         closing date, from December 31, 2016 to December 31, 2018. The results framework was adjusted
         to accommodate shifts in project-financed activities.
        July 20, 2017: Part of the loan was cancelled.
        January 18, 2018: Progress in implementing Component 3, but the need for additional time to
         complete planned activities, led to another extension of the closing date, from December 31, 2018 to
         December 31, 2020.

  December 7, 2020: The COVID-19 situation delayed implementation of remaining Component 3 activities.
  Part of the loan was cancelled, and the closing date was extended a final time, from December 31, 2020 to


                                                                                                    Page 3 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Tax Administration Reform Project (P116696)



   December 31, 2021. The results framework was again adjusted to accommodate shifts in project-financed
   activities.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
At the time of appraisal, Kazakhstan was navigating a period marked by declining economic growth
due to the global financial crisis, impacting oil and non-oil revenues and leading to a deterioration
in the country’s fiscal balance. The country—which had benefitted from strong economic activity in the
finance and construction sectors buoyed by strong oil revenues in the period leading to the global financial
crisis—was significantly affected by the global financial crisis that resulted in falling commodity prices, and
by the tightening of international and domestic financial conditions. As a result, the country’s fiscal balance
deteriorated from 4.7 percent of GDP in 2007 to 1.1 percent of GDP in 2008 and was projected to be
equivalent to -2.1 percent of GDP in 2009, according to the 2009 IMF Article IV report. Meanwhile, the
country’s non-oil fiscal balance deteriorated from -4.7 percent of GDP in 2007 to -11.3 percent of GDP in
2008 and was projected to be equivalent to -12.9 percent of GDP in 2009. The large volatility in government
revenues was largely due to Kazakhstan’s relatively undiversified tax base, even when compared with other
resource-rich countries, with government revenues mainly derived from the value-added tax (VAT) and the
corporate income tax (CIT) across a small group of large firms and in a small set of sectors (OECD Tax
Policy Reviews: Kazakhstan 2020).

The deterioration in the country’s fiscal balance, combined with tightening international and
domestic financial conditions that adversely affected the private sector, led the government to
embark on a wide-ranging set of structural and institutional reforms in taxation to support
government revenues and the business climate. The Government of Kazakhstan considered tax policy
reforms targeting a broadening of the tax base and a reduction in the VAT and CIT tax rates (excluding the
agricultural sector, on which a special CIT tax rate was applied). While the revenue productivity of
Kazakhstan’s VAT exceeded the average of countries at the same level of economic development, this
largely came from a disproportionate share of imports in GDP, which facilitated collection, with the domestic
VAT base considered to be small by international standards, and to have been eroded in the period leading
to appraisal by exemptions for housing and infrastructure projects (Volume 1 of the Tax Strategy Paper).
Meanwhile, Kazakhstan’s profit tax rate of 30 percent was the second highest rate among the Cooperation
of China and 16 Central and Eastern European countries after China which stood at 33 percent and any
increase in capital mobility could have eroded Kazakhstan’s tax competitiveness which would exercise
downward pressure on the country’s CIT rate (Volume 1 of the Tax Strategy Paper). Given that the
government’s tax policy reforms were intended to be tax neutral, tax administration reforms were required
to generate additional public revenues through increased voluntary compliance with tax regulations.
Voluntary taxpayer compliance was adversely affected by, most notably, unofficial payments to tax
officials, taxpayer services being underutilized, rising costs for taxpayers to comply with tax regulations, the
audit system being weak, and low taxpayer confidence in the tax appeals mechanism.

A Tax Strategy Paper was prepared in June 2008 by Kazakhstan’s Tax Committee (TC) through the
Bank's Joint Economic Research Program, providing guidelines on tax policy and tax
administration reforms. The Tax Strategy Paper was comprised of two volumes. Volume 1: A Strategic
Plan for Increasing the Neutrality of the Tax System in Non-Extractive Sectors took as given the tax reform

                                                                                                      Page 4 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Tax Administration Reform Project (P116696)



package that the authorities and stakeholders had designed, proposing additional steps in the medium-term
horizon to maximize the benefits of tax neutrality on competitiveness. The proposed tax policy reforms were
related to labor (i.e., personal income tax and social tax), capital (i.e., CIT), and consumption (i.e., value-
added tax and excise duties). Volume 2: Tax Administration Reform and Modernization examined tax
administration issues in Kazakhstan with a view to support voluntary taxpayer compliance. As stated in the
Executive Summary of Volume 2 of the Tax Strategy Paper, “[vo]luntary compliance, like a tripod, rests on
three pillars: a sound system of audit (inspection) of taxpayers’ returns (declarations) and records; an
efficient system for the collection (including enforced collection), accounting, and recording of all payments
due; and a comprehensive taxpayer service and education program that reduces the cost of compliance for
taxpayers. All activities of the tax administration apparatus must be judged on the basis of how well they
improve performance in these areas.” To this end, it identified functional areas of intervention in the short,
medium, and longer-term horizons, which consisted of (i) organizational structure, (ii) human resources and
training, (iii) anti-corruption, (iv) taxpayer service and education, (v) large taxpayers, (vi) audit/inspection,
(vii) collection, (viii) information technology, and (ix) legal and appeals. Volume 2 included detailed
guidelines and timelines for each of the proposed measures under each of these functional areas. On
planning, organization, and staffing, for example, it suggested the development of a strategic plan within a
medium to long-term framework (from three to seven years) which, taking into account a realistic
assessment of current tax administration operations, would provide a detailed modernization plan
encompassing investment and organizational changes in key functional areas. On collection, for example, it
recommended that the tax code be amended and procedures be promulgated to enable write-off of
uncollectible accounts.

The objectives pursued by the project were consistent with the Government of Kazakhstan's vision
and national development strategy. The objectives were also consistent with the TC’s strategy, as
outlined in both volumes of the Tax Strategy Paper. The government's vision outlined in Kazakhstan
2050 aspires to lead the country to a modern knowledge-based society, with an economy that is well
diversified and driven by private sector growth. Kazakhstan 2050 is being implemented in five-year
incremental national development strategies, with the strategy at the time of appraisal centered around five
priorities: (i) accelerating the technological modernization of the economy; (ii) improving the business
environment; (iii) increasing macroeconomic stability; (iv) enhancing the quality of human capital; and (v)
strengthening institutions, security, and anti-corruption efforts. The project's objectives were also consistent
with the TC’s Strategy for the Development of the Tax Service released in 2007, which aimed at: (i)
ensuring the completeness of tax collection through improvement of voluntary compliance, simplification of
tax legislation, and increased efficiency of tax collection; (ii) ensuring taxpayer satisfaction through
increased awareness and taxpayer education, reduced administrative burden, and improved quality of
taxpayer services; (iii) formation of a highly effective tax service through reengineering of business
processes, introduction of a risk management system, and improvement in the use of modern technology;
(iv) strengthening of the enforcement function; and (v) improving transparency and the motivation and
orientation of staff towards achievement of results.

The objectives were also aligned with all five priorities of the World Bank-supported Country
Partnership Strategy (CPS) with Kazakhstan at appraisal FY12-FY17, which included: economic
recovery after the 2008 financial crisis; diversification of the economy through industrialization; and
advancing public sector reforms to enhance efficiency, transparency, and accountability of public sector
officers. With regard to the last, the government intended to make progress on implementing reforms in the
areas of public financial management and customs and tax administration. This project was designed to
strengthen public finances and the public sector for efficient service delivery. The project remained
aligned with the Country Partnership Framework at closing (CPF, FY20-FY25), which stated (p. 7) that

                                                                                                       Page 5 of 14
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Tax Administration Reform Project (P116696)



               "improvements to tax administration will be essential for non-oil revenue mobilization." To promote inclusive
               growth, the CPF contained an objective to strengthen the environment for private sector development that
               covered the tax administration reform activities under this project. The CPF also contained a cross-cutting
               focus area on effective governance and strengthened market and social institutions, with an objective to
               support evidence-based delivery of public sector reform.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Reform and strengthen the tax administration in order to improve the level of voluntary taxpayer compliance
                             with tax regulations, enhance effectiveness to fight tax evasion, increase administrative efficiency, and reduce
                             the potential for corruption.

                             Rationale
                             The results chain linking proposed activities, outputs, and outcomes was logical. Improving voluntary taxpayer
                             compliance was to be supported by activities related to: (i) introducing compliance risk management to better
                             manage and improve tax compliance; (ii) improving the appeals process to enhance the dispute resolution
                             system; (iii) establishing a comprehensive program of taxpayer education and services; (iv) expanding e-filing
                             and e-payment possibilities; (v) developing and adhering to tax service standards; (vi) undertaking
                             performance feedback surveys and using survey results to improve client service; (vii) improving strategic
                             planning; (viii) reengineering business processes to increase efficiency, transparency, and accountability
                             while reducing opportunities for rent-seeking behavior; (ix) introducing modern, integrated information
                             technology business support; (x) strengthening human resource technical and operational capacity; (xi)
                             improving data exchange between the TC and other enforcement agencies; (xii) strengthening large taxpayer
                             administration; and (xiii) strengthening the core operational functions of the TC. Improvement in the ease and
                             the time for filing tax returns through enhanced education and tax service standards, as well as in the process
                             for resolving tax disputes through the appeals mechanism, constituted critical activities along the results chain
                             toward the achievement of the overarching objective of improving the level of compliance with tax regulations.
                             Further, the introduction of compliance risk management, which could more effectively verify income/sales of
                             a tax entity against third-party information, was essential to improving voluntary taxpayer compliance, if
                             adequate penalties for non-adherence to tax regulations were adopted in parallel. Finally, enhanced
                             administrative efficiency was expected to reduce the likelihood of tax officials being bribed by taxpayers.

                             Outputs and intermediate outcomes

                             Until the 2016 restructuring, there were seven key outputs/intermediate outcomes pursued by the project. The
                             project achieved two out of these seven outputs/intermediate outcomes: the reorganization and consolidation
                             of the TC based on functional rationalization, and the development of design and systems architecture for

                                                                                                                                Page 6 of 14
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Tax Administration Reform Project (P116696)



an integrated IT system with major functions. The ICR explains that further organizational review and design
of an appropriate organizational TC structure at the headquarters and in the regions was not carried out due
to the merger of tax, customs, and economic investigation functions and the creation of the State Revenue
Committee (SRC). Similarly, the planned feasibility study for establishing a tax training institute and the
curricular needs assessment and recommendations for training programs to meet current and future
modernization requirements were also dropped with the reconfiguration of the Customs Training Center into
the SRC Training Center. The planned development of the automated risk management system was
narrowed to exclude the VAT refund system and the development of data processing centers. The ICR
reports that the latter was dropped due to the adoption of the Universal Filing Concept; the project
team clarified that the Universal Filing Concept introduced universal declarations to provide 100 percent
coverage of all taxes paid by individuals and is legislated under Chapter 71 of the Kazakhstan Tax Code (see
unofficial translation at https://adilet.zan.kz/eng/docs/K1700000120). The ICR also reports that it was not
possible to assess the depth and the coverage of planned business process reengineering (review and
redesign of the business processes of the tax administration), which was expected to lead to increased e-
filing and e-payment possibilities.

Tax audits were centralized at the oblast (i.e., regional office) level and eliminated at the rayon (i.e., district)
level, and the large taxpayers office was established at the SRC with taxpayer service centers rolled out
across the country. The tax appeals unit was moved from the SRC to the Ministry of Finance, with
representatives of other state bodies and representatives from the private sector as its members. The ICR
reports that despite the progress achieved to date, further improvements are required given that the majority
of cases are ruled in favor of the SRC. The number of thematic and complex audits conducted fell by 35
percent relative to the 2016 level, while charges and penalties have increased by 16 percent. About 91
percent of public services are now provided in electronic format.

Outcomes

The ICR reports that there was no monitoring of the PDO level indicator related to the increase in the total
number of registered taxpayers. While this indicator was a relevant measure to assess the overarching
objective of improving tax compliance, it was not monitored or reported, and there were no outputs
or intermediate outcomes linked to a reduction in the shadow economy through, for example, the introduction
of compliance risk management to better manage and improve tax compliance. In the absence of evidence
to the contrary, this suggests that the outcome was not achieved.

The percentage of returns filed electronically for legal entities increased from 61.2 percent in 2008 to 97.7
percent in 2021, exceeding the original target of 80 percent and the revised target of 96 percent. However,
this indicator is not a complete measure of achievement of the objective, with individual taxpayers having
been removed from the original indicator at the 2016 restructuring, limiting the measurement of the indicator
to legal entities, i.e., entities established in the legal form of joint stock companies, limited liability
partnerships, and their branches, as well as public associations. The project team clarified that the indicator
was limited to legal entities, given that legal entities are most likely to use electronic means for complying with
tax obligations.

The average time taken by taxpayers to comply with tax obligations fell from 271 hours in 2011 to 186 hours
in 2020, representing a 32.8 percent decline, falling short of the original target of a 50 percent reduction but
essentially meeting the revised target of a 33 percent decline. The baseline and the actual achievement
figures for this indicator were based on the Doing Business survey, which was discontinued after Doing
Business 2020, and the actual achievement at the time of project closing was not assessed. This indicator

                                                                                                       Page 7 of 14
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               Tax Administration Reform Project (P116696)



                            constitutes a valid, though incomplete, measure for assessing achievement toward improved voluntary tax
                            compliance, given that an improvement in the average time taken by taxpayers to comply with tax obligations
                            is likely to lead to greater compliance with tax obligations.

                            The target for the cumulative stock of arrears as a percentage of total tax collected in a year was achieved,
                            with the ratio falling from 1.7 percent in 2008 to 0.88 percent by 2015, below the target of 1.30 percent. This
                            indicator was dropped at the 2016 restructuring, with the Bank arguing that the result for this indicator
                            depended on a range of factors outside of tax administration control, including taxpayers' own calculations of
                            tax accruals or deductions, results of tax audits, insolvency, and appeals.

                            The percentage of field audits (audits that are carried out at the taxpayer’s premises) selected by automated
                            procedure rose from 0 percent in 2008 to 14.7 percent in 2021, well below the target of 50 percent. The
                            restructuring paper explains that risk management systems were not purchased until the 2016 restructuring
                            due to procurement delays.

                            The average adjustment to reported taxes following tax audits per auditor rose from 35 million tenge in 2013
                            to 55 million tenge in 2021, well below the original target of 210 million tenge and the revised target of 370
                            million tenge.

                            VAT productivity rose from 0.30 to 0.34 by June 8, 2021, falling short of the target of 0.40.

                            The nominal increase in the average tax revenue collected by each tax official rose from 328 million tenge in
                            2009 to 448 million tenge in 2015, falling short of the target of 530 million tenge. This indicator was dropped
                            at the 2016 restructuring. The ICR explains that the increase relative to the baseline cannot be attributed to
                            the project’s achievement in light of the fact that tax revenues relative to GDP declined significantly over the
                            period, but that this was likely explained by a potential reduction in the number of tax officials. IEG finds that
                            achievement on this indicator cannot be assessed because (i) although the merger of the tax and customs
                            departments at SRC made it look like there was a large increase in the number of tax officials, the Bank does
                            not report the number of officials who had actual responsibility for tax collection, and (ii) there is a difference
                            between changes in tax revenue and changes in tax revenue as a share of GDP, and fluctuations in the tax
                            revenue to GDP ratio do not provide information on fluctuations in nominal tax revenue collections.

                            The public perception of the quality of taxpayer services fell from 88.5 percent (legal entities: 88 percent;
                            individuals: 89 percent) in 2010 to 87 percent (legal entities: 85 percent; individuals: 89 percent) in 2017
                            against a target of 89.5 percent (legal entities: 89 percent; individuals: 90 percent).

                            Many key outcome targets were not achieved. Further, given that many of the project's key activities were
                            dropped, attribution of observed outcomes to project interventions is questionable.



                            Rating
                            Modest


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                                                                                                                                 Page 8 of 14
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Tax Administration Reform Project (P116696)




  Rationale
  Given mixed achievement of outcome targets and unresolved questions about attribution of observed
  outcomes to the project’s interventions, efficacy is rated Modest.



  Overall Efficacy Rating                                    Primary Reason
  Modest                                                     Low achievement


5. Efficiency
An economic analysis of the project was conducted at the appraisal and ICR stages.

Economic analyses were conducted on the value of time saved filing taxes for legal entities and individuals. For
the economic analysis performed for legal entities, the ICR recognizes that the benefits are likely attributable to
the amendment to the Tax Code that simplified tax provisions for corporations. For the economic analysis
performed for individual taxpayers, the economic analysis measured the reduction in the time spent in tax
offices, which it attributes to an improvement in automated processes. The ICR finds net positive benefits in
each case.

An economic analysis was also performed on fiscal benefits. The ICR states that "in the case of fiscal benefits,
the estimation shows a negative outcome. The NPV of the fiscal benefits at appraisal was KZT 17,727 million
and the fiscal benefits estimated at closing are KZT 12,929 million (negative). The main reason for that is that
the tax arrears rate was expected to decrease over the implementation of the project evidencing a high level of
compliance, more revenue, and a more effective and efficient tax administration. However, as the tax arrears
rate ended up higher, this resulted in fewer fiscal benefits" (ICR, p. 20). As part of the ICR Review, the task team
clarified that the main factor behind the growth of arrears was the accrual of advance payments on corporate
income tax for the period of December 25, 2021, which were paid by individual large taxpayers in January 2022.

Project delays led to extensions totaling seven years. The ICR attributes poor implementation efficiency to: (i)
high staff turnover, as well as cumbersome bureaucratic rules and procedures at the SRC and the Project
Management Unit (PMU); (ii) delay in the completion of a feasibility study for the IT component (which was not a
requirement at appraisal) due to slow adoption of the consolidated e-government digital strategy; (iii)
inefficient procurement procedures that made it difficult for the SRC to comply with the government's and the
Bank’s procurement guidelines; and (iv) resistance to change by internal and external vested interests.
An assessment conducted on the causes for the procurement delay of the ICT component at the project's mid-
term review revealed that procurement arrangements were satisfactory, but that the protracted decision-making
process within the SRC explained the delay.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:

                                                                                                       Page 9 of 14
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Tax Administration Reform Project (P116696)




                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     0
Appraisal                                                  686.00
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     0
ICR Estimate                                                0
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

With high relevance, modest efficiency, and modest efficacy, overall Outcome is rated Moderately
Unsatisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Unsatisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The ICR identifies a number of risks to sustaining development outcomes related to the SRC failing to
deepen the tax reforms that have been implemented. To reduce this risk, the ICR recommends that the SRC
consider: (i) a stocktaking exercise to review and assess the current stage of tax administration in
Kazakhstan, including benchmarking it against best international standards and trends; (ii) development of
strategies on increased revenue mobilization, including a new compliance risk-based
management framework; (iii) stakeholder consultations; and (iv) training of officials, including the completion
of a code of ethics.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  While the Project Appraisal Document (PAD) did not provide a theory of change diagram, it did
  elaborate on the results chain linking project activities to the achievement of the PDO. IEG finds that
  quality-at-entry may have been adversely affected by the Bank failing to adequately consider lessons
  learned despite Volume 2 of the Tax Strategy Paper suggesting that these were considered at project
  design. For example, one of the key lessons learned consisted of having a “clear vision of the
  organization’s future state, supported by the government, and well-articulated strategies and
  comprehensive plans agreed to realize this vision.” The merger of tax, customs, and economic
  investigation functions and the creation of the SRC derailed many of the project activities under
  Components 1 and 2, which resulted in a significant reduction in project allocations. Another lesson
  learned on “appropriate provision for development of human and institutional capacities” was also


                                                                                                    Page 10 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Tax Administration Reform Project (P116696)



  affected by the failure to conduct an assessment related to the establishment of a tax training institute
  and the curricular needs assessment and recommendations for training programs to meet current and
  future modernization requirements due to the reconfiguration of the Customs Training Center into the
  SRC Training Center. Another key lesson learned that was not adequately captured in project design was
  the “investment in ICT linked to reengineered business processes and focused on institutional
  development” which is evidenced in the significant delays in Component 3 activities. It is also not clear
  how project design took into consideration the tax reform package that may have been implemented in
  parallel.

  The PMU established M&E arrangements, but there were significant shortcomings in the results
  framework. It lacked outcome-based indicators, limiting the assessment of progress toward achievement
  of the objectives, and baselines and targets were not clearly set.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The ICR reports that missions were mainly focused on addressing issues with the implementation of
 Component 3 activities, with the project team providing recommendations to ensure progress toward the
 achievement of the PDO.

 There were a number of major shortcomings, however. At the second project restructuring, the Bank opted
 to scale back on project activities and reduce and refine indicators, rather than take the opportunity to
 fundamentally reframe the project's approach in line with constraints to achieving project outcomes. Project
 implementation was also adversely affected by the co-task team leader's departure from the country that
 limited the Bank’s ability to supervise implementation, with the last aide-memoire dated March 2-6, 2020.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 M&E design had significant shortcomings.

 First, while measurement of progress toward voluntary tax compliance through the increase in the total
 number of registered taxpayers by 10 percent annually was featured in the PAD, the indicator was not


                                                                                                  Page 11 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Tax Administration Reform Project (P116696)



 included in the table of arrangements for results monitoring in the PAD's Annex 3 and was consequently
 not monitored until the 2016 restructuring.

 Second, the ICR (p. 24) admits that "in the case of the TARP, the selected IRIs and results were not clear
 on IRIs' contribution towards achieving the PDO over the life of the project. For example, components 1
 and 2 had the following IRIs: 'organizational review and design of appropriate organizational structure at
 HQ and in the regions,' 'reorganization and consolidation of the TC on functional rationalization,'
 'development of design and systems architecture for the integrated IT system with major functions,' and
 'development of automated risk management and VAT refund system,' just to mention a few. This seems
 tautological but did not inform on whether the PDO was under good course or not. Moreover, even though
 the PAD mentions the IRI 'operational cost/revenue collected,' it was not incorporated into the results
 framework. This indicator could help better to measure the contributions to the PDO by TARP."

 Third, some of the PDO indicators were not well elaborated, such as the indicator on the selection of audits
 through an automated procedure, where it was unclear whether this referred to the central audit system,
 the ITMS, or the risk management system. Similarly, the indicator on the number of adjustments in audits
 was unclear as to how adjustments would be accounted for in a systematic manner.

 Fourth, the M&E capacity of the PMU was inadequate, and the fact that the Project Operation Manual was
 not updated but was nonetheless approved at the project launch adversely affected M&E design



b. M&E Implementation
  The 2016 restructuring simplified the M&E framework. The number of PDO indicators was reduced from
  seven to six, and the number of IRIs was reduced from eight to three. The PDO level indicators on non-oil
  tax/GDP and the nominal increase in the average tax revenue collected by each tax official were
  removed, and the IRI on VAT productivity was raised to a PDO-level indicator. The three IRIs were limited
  to the reorganization and consolidation of the TC on functional rationalization, the development of design
  and systems architecture for the integrated IT system with major functions, and the development of
  automated risk management. However, this streamlining "did not imply a more meaningful M&E
  framework" (ICR, p. 24), with most of the shortcomings noted in design continuing to apply.



c. M&E Utilization
  M&E utilization was limited by the shortcomings identified under M&E design and implementation.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards


                                                                                                  Page 12 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Tax Administration Reform Project (P116696)



   The project is classified Category C for environmental safeguards. No safeguard policies were triggered.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   The project's performance in financial management was rated Satisfactory. The ICR indicates that this is
   evidenced by assessments conducted by the World Bank, as well as by external auditors. The project's
   performance in following procurement procedures was rated Moderately Satisfactory across all ISRs. This
   performance was largely explained by delays in the procurement of information technology equipment
   under Component 3. An assessment to identify the underlying causes of procurement issues during the
   mid-term review revealed that while procurement arrangements were satisfactory, decision-making
   processes within the SRC explained much of the delays in procurement processes.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   The ICR notes that while the project was not gender tagged, the majority of users of the taxpayers’ center
   of Nur-Sultan were women seeking clarifications, as evidenced during an ICR field mission. Furthermore,
   this field mission found that the majority of tax officers working at the help desks at the tax centers were
   women.

   The ICR indicates that digital platforms supported by the project allowed taxpayers to fulfill their tax
   obligations during the COVID-19 pandemic, and that the taxpayers' database allowed the government to
   provide income transfers to the sectors that were most adversely affected by the pandemic.



d. Other
   None noted.



11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
                                Moderately            Moderately
Outcome
                                Unsatisfactory        Unsatisfactory
                                Moderately            Moderately
Bank Performance
                                Unsatisfactory        Unsatisfactory
Quality of M&E                  Modest                Modest

Quality of ICR                  ---                   Modest


12. Lessons

                                                                                                    Page 13 of 14
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Tax Administration Reform Project (P116696)




The IEG concurs with the lessons drawn from the ICR, which included:

     1. The instrument used should reflect the nature of the change sought. In this case,
        Development Policy Financing might have provided greater incentives for the government to
        implement reforms, compared to Investment Project Financing.
     2. The M&E framework should be not only well designed but carefully monitored to provide
        early alerts when project implementation is being confronted with challenges.

Further, IEG finds that the adoption of an ITMS should carefully consider any institutional and
political factors that may delay or prevent its adoption. In this case, the merger of the tax and
customs services limited SRC’s ability to design and to launch the process, along with the adoption
of the e-government digital strategy that was a pre-requisite to the completion of a feasibility study
for the IT component.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The quality of the ICR is rated Modest due to the relatively low quality of analysis. Given the multiple issues at
the design and implementation stages, which ultimately resulted in five project restructurings and significant
delays in closing the project, the ICR could have incorporated detailed analysis on gaps between the
recommended guidelines of Volume 2 of the Tax Strategy Paper and the activities that were implemented
through the project. Further, the ICR fails to discuss the tax reform package that may have been implemented
in parallel and how such reforms were considered or may have impacted project design and implementation.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Modest




                                                                                                     Page 14 of 14
