     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Fujian Fishing Ports Project (P129791)



                                                                                   Report Number: ICRR0023569

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                   Project Name
 P129791                                      Fujian Fishing Ports Project

 Country                                      Practice Area(Lead)
 China                                        Urban, Resilience and Land


 L/C/TF Number(s)                             Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-83780                                   31-Dec-2020                                         19,301,677.14

 Bank Approval Date                           Closing Date (Actual)
 03-Jun-2014                                  15-Dec-2022

                                              IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                             60,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                              19,301,677.14                                               0.00

 Actual                                          19,301,677.14                                               0.00




 Prepared by                  Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Hassan Wally                 Avjeet Singh                  Avjeet Singh                   IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) of the Fujian Fishing Ports Project (FFPP) as articulated in the
   Loan Agreement (LA, page 5) was identical to the one stated in the Project Appraisal Document (PAD,
   paragraph 13) aimed to:

   "reduce the vulnerability of fishing communities to extreme weather events in selected counties in
   Fujian Province."


                                                                                                    Page 1 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Fujian Fishing Ports Project (P129791)



   Parsing the PDO. The PDO will be parsed based on one objective:

   To reduce the vulnerability of fishing communities to extreme weather events in selected counties in Fujian
   Province.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   The PDO was supported by the following four components:

   1. Construction and Upgrading of Fishing Port Facilities (appraisal cost: US$85.68 million, actual
   cost: US$36.14 million). This component was to finance the construction and upgrading of infrastructure in
   six fishing ports in Fujian Province (Beishuang, Dajing, Fenghuo, Lv’xia, Sansha, and Wen’ao in Xia’pu
   County) to provide shelters to fishing vessels during typhoon events. Infrastructure to reduce vulnerability
   against extreme weather events included breakwaters, berthing facilities, embankments, land formation,
   trestle bridges, anchorages, access roads, emergency shelters, and port management cottages. The
   component was also to finance dredging and relocation of shrimp ponds. Emergency shelters and cottages
   were to be built for fishers displaced by storms, and accommodation was to be provided for port
   management teams.

   2. Improvement of the Early Warning and Response Systems (appraisal cost: US$2.14 million, actual
   cost: US$3.72 million). This component was to finance the development of an Early Warning System
   (EWS) and emergency response plan for implementation by the Emergency Response and Command
   Centre (ERCC) of Xia’pu County, defining early warning protocols and associated actions, resources,
   communication and coordination mechanisms, and roles for fishing communities and involved institutions;
   purchase of emergency response equipment for the ERCC, such as rescue vessels; and purchase of
   communication system software and hardware for the ERCC operation and for fisher vessels to operate the
   EWS and emergency response plan.

   3. Training and Capacity Building (appraisal cost: US$8.43 million, actual cost: US$8.32 million). This
   component was to finance three subcomponents:

   3.1. Capacity building for school administrators and teachers in the Fujian Provincial Ocean Technical
   School (FOTS) in Fuzhou (the capital city of Fujian Province) for fishers training through international study
   tours and domestic training programs on school management, advanced training on fishing.




                                                                                                     Page 2 of 21
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Fujian Fishing Ports Project (P129791)



  3.2. Development and updating training materials to meet skill demands from the fishing sector, setting up a
  database of FOTS training programs for fishers, and designing and delivering specialized training programs
  to fishers to reduce fishing communities' vulnerability.

  3.3. Upgrading of FOTS learning facilities and equipment, including renovating training buildings (Qinting
  and Cangshan campuses) and dormitories and acquiring training equipment (navigation simulators), books,
  and learning materials.

  4. Technical Support and Project Management (appraisal cost: US$2.22 million, actual cost: US$1.37
  million). This component was to finance technical support to the Provincial Project Management Office
  (PPMO), housed in the Planning and Finance Division of the FDOF, and relevant executing agencies in
  Xia’pu County and FOTS to enhance project management and implementation capacity, respectively. The
  component was also to finance consultancy support services for project management, procurement,
  monitoring and evaluation (M&E), domestic/international study tours, and updating port management
  manuals for the selected ports.

  Revised Components. The December 2020 restructuring reduced the scope of component 1 and adjusted
  the four components’ costs. All component 1 activities in the Beishuang, Lv’xia, and Wen’ao fishing ports
  were canceled. In the Dajing fishing port, the construction of a sea dock and a retaining wall was also
  canceled, while the other activities in this port, dredging the harbor basin, construction of an inner port basin
  protection, and construction of a shelter, remained. Accordingly, the loan proceeds allocation to component
  1 was reduced from US$50.02 million to US$25.22 million. The loan proceeds allocation to the other
  components was also revised: for component 2, it was increased from US$2.14 million to US$3.76 million;
  for component 3, it was increased from US$5.86 million to US$8.67 million; and for component 4, it was
  reduced from US$1.83 million to US$1.20 million.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost. The project cost at appraisal was estimated at US$103.47 million. According to the ICR Data
  Sheet (page 2), the actual cost was US$54.10 million. The difference between the appraisal and actual
  amounts was due to scaling down the project and cancelling financing (see below).

  Financing. The project was financed through an IBRD Loan worth US$60.00 million. The amount disbursed
  was US$19.30 million, or 32% of the appraisal amount (ICR Data Sheet, page 2). As part of the December
  4, 2020 restructuring, US$21.00 million of the IBRD loan was cancelled. In a further communication, the
  project team explained that “the remaining US$19.7 million was canceled after the disbursement deadline of
  April 15, 2023.” According to the ICR (paragraph 23) "the cancelation of loan proceeds reflected the
  reduced scope of component 1 as well as the borrower’s decision to cover part of the cost of works in
  Sansha port after the selected contractor was debarred by the World Bank and the works could not
  proceed."

  Borrower Contribution. The borrower was expected to provide US$43.47 million of counterpart funding.
  The actual amount contributed was US$34.80 million (ICR Data Sheet, page 2).

  Dates. The project was approved on June 3, 2014 and became effective three months later on September
  23, 2014. The Mid-Term Review was conducted on March 27, 2017, about two years and six months after
  effectiveness. While the PAD did not specify an exact date for the MTR, this Review finds that the MTR was

                                                                                                     Page 3 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Fujian Fishing Ports Project (P129791)



   conducted in a reasonable time relative to other World Bank financed operations. The project closed
   on December 15, 2022, two years beyond the original closing date of December 15, 2020. The extension
   was needed to accommodate significant implementation delays that stemmed from a lengthy process to
   secure ocean work permits, and lengthy procurement and land acquisition processes (ICR, paragraph 25).

   The project was restructured three times, all of which were Level 2 restructuring as follows:

   1. On April 12, 2017, when the amount disbursed was US$1.00 million, in order to revise the Results
   Framework (RF).

   2. On December 4, 2020, when the amount disbursed was US$7.00 million, in order to revise the RF,
   change components and costs, extend the Loan closing date by 18 months, from December 31, 2020, to
   June 30, 2022, cancel of financing for US$21.00 million from the IBRD loan, reduce the counterpart
   financing from US$43.47 million to US$28 million, allocate funds between disbursement categories,
   and change the implementation schedule.

   3. On June 14, 2022, when the amount disbursed was US$16.85 million, in order to revise the RF, extend
   the Loan closing date by an additional five and a half months, from June 30, 2022, to December 15, 2022,
   and change the implementation schedule.

   A split rating will be applied to assess the outcome of this project because the restructurings scaled down
   the scope of the PDO in terms of the protected port area and ports sheltering capacity, resulting in fewer
   fishing communities whose vulnerability to extreme weather events was to be reduced.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Context at Appraisal. Fujian Province is located on China's east coast with the second longest
coastline (3,200 km). With 61, 800 registered fishing vessels, the fishery sector in Fujian accounted for 30%
of the agricultural sector’s gross domestic product in the province. Fujian faced extensive damages and
losses from 49 typhoon landfalls from 1980 to 2012. The loss of life, injuries, damages, and loss of property
in the province were exacerbated by inadequate preparedness and response and recovery measures to
monitor storm paths and take measures to communicate port warnings and emergency procedures to
fishers in a timely manner. Fishers and vessels continue to be impacted by storm surge and the lack of
adequate infrastructure, such as breakwaters, shelters, and roads. This project aimed to address these
challenges by upgrading the fishing ports’ infrastructure to enhance their protection against extreme
weather events and strengthen the province’s port planning and management to improve its disaster
preparedness and emergency response.

Previous Bank Experience. The Bank has had a long experience in China through supporting projects in
different sectors, including infrastructure, environment, irrigation, and agriculture. This project would build
on the experience of the Bank's Sustainable Coastal Resource Development Project (P003539), which
included a component implemented in Fujian.



                                                                                                      Page 4 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Fujian Fishing Ports Project (P129791)



Consistency with Bank Strategies. At appraisal, the PDO aligned with the Bank Country Partnership
Strategy for China (CPS, FY2013-FY2016). The CPS strategic theme One: Supporting Greener Growth,
aimed at promoting sustainable agriculture practices (Outcome 1.4) and discussed China's agricultural
supply struggling to keep up with demand, compounded by climate variability, among other factors. The
CPS included the fishery sector as a component of agriculture. This project would help China expand its
ability for climate change adaptation in the agricultural sector by applying modern disaster risk management
tools and methods. The project also supported Strategic Theme 2: Promoting More Inclusive Development,
Outcome 2.2: Strengthening Skill Development Program, by improving the quality and relevance of
technical and vocational education in the fishery sector in Fujian Province.

At completion, the PDO continued to align with the Bank's Country Partnership Framework for
China (CPF, FY2020–2025). Specifically, the PDO supported the CPF’s Engagement Area 2: Promoting
Greener Development, Objective 2.3: Demonstrating Sustainable Agriculture Practices and Improving Food
System Quality and Safety, and Objective 2.4: Strengthening Sustainable Natural Resource Management.
The project supported Objective 2.3 by helping the local government in Fujian expand its ability for climate
change adaptation in the fishery sector through the application of modern disaster risk management tools
and methods to reduce the vulnerability of fishing communities. The project also supported Objective 2.4 by
contributing to resilient fishing activities and improved port management practices. The PDO was also in
line with the CPF’s Engagement Area 3: Sharing the Benefits of Growth, Objective 3.2: Strengthening the
Quality of Early Learning and Skills Development Programs as it invested in upgrading skills development
programs and facilities for fishers.

Consistency with Government Strategies/Priorities. At appraisal, the PDO aligned with China’s 12th
Five Year Plan (FYP), which featured maintaining sustainable food self-sufficiency, raising farmers'
incomes, and constructing the new socialist countryside among governments’ top priorities.

At completion, the PDO continued to align with China’s National Fishing Port Construction Plan (2018–
2025), which called for integrating the fishing port economic zones at the county level to promote the
transformation and upgrading of traditional fisheries. The project contributed to this objective by enhancing
port infrastructure (access roads, berthing facilities, trestle bridge, etc.) and improving port operation
practices by preparing and adopting modern port operation manuals. The PDO also continued to be in line
with Fujian Province’s14th Five-Year Plan for National Fishery Development (FYP, 2021–2025), which
aimed to support high-quality development and innovation of the marine economy, speeding up the
construction of fishing ports, prioritizing typhoon resistance plans for fishing ports, and standardizing the
provision of disaster prevention facilities and emergency supplies.

Summary of Relevance of Objectives Assessment. At completion, the PDO continued to align with the
Bank's strategy and the Government priorities at both the provincial and national levels. The PDO
statement was outcome-oriented. The theory of change assumes that reducing the vulnerability of fishing
communities would effectively reduce storm disaster risk. However, disaster risk is driven as well by other
factors on top of physical exposure and vulnerability of communities and assets, which was the main target
of the project-supported activities. These include the event’s intensity and duration (hazard-related factors),
fishers' response behavior, etc. Thus, the PDO was not sufficiently monitorable due to the lack of PDO-level
Indicators to measure outcomes that were exclusively attributable to the activities financed by the project
(see section 9a for more details). Also, the PDO was pitched a higher level of ambition given that the
implementation agency’s capacity (at provincial and county levels) had no experience with World Bank-
funded projects. Therefore, the Relevance of Objectives is rated Substantial.



                                                                                                     Page 5 of 21
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Fujian Fishing Ports Project (P129791)




               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To reduce the vulnerability of fishing communities to extreme weather events in selected counties in Fujian
                             Province.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change (ToC). To achieve the stated objective, the project supported the following activities:
                             construction of breakwaters, dredging, and slope protection; construction / rehabilitation of berthing facilities,
                             land areas, trestle bridges, docks; construction / rehabilitation of roads, ports management
                             cottages and emergency shelters; design and implementation of an EWS and emergency plans, and
                             the acquisition of a rescue vessel and a rescue vehicle; and upgrading port training facilities, updating training
                             materials and conducting training of trainers and port administrators. The expected outputs of the afore-
                             mentioned activities were: breakwaters constructed, port areas dredged, coastal slopes constructed; berthing
                             facilities, trestle bridge, docks, and port areas rehabilitated; port roads, management cottages, and
                             emergency shelters rehabilitated; emergency response resources, EWS and protocols in place; port training
                             facilities upgraded, training materials updates, and trainers and port administrators trained. The expected
                             outcomes were: increased capacity of ports to shelter fishing vessels during storms, increased capacity of
                             fishers to seek shelter in case of storm warning, reduced exposure of fishers and vessels to storm paths, and
                             increased port emergency response and management capacity. This will reduce fishing communities'
                             vulnerability to extreme weather events in selected counties in Fujian Province. The anticipated long-term
                             outcome would be the resilient and sustainable development of the fishery sector in Fujian Province.

                             The achievement of the PDO was underpinned by four critical assumptions: (i) County and provincial
                             government finances 41.7% of the project costs; (ii) Breakwaters designed to give protection from storms with
                             a 1% annual probability of occurrence; (iii) Fishers are trained on EWS and emergency protocols; and (iv)
                             Availability of budget for O&M of new and rehabilitated facilities and systems.

                             While the stated activities were connected to the PDO, they would only partially contribute to its achievement.
                             The PDO assumed that reducing the vulnerability of fishing communities would effectively reduce storm
                             disaster risk. However, disaster risk is driven as well by other factors on top of physical exposure and
                             vulnerability of communities and assets, which was the main target of the project-supported activities. Other
                             factors include the event’s intensity and duration (hazard-related factors) and fishers' behavior to respond
                             properly to EWS (cultural factors), among many others. Finally, the critical assumptions were logical but
                             overlooked an important assumption, which was timely securing ocean permits and land acquisition to allow
                             the implementation of project activities with no delays.



                                                                                                                                 Page 6 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Fujian Fishing Ports Project (P129791)



Outputs/Intermediate Results

The following output indicators were not monitored and subsequently dropped:

      Number of Shelter/Anchorage Areas Formed.
      Number of Fishing Vessels Protected in the Ports constructed under the Project.
      Contribution to the targeted Protection Rate set forth by the Province.
      Number of Project Beneficiaries, including fishermen and family members, received training/in which
       number of females.
      Percentage of trainees who pass skill certification exams.
      Percentage of trainees who pass skill certification exams.
      Floor Areas of the Training Center Completed.

Outcome

The following outcome indicators were not monitored and dropped.

        Number of lives lost in fishing communities in selected counties due to extreme weather events
        Number of fishing vessels lost in selected counties due to extreme weather events
        Reduction in economic losses in selected counties due to extreme weather events
        Improved effectiveness of the early warning and emergency response systems

The original Results Framework did not allow for measuring attributable progress, and all the original outcome
indicators were subsequently dropped. Therefore, the efficacy of the project achieving its PDO per the original
indicators is rated Negligible.



Rating
Negligible


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
To reduce the vulnerability of fishing communities to extreme weather events in selected counties in Fujian
Province.

Revised Rationale
Theory of Change (ToC). The PDO was not revised, but the RF indicators were revised as part of the 2017
restructuring. The same ToC applies.

Outputs/Intermediate Results

      3 ports were constructed and expanded under the project, which was below the target of 6 ports
         (target not achieved).
      An Emergency Response Plan was developed and adopted (target achieved).

                                                                                                 Page 7 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Fujian Fishing Ports Project (P129791)




      2,330 residents of the targeted fisher communities participated in the emergency preparedness and
       responsiveness drills, which was below the target of 4,000.
      1,111 female residents of the targeted fisher communities participating in the emergency
       preparedness and responsiveness drills compared to an original target of 1,300 (target not achieved).
      New training center for fishermen was constructed, equipped, and functional (target achieved).
      Direct project beneficiaries reached 34,218, of which 16,565 were females, compared to an original
       target of 63,800, of which 21,300 were females; both targets were not achieved.

The ICR reported the following achievements which were not reflected in the RF:

      A total of 31 weather monitoring stations were installed in fishing villages and fishing ports across
         Xia’pu County (ICR, paragraph 34).
        Five emergency preparedness and response drills in Xia’pu County in accordance with the emergency
         plans were practiced (ICR, paragraph 35).
        The project supported infrastructure included: 1,539 m of constructed breakwaters that reduced the
         intensity of incoming storm waves to the ports, 335 m of constructed vessel berthing facilities, and 80
         m of constructed trestle bridges within the ports to enhance and speed up the operation of vessels;
         and 751 m of constructed embankments to ensure the stability of port roads and surrounding areas
         (ICR, paragraph 32).
        The project financed the dredging of 124,000 cubic meters (m3) of sediments from the seabed within
         the ports to enhance the transit of vessels to shelter areas (ICR, paragraph 32).
        The project upgraded access to the three ports and constructed shelters for port administrators, which
         are critical for protection during emergencies. A total of 933 m of access roads, 1,765 m of port
         passages, and 3,496 m2 of shelter buildings were built (ICR, paragraph 33).
        A total of 31 weather monitoring stations were installed in fishing villages and fishing ports across
         Xia’pu County (ICR, paragraph 34).

Outcomes

      The project partially achieved the PDO when compared to the pre-restructuring targets. The project
         protected 135.60 ha of port area against natural hazards below the original target of 170.82 ha.
      The project also increased the capacity of ports to shelter fishing vessels to 1,090 boats (baseline not
       provided), which was below the original target of 2,980 boats. This reduced the exposure of fishers
       and vessels to extreme weather events, such as storm surges.
      The project fully achieved the target of upgrading equipment and capacity for the early warning and
       response system in Xia’pu County. The EWS was successfully tested in November 2022 when
       typhoon Nalgae hit Fujian province (ICR, paragraph 34). However, no information was reported in the
       ICR on whether the EWS reduced vulnerability.
      Finally, 90.41% of the project beneficiaries felt that project investments reflected their needs,
       exceeding the target of 85%.

Summary of Efficacy Assessment. The project constructed and expanded 3 ports, supported several
infrastructure improvements as noted above, and implemented an operational EWS. However, the project
partially achieved the PDO compared to the April 2017 targets for two PDO outcome indicators, and only one
was fully achieved. Therefore, the efficacy with which this objective was achieved is rated Modest.


                                                                                                   Page 8 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Fujian Fishing Ports Project (P129791)




Revised Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 2
Revised Objective
To reduce the vulnerability of fishing communities to extreme weather events in selected counties in Fujian
Province.

Revised Rationale
Theory of Change (ToC). The PDO was not revised, but the RF indicators were revised as part of the 2020
restructuring. The same ToC applies.

Outputs/Intermediate Results

      3 ports were constructed and expanded under the project (revised target achieved).
      Emergency Response Plan was developed and adopted (target achieved).
      2,330 residents of the targeted fisher communities participated in the emergency preparedness and
       responsiveness drills, exceeding the revised target of 2,180.
      1,111 female residents of the targeted fisher communities participated in the emergency preparedness
       and responsiveness drills, exceeding the revised target of 726 (target achieved).
      New training center for fishermen was constructed, equipped, and functional (target achieved).
      Direct project beneficiaries reached 34,218, of which 16,565 were females, exceeding the revised
       target of 29,130, of which 9,710 were females (targets achieved).

The ICR reported the following achievements which were not reflected in the RF:

      A total of 31 weather monitoring stations were installed in fishing villages and fishing ports across
         Xia’pu County (ICR, paragraph 34).
        Five emergency preparedness and response drills in Xia’pu County in accordance with the emergency
         plans were practiced (ICR, paragraph 35).
        The project supported infrastructure included 1,539 m of constructed breakwaters that reduced the
         intensity of incoming storm waves to the ports, 335 m of constructed vessel berthing facilities, and 80
         m of constructed trestle bridges within the ports to enhance and speed up the operation of vessels;
         and 751 m of constructed embankments to ensure the stability of port roads and surrounding areas
         (ICR, paragraph 32).
        The project financed the dredging of 124,000 cubic meters (m3) of sediments from the seabed within
         the ports to enhance the transit of vessels to shelter areas (ICR, paragraph 32).
        The project upgraded access to the three ports and constructed shelters for port administrators, which
         are critical for protection during emergencies. 933 m of access roads, 1,765 m of port passages, and
         3,496 m2 of shelter buildings were built (ICR, paragraph 33).
        A total of 31 weather monitoring stations were installed in fishing villages and fishing ports across
         Xia’pu County (ICR, paragraph 34).


                                                                                                   Page 9 of 21
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               Fujian Fishing Ports Project (P129791)



                            Outcome

                                  The project achieved the PDO when compared to the post-restructuring targets. The project protected
                                   135.60 ha of port area against natural hazards, meeting the revised target of 135 ha.
                                  The project also increased the capacity of ports to shelter fishing vessels to 1,090 boats (baseline not
                                   provided), which fully achieved the revised target. This reduced the exposure of fishers and vessels to
                                   extreme weather events, such as storm surges.
                                  The project fully achieved the target of upgrading equipment and capacity for the early warning and
                                   response system in Xia’pu County. The EWS was successfully tested in November 2022 when
                                   typhoon Nalgae hit Fujian province (ICR, paragraph 34). The EWS issued evacuation orders for all
                                   fishing vessels and personnel engaged in aquaculture, particularly those using fishing rafts located in
                                   the central and southern coastal areas of Fujian, and the County Typhoon Defense Emergency
                                   Command Center tracked the real-time navigation direction and speed of ships operating at sea.
                                  Finally, 90.41% of the project beneficiaries felt that project investments reflected their needs,
                                   exceeding the target of 85%. As per the survey carried out in the project area of Xia’pu County and
                                   FOTS in February /March 2022. The ICR noted that about 94% of respondents in Xia’pu County
                                   agreed that the construction of fishing ports improved (a) the ability of fishing boats to shelter from
                                   storms, reduced fishery production accidents, and ensured the safety of fishermen's lives and property
                                   and (b) awareness of disaster prevention and mitigation through emergency drills and training. On the
                                   other hand, the survey at FOTS was designed to understand whether the project beneficiaries (faculty,
                                   staff, students, and trainees) were satisfied with the upgraded training facilities, training courses
                                   organized by the training centers, and teaching quality and whether the project investments reflected
                                   their needs. Nearly 85.8% of the survey respondents (198 males and 34 females) were satisfied or
                                   relatively satisfied with the upgraded training site and surrounding school environment. The reason for
                                   a lower satisfaction rate with FOTS is that, at the time of the survey, about half of the project activities
                                   had not yet been completed.

                            Summary of Efficacy Assessment. The project constructed and expanded 3 ports, supported several
                            infrastructure improvements as noted above, and implemented an operational EWS. The project achieved the
                            PDO compared to the post-restructuring targets for all PDO outcome indicators. Therefore, the efficacy with
                            which this objective was achieved is rated Substantial.



                            Revised Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Overall Efficacy before 2017 is rated Negligible. The original Results Framework did not allow measuring
                            progress that could be attributed to the project.




                                                                                                                                Page 10 of 21
              Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
              Fujian Fishing Ports Project (P129791)




         Overall Efficacy Rating                                  Primary Reason
         Negligible                                               Low achievement
 OBJR1_TBL




         OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
         Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
         Overall Efficacy post-2017 restructuring is rated Modest. The project constructed and expanded 3 ports,
         supported several infrastructure improvements as noted above, and implemented an operational EWS.
         However, the project partially achieved the PDO compared to the April 2017 targets for two PDO outcome
         indicators, and only one was fully achieved.



         Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating                       Primary Reason
         Modest                                                   Low achievement
 OBJR2_TBL




         OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 2
         Overall Efficacy Revision 2 Rationale
         Overall Efficacy post-2020 restructuring is rated Substantial. The project constructed and expanded 3 ports,
         supported several infrastructure improvements and implemented an operational EWS. The project fully
         achieved the revised post-restructuring targets for all PDO outcome indicators.



         Overall Efficacy Revision 2 Rating
         Substantial



5. Efficiency
Economic and Financial Analysis (EFA)

ex-ante

              The project's Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR) was estimated at 18%, NPV was US$ 43.82
               million, and Benefit-Cost Ratio at 1.57.
              Benefits quantified by the economic analysis included reduced vulnerability and lower risk of damages
               and losses suffered by the fishing community, cost savings to the fishermen while seeking shelter from a
               disaster for which a warning was issued, and enhanced logistical synergy by building the six ports.
              The assumed risk mitigation rates were 90%, 70%, and 80% for losses on aquaculture boats, sunken
               vessels, and damaged vessels. This
               assumption leads to a total mitigation of 75% on average, corresponding to US$ 13.64 million annually in
               avoided risks and damages.
              Overall, the ex-ante economic analysis was robust and reflected different parameters that justified the
               project investment.



                                                                                                         Page 11 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Fujian Fishing Ports Project (P129791)



ex-post

      At project completion, the EIRR was estimated at 17.1%, NPV was US$8.73 million, slightly below the
       appraisal estimate of 18%, and the benefit-cost ratio was 1.34 compared to 1.57 at appraisal.
      The reduction of economic analysis results was due to fewer benefits (only three ports were built
       compared to six) and reduced project costs. The project scope was also reduced, resulting in a total loan
       cancelation of US$21 million.
      The financial analysis evaluated the financing aspect for Xia’pu County’s fiscal revenue to provide
       counterpart funds, O&M after the completion of the project, and financial sustainability of the training and
       capacity building component. The analysis showed that the financial revenue sources of the county
       government were stable, with a 13.1% annual increase in the County’s financial revenues. The analysis
       concluded that the O&M and debt repayment did not present an undue burden compared to Xia’pu
       County’s financial resources (ICR, Annex 5).
      Sensitivity Analysis. A sensitivity analysis was carried out to assess the economic viability of the project
       in different adverse scenarios: (a) a 20% increase in O&M cost, (b) a 20% decrease in economic
       benefits, and (c) a combination of these scenarios. Sensitivity indicators and switching values were
       calculated. This analysis indicated that the project’s economic viability was robust under all scenarios,
       with the EIRR ranging from 10.8% to 16.4% and the B/C ranging from 1.03 to 1.29.

Implementation Efficiency. The project experienced significant delays during the first half of the
implementation period under all project components. During the project's first three years, the combination of
slow procurement and a long waiting time to secure ocean work permits hindered the implementation of
activities under Component 1. In addition, components 2 and 3 faced significant delays because of land
acquisition processes during the first half of the project. Finally, under component 4, the project management
consultant team onboarding was delayed and only happened after three years of project effectiveness.

Summary of Efficiency Assessment. The project experienced a 50% reduction in its scope, and consequently,
the total project costs were cut by about 50% of the appraisal estimate. The EIRR at completion was estimated
at 17.1%, slightly below the EIRR estimate at appraisal at 18%. The project experienced significant
implementation delays. Therefore, Efficiency is rated Modest.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     0
 Appraisal                                                 18.00
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     0
 ICR Estimate                                              17.10
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

                                                                                                     Page 12 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Fujian Fishing Ports Project (P129791)




6. Outcome

Before 2017 Restructuring. Relevance of Objectives was rated Substantial. Overall Efficacy was rated
Negligible. The original Results Framework did not allow for measuring attributable progress. Efficiency was
rated Modest. The EIRR at completion was below the EIRR estimated at appraisal, and the project experienced
significant implementation delays, resulting in poor implementation efficiency. There were significant
shortcomings in the operation’s achievement of its objectives. Based on the ratings for the outcome criteria, the
Outcome is rated as Unsatisfactory.

Before 2020 Restructuring. Relevance of Objectives was rated Substantial. Overall Efficacy was rated Modest.
The project partially achieved the PDO compared to the pre-restructuring targets for two PDO outcome
indicators, and only one target was fully achieved. Efficiency was rated Modest. The EIRR at completion was
below the EIRR estimated at appraisal, and the project experienced significant implementation delays, resulting
in poor implementation efficiency. There were substantial shortcomings in the operation’s achievement of its
objectives. Based on the ratings for the outcome criteria, the Outcome is rated Moderately Unsatisfactory.

After 2020 Restructuring. Relevance of Objectives was rated Substantial. Overall Efficacy was
rated Substantial. The project achieved the PDO compared to the post-restructuring targets for all PDO
outcome indicators. Efficiency was rated Modest. The EIRR at completion was below the EIRR estimated at
appraisal, and the project experienced significant implementation delays, resulting in poor implementation
efficiency. There were moderate shortcomings in the operation’s efficiency. Based on the ratings for the
outcome criteria, the Outcome is rated Moderately Satisfactory.

The overall Outcome is assessed based on the following split rating:

                      Before 2017                Before 2020
                                                                            After 2020 Restructuring
                      Restructuring              Restructuring
Relevance of
                      Substantial                Substantial                Substantial
Objectives
Overall Efficacy      Negligible                 Modest                     Substantial
Efficiency            Modest                     Modest                     Modest
                                                 Moderately
Outcome Rating        Unsatisfactory                                        Moderately Satisfactory
                                                 Unsatisfactory
Numerical value of
                      2                          3                          4
the outcome rating*
Disbursement (US$
                      1.15                       6.00                       12.15
million)
Share of
                      0.06 (6%)                  0.31 (31%)                 0.629 (62.9%)
disbursement
Weighted Value of
                      0.12                       0.93                       2.52
Outcome

Final Outcome: 0.12 + 0.93 + 2.52 = 3.57, which rounds up to 4, based on a 1 to 6 scale, 4 corresponds to
Moderately Satisfactory.


                                                                                                   Page 13 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Fujian Fishing Ports Project (P129791)




a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The following risks could potentially impact the Development Outcome:

1. Financial risk. Xia’pu County has the financial strength to finance the O&M of project-financed assets (the
ports) and ensure the sustainability of the capacity-building program. This is confirmed by the financial
analysis results at project completion (ICR, paragraph 78).

2. Operational risk. The Xia’pu County Typhoon Defense Emergency Command Center and FOTS have the
institutional capacity to continue and effectively operate the EWS and training facilities without project
support. Under China’s National Fishing Port Construction Plan (2018–2025), activities supported by the
project are expected to be scaled up to other fishing ports (ICR, paragraph 78).

IEG emphasizes the following risk:

3. Environmental risk. Fujian Province continues to be prone to extreme weather events. Such
events could result in damages and losses to the project-supported infrastructure and reverse the gains
achieved under the project.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
        Strategic relevance and approach. The Government of China requested the Bank’s involvement
          in this project to bring innovative concepts not only regarding fishing port upgrading and
          construction from an engineering perspective but also with regard to port planning, optimization,
          and management. The PDO was in line with the Bank's strategies and Government priorities.
         Technical, financial, and economic aspects. The project design featured financing civil works
          in selected ports, design of the EWS, acquisition of weather monitoring and communication
          equipment (hardware and software), and rescue equipment (vessel and vehicle). In addition, the
          design would support upgrading port training facilities and training materials and implementing
          emergency response drills for fishing communities. While these activities were relevant to
          reducing storm disaster risk, there were other factors on top of physical exposure and vulnerability
          of communities and assets that could still impact disaster risk. The PAD included a robust
          economic and financial analysis that justified the project investment.
         Poverty, gender, and social development aspects. The project was expected to reduce the
          vulnerability of poor fishing communities in Xia’pu County to extreme weather events. The project
          was expected to increase employment and job opportunities for residents in the project area and

                                                                                                   Page 14 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Fujian Fishing Ports Project (P129791)



           promote the economic prosperity and development of the fishing area. Women constituted 50% of
           the project beneficiaries. Women participated in the consultation meetings and the social
           assessment process, and particular attention was paid to the views and needs of women (PAD,
           paragraph 47).
          Environmental and fiduciary aspects. The project design included appropriate environmental
           and social risk assessments with adequate mitigation strategies. The design featured
           adequate procurement and financial management (FM) arrangements.
          Implementation arrangements. Two implementing agencies were established to coordinate
           activities at the provincial and county levels. However, the project’s design did not consider the
           potential bottlenecks in obtaining ocean work permits and land acquisition. This eventually
           resulted in significant implementation delays.
          Risk assessment. Seven risks were identified at the appraisal stage with an overall Substantial
           rating. The identified substantial risks related to three main areas: stakeholders, implementing
           agency, and project-related risks. While risks were well defined and adequate
           mitigation measures reflected in the design, the risk related to the non-conducive regulatory
           framework for the interventions in some of the targeted ports was overlooked.
          M&E arrangements. M&E suffered from notable design shortcomings that necessitated the full
           revision of the Results Framework (see section 9 for details).

  Summary of QAE Assessment. The project was strategically relevant. The design featured relevant
  activities to support reducing the vulnerability of fishing communities to disaster risks and reflected
  adequate environmental and fiduciary aspects. Implementation arrangements were adequate, but there
  were significant delays related to securing ocean/land permits. While the risk assessment was thorough,
  the risk related to the non-conducive regulatory framework for the interventions was overlooked. Finally,
  M&E design had significant shortcomings. Quality at Entry is rated Moderately Unsatisfactory due to
  significant shortcomings in the Results Framework design and inadequate risk assessment that led to
  significant implementation delays.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
       The Bank conducted 13 implementation support missions in seven years (including virtual meetings
        because of COVID-19 restrictions in 2021 and 2022). The project experienced frequent changes in
        the Task Team Leadership, with five TTLs throughout implementation. According to the borrower’s
        Completion Report, these frequent changes affected the continuity of the project management (ICR,
        paragraph 76).
       The Bank’s team was multidisciplinary and provided implementation support and technical inputs
        that the borrower needed. This included guidance for the design of the EWS, recommendations for
        civil works construction management, and social and environmental safeguards (ICR, paragraph
        76).
       However, the Bank team could have been proactive in adjusting the project scope and targets
        earlier after the delay of the ocean work permits was identified. This would have allowed
        implementation efforts to focus on the three remaining ports.

                                                                                                   Page 15 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Fujian Fishing Ports Project (P129791)



       Despite three restructurings, the RF weaknesses were not fully addressed in a timely manner. Also,
        the ICR (paragraph 76) noted that the "unnecessarily long exchange (ten months) between the
        World Bank and the borrower about the status of the Sansha port contractor left little time to
        implement the contract once the agreement was made on the way forward."

 Summary of Bank Performance Assessment. While the Bank supervised and monitored implementation
 bottlenecks, there were some weaknesses in proactiveness. This included the delay in addressing RF
 shortcomings and in refocusing the project. Also, the decision related to the Sancha port contractor was
 lengthy, and frequent TTL changes affected the continuity of project management. Overall, Bank
 Supervision is rated Moderately Satisfactory.

 Based on the assigned rating to QAE and Bank Supervision, Bank Performance is rated Moderately
 Satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
      The PAD did not include a Theory of Change (ToC), which the Bank did not require at the time of
        appraisal. Nonetheless, the ICR included a ToC constructed based on the project activities, outputs,
        and outcomes described in the PAD. The ToC also included the underlying assumptions
        underpinning the achievement of the PDO.
       The PDO was measured through four PDO outcome indicators: (i) Reduction in the number of lives
        lost in fishing communities in selected counties due to extreme weather events; (ii) Reduction in the
        number of fishing vessels lost in selected counties due to extreme weather events; (iii) Reduction in
        economic losses in selected counties due to extreme weather events; and, (iv) Increased
        effectiveness of the early warning and emergency response systems.
       While these four PDO indicators had reasonable targets, they were not fully aligned and attributable
        to the project activities. For example, for PDO indicator (i), the reduction of lives lost in fishing
        communities could also be driven by cultural, demographic, and socioeconomic factors beyond the
        control of the project. For PDO indicator (ii), the reduction of fishing vessels lost was also a function
        of the actual number of exposed vessels, fishers' behavior, and economic context, which were
        factors beyond the control of the project. Also, for PDO indicator (iii), the reduction of economic
        losses due to extreme events was driven by multiple factors beyond the control of the project,
        including variations of the vessels and content value; and for PDO indicator (iv) the number of
        vessels returned to ports safely in a specific weather event might be affected by fishers behavior
        and financial stress, vessel maintenance, all of which were factors beyond the control of the project
        (ICR, Table 5).


                                                                                                     Page 16 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Fujian Fishing Ports Project (P129791)



       The RF included nine intermediate results indicators to track the project's progress and measure
        achievements of different activities. Seven indicators were dropped as part of the 2017 restructuring
        and replaced with new IRIs better aligned with the new PDO indicators.
       Overall, M&E had significant design shortcomings regarding the indicators that measure the
        achievement of the PDO and intermediate results. Specifically, the PDO outcome indicators and
        several IRIs did not measure outcomes that were exclusively attributable to the activities financed
        by the project (ICR, paragraph 64).



b. M&E Implementation
       M&E activities were overseen by the Provincial Project Management Office (PPMO). According to
         the ICR (paragraph 66), M&E activities suffered from limited capacity at the PPMO,
         and semiannual progress reports were not prepared during the first half of the implementation
         period.
        After the MTR in 2017, M&E activities benefited from hiring a consulting company to support M&E
         activities. Also, consultants were appointed to monitor safeguards compliance. According to the
         ICR (paragraph 66), the second half of the project implementation period saw improved data
         collection and reporting efforts, with progress reports submitted on time twice per year. The M&E
         system also included quality control of civil works.
        As part of the 2017 restructuring, all original PDO outcome indicators were dropped and replaced
         by new indicators better aligned with the project activities. Also, seven IRIs were dropped and
         replaced with new indicators. Despite this revision, weaknesses persisted in the definition of PDO
         indicators and IRIs. For example, in “increased capacity of ports to shelter fishing vessels," the
         target value was the actual sheltering capacity of the ports by project completion, not a number
         increase. The description of the indicator should be the “capacity of ports to shelter fishing
         vessels,” and then baseline data should have been collected. Also, the indicator on “beneficiaries
         that feel project investments reflect their needs” did not present a disaggregated target for
         females, even though it was noted in the indicator description. Finally, the target for the indicator
         on project direct beneficiaries lacked specificity as it only reflected direct beneficiaries of the ports-
         related investments under the project, not the whole project.
        Overall, M&E implementation was mixed, with poor performance in the first half and notable
         improvement in the second half of the implementation period. As discussed above, the PDO and
         IRI weaknesses were not fully addressed during the project restructuring.



c. M&E Utilization
       The collection of M&E data enabled the PPMO and the Bank to monitor implementation
         progress, results, and bottlenecks and offer solutions (ICR, paragraph 67). M&E data also
         enabled the PPMO and the Bank to identify the main implementation challenges and recommend
         solutions as part of the restructurings.
        The project's M&E data informed the preparation of Implementation Status and Results Reports
         (ISRs) and external monitoring reports prepared by hired consulting firms reported on safeguards
         progress and compliance and actions needed to improve as needed (ICR, paragraph 67).



                                                                                                        Page 17 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Fujian Fishing Ports Project (P129791)



  Summary of M&E Quality. M&E design had significant shortcomings, including unattributable PDO
  indicators and intermediate result indicators. While M&E implementation improved during the second
  half of the project, there was insufficient focus on M&E activities in the first half. Despite restructuring the
  project and revising the RF, M&E weaknesses persisted. Finally, M&E utilization was undermined by
  design shortcomings and mixed implementation. Therefore, the overall rating of M&E quality is Modest.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
        The project was classified as an environmental Category A due to the scale of potential
            environmental and social impacts and environmental sensitivity of the project areas. The project
            triggered three environmental and one social safeguard(s): Environmental Assessment (OP/BP
            4.01), Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04), Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11), and Involuntary
            Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12).
           Potential environmental and social impacts for component 1 included changes in marine
            hydrodynamics and siltation/erosion processes of new port infrastructures such as
            breakwaters; impacts on marine and terrestrial habitats and water quality during the construction
            phase; impacts associated with transport and disposal of waste from fish vessels, ports, and local
            communities; and disturbance to aquaculture and fisherman livelihoods as a result of construction,
            labor influx, and noise. For component 3, the main environmental impacts relate to construction
            activities,
            such as soil erosion, noise, and dust (PAD, paragraph 54).
           A full Environmental Assessment (EA) was carried out during project preparation. Based on the EA,
            an Environment Impact Assessment (EIA) and an Environmental Management Plan (EMP) were
            prepared for construction activities under Component 1. An Environmental Code of Practice was
            developed for physical activities under Component 3. Also, the borrower prepared a resettlement
            plan through extensive public consultations. As part of the June 2022 restructuring, the EMP was
            updated to reflect a reduction of project impacts, particularly considering the decreased use of
            marine areas.
           Compliance with Environmental Safeguards. According to the ICR (paragraph 71), "the project
            complied with the World Bank environmental safeguards policies." There were no occupational
            health and safety incidents or environmental noncompliance reported.
           Compliance with Social Safeguards. According to the ICR (paragraph 69), "the project complied
            with the World Bank social safeguards policies." The project’s resettlement plan was implemented
            per the World Bank and national requirements. There were no pending complaints by the project
            closing date.




b. Fiduciary Compliance

                                                                                                        Page 18 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Fujian Fishing Ports Project (P129791)



   Financial Management (FM). According to the ICR (paragraph 73), "the project complied with the World
   Bank financial management policies." Annual audit reports were submitted on time, and actions were
   taken to address the issues disclosed by the external auditors. However, most of the interim financial
   reports were submitted with a delay (out of 15 reports, only 4 were submitted on time).

   Procurement. According to the ICR (paragraph 72), "project procurement was conducted in accordance
   with the agreed procedures and rules as specified in the loan and project agreements." However, in the
   first half of the implementation period, the weak procurement capacity of implementing agencies
   exacerbated project challenges. The procurement pace improved after a private consulting firm was hired
   to provide training and improve the capacity of the implementing agencies. In the Sansha Fishing Port, the
   Bank sanctioned the contractor on September 10, 2020, with a three-year debarment for providing a fake
   performance bank guarantee and advance payment bank guarantee (ICR, footnote #27). However, it took
   ten months (from December 2019 to September 2020) for the Bank to clarify the way forward for the
   Sansha Port activities, which left little time to implement the contract once the agreement was made (ICR,
   paragraph 76).




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None.



d. Other
   None.



11. Ratings
                                                                               Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                 IEG
                                                                               Disagreements/Comment
                                 Moderately
Outcome                                              Moderately Satisfactory
                                 Satisfactory
                                 Moderately
Bank Performance                                     Moderately Satisfactory
                                 Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                   Modest              Modest

Quality of ICR                   ---                 High


12. Lessons

The ICR included five lessons. The following three are emphasized with some adaptation of
language:

1. To effectively address disaster risk reduction, the project's design needs to reflect a well-
articulated intervention, including structural and nonstructural measures for vulnerability

                                                                                                 Page 19 of 21
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Fujian Fishing Ports Project (P129791)



reduction. While infrastructure-related investments took the largest share of this project,
nonstructural measures, such as establishing an EWS and enhancing training capacity for fishers,
were equally weighted in terms of relevance toward PDO achievement. The effective response from
the Xia’pu County Typhoon Defense Emergency Command Center and port administrators over the
EWS trial operation stage and the emergency response drills have proven the efficacy of combining
structural and nonstructural measures to reduce the vulnerability of exposed communities and
assets. The project experience demonstrated that new infrastructure enhanced protected and
sheltered areas from natural hazards, and the use and training on the EWS and emergency
response plan enabled articulated response from port administrators, fishers, and fishing
communities and enhanced the county’s long-term resilience.

2. At the appraisal stage, infrastructure investment projects need to conduct an in-depth
analysis of potential non-conducive regulatory challenges to ensure timely implementation of
activities. The project faced challenges securing ocean work permits, highlighting the need for an
in-depth assessment of the country and sector’s regulatory framework to inform project preparation.
Despite later efforts from governments and relevant departments of Fujian Province, Ningde City,
and Xia’pu County, the approval of ocean work permits was not obtained within the time frame set
by the World Bank (by the end of December 2019) for four of the selected fishing port projects.
This significantly reduced the project scope (from six to three ports) and implementation delays.

3. M&E design needs to reflect the causal links between activities, outputs, and outcomes
and include relevant indicators to assess project achievements accurately. The experience in
this project showed that causal links are not always evident when defining outcome indicators. The
original PDO indicators failed to be exclusively attributable to the activities financed by the project.
The tricky point was that by reducing the vulnerability of fishing communities, as stated in the PDO,
the project contributed effectively to reducing storm disaster risk. However, disaster risk is driven as
well by other factors on top of physical exposure and vulnerability of communities and assets, which
was the target of the project-supported activities. For example, the actual number of deaths and
economic losses during typhoons varies by the event’s intensity and duration (hazard-related
factors) and fishers' behavior to respond appropriately to EWS (cultural factors), among many
others. There was no causal link between the project-supported activities and the change in these
other factors, so all original PDO indicators were replaced in the April 2017 restructuring.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

Quality of Analysis and Evidence. The ICR provided clear linking between evidence and findings and used the
evidence base to serve the arguments under the different sections, particularly the discussion on outcomes.




                                                                                                     Page 20 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Fujian Fishing Ports Project (P129791)



Results Orientation. The ICR included a comprehensive discussion on the achievement of the PDO. The
outcome discussion was well balanced between what the project achieved on the ground and the achievement
of outcome indicators.

Lessons. Lessons reflected the project experience and were based on evidence and analysis.

Consistency with guidelines. The ICR used the available data to justify most of the assigned ratings and
appropriately conducted the split evaluation per the guidance.

Conciseness. The ICR provided comprehensive coverage of project activities and candidly reported on most
shortcomings concisely.

Summary of the Quality of ICR Assessment. The ICR was well written. It included a clear and candid
discussion on the achievement of outcomes and reflected relevant lessons. Most sections were concise and
reflected relevant information. Overall, the Quality of the ICR is rated High.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      High




                                                                                                  Page 21 of 21
