     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Electricity Sector Strenghtening Project (P150634)



                                                                                    Report Number: ICRR0023500

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                   Project Name
 P150634                                      Electricity Sector Strenghtening Project

 Country                                      Practice Area(Lead)
 Rwanda                                       Energy & Extractives


 L/C/TF Number(s)                             Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-57540                                    31-Oct-2021                                         94,412,180.76

 Bank Approval Date                           Closing Date (Actual)
 14-Dec-2015                                  31-Oct-2022

                                              IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                               95,000,000.00                                             0.00

 Revised Commitment                                95,000,000.00                                             0.00

 Actual                                            94,412,180.76                                             0.00




 Prepared by                  Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Maria Shkaratan              Christopher David             Ramachandra Jammi              IEGSD (Unit 4)
                              Nelson




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to enhance the operational efficiency of the electricity utility and
   increase electricity access (PAD, page 11). The Project Agreement does not contain the PDO.

   The PDO was not revised.




                                                                                                    Page 1 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Electricity Sector Strenghtening Project (P150634)



   For the purposes of this Implementation Completion Report (ICR) review, the objective will be assessed as
   follows:

   PDO1: To enhance the operational efficiency of the electricity utility.

   PDO2: To increase electricity access.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   1. Original components

   Component A: Electricity Sector Capacity Strengthening (cost at appraisal: US$20.0 million; actual
   cost: US$20.0 million) supported the Electricity Utility Corporation Limited (EUCL) in improving the
   efficiency, transparency, and accountability in network operations and maintenance (O&M), commercial
   functions, and management of corporate resources. There were three subcomponents:

   Subcomponent A-1 Management Information Systems (MIS) aimed to improve the utility’s corporate
   services and processes by implementing an Integrated Business Management Information System (IBMS)
   in the Rwanda Energy Group (REG). The IBMS comprised: (a) Commercial Management System to support
   customer service and commercial functions; (b) an Integrated Distribution Management System, including
   an Incident Recording and Management System to support the reliability of electricity supply, operating
   efficiency, and outage management; (c) a Geographic Information System (GIS); and (d) an Enterprise
   Resource Planning system, a single platform for managing the REG’s corporate processes and resources.

   Subcomponent A-2 Revenue Protection Program (RPP) was designed to reduce commercial losses and
   included the installation of advanced metering infrastructure (AMI) for the targeted 1,500 large customers; a
   state-of-the-art Meter Data Management System (MDMS); and a dedicated metering control center (MCC).

   Subcomponent A-3 Strengthening of Technical Capacity of Key Functions in EUCL addressed
   capacity in operations, commercial services, finance, and corporate services. Specific activities included
   technical training of the staff and assisting in the following: developing functional processes and operational
   procedures; collecting and keeping baseline data for performance targeting; preparing and implementing a
   corporate strategic plan; and developing a performance-based dashboard.

   Component B: Increased Access to Electricity Services (cost at appraisal: US$70 million; actual
   cost: US$69.5 million) provided a continuation of the ongoing World Bank support to the government’s
   Electricity Access Rollout Program (EARP) to extend the distribution network and reinforce it to ensure
   sufficient quality of supply; and to upgrade it to a higher capacity to meet the increasing demand.

   Subcomponent B-1 Strengthening the Distribution Network around Kigali Area financed the following:
   (a) rehabilitating 15 kV medium voltage (MV) switching stations to enhance safety, (b) upgrading the


                                                                                                     Page 2 of 15
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  Electricity Sector Strenghtening Project (P150634)



network to improve supply reliability and reduce technical losses; and (c) installing equipment for monitoring
and controlling the network from the National Control Center to reduce unscheduled downtime.

Subcomponent B-2 Grid Extension to New Load Centers financed new connections, including
equipment for grid extensions, reinforcements, consumer connections; and installation services.

Component C: Technical Assistance and Project Implementation Support (cost at appraisal: US$5
million; actual cost: US$4.9 million) financed technical assistance and Project implementation support.

Subcomponent C-1: Feasibility and Diagnostic Studies supported studies to inform sector performance
improvements, especially as related to grid supply and reliability.

Subcomponent C-2: Project Implementation Support supported the Project Coordination Unit (PCU),
including Project management, procurement, financial management (FM), safeguards, and monitoring and
evaluation (M&E).

2. Changes in components and indicators during implementation

a. The Project’s components remained unchanged during implementation.

b. Two PDO indicators and one intermediate indicator were revised, as follows:

      For PDO indicator 3 Reduction in commercial losses (percentage), the baseline data (existing
       commercial losses, percentage) was increased, based on a new study (CABIRA: Cabinet
       D’ingenierie Et De Recherche Appliquee, 2016), which provided data for 2015, the year of Project
       approval. The end target was increased accordingly, to reflect the increase in the baseline number.
       Therefore, while the baseline and the target were corrected, the ambition of the Project in relation to
       this indicator’s target remained the same.
      PDO indicator 4 was revised from “Reduction of technical losses in the Kigali City 15KV distribution
       network (total annual-GWh savings)” (PAD, page 31) to Reduction in energy not served in Kigali City
       15KV distribution network (total annual Gigawatt-hour (GWh) (ICR, page 40-41). The original
       indicator had two shortcomings: (i) being expressed in absolute terms, it did not provide an adequate
       measure of improvements in technical losses, considering the rapid growth in electricity supply
       (percentage terms would be a better unit of measurement); and (ii) the measured change could not
       be fully attributed to the Project, as the Project did not intend to address all sources of technical
       losses. The new indicator measured improvements attributable to the Project and used an adequate
       unit of measurement. The revision of the PDO indicator 4 did not constitute a reduction of the Project
       scope or ambition; rather it was a correction of a mistake with the results framework (RF) design.
      For the intermediate indicator Reduced average outage duration in 15 KV system of Kigali
       distribution network (hours), the baseline value and the end target were revised to reflect the update
       received from the EUCL in March 2021 for years 2013-2020. According to the update, the original
       baseline was substantially underestimated and needed to be corrected. The RF baseline was
       increased accordingly, and so was the target. Based on the EUCL data of March 2021 (which the
       team has shared with IEG), this change was made to better reflect the latest information, and the
       ambition of the Project was not decreased but rather increased.




                                                                                                 Page 3 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Electricity Sector Strenghtening Project (P150634)



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project Cost: The appraisal estimate was US$95.0 million, and the actual Project cost was US$94.4
   million. The ICR points out that the available funding was fully disbursed at Project closure, and the
   difference between the actual cost at closure and the estimated cost at approval was due to foreign
   exchange rate variations (ICR, page 10).

   Project Financing: The Project was financed by an IDA credit.

   Borrower/Recipient contribution: There was no Borrower’s contribution.

   Project Dates: The Project was approved on December 14, 2015 and became effective on May 10, 2016.
   The mid-term review was held on July 7-12, 2019. The original closing date was October 31, 2021. The
   Project was extended once, for a period of 12 months, to October 31, 2022.

   Project Restructurings:

   The Project underwent one restructuring, approved on May 31, 2021, which involved a change in
   the RF and a 12-month extension of the closing date. Given there was no change in scope, a split
   evaluation is not required.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country and Sector Context. At the time of Project appraisal, Rwanda had average annual gross
domestic product growth of 6 percent over 2000–2014; a poverty level of 39 percent, as compared with the
57 percent in 2006; and a vision of achieving middle-income-country status by 2020. Access to electricity
was a significant barrier to continued growth, and it was made a priority. Despite important achievements
since 2009, the electricity sector faced the following challenges: (i) low access rate, especially in rural
areas; (ii) limited investments in generation capacity, with no clear procedures to implement them and
few incentives for private sector participation; (iii) high system losses of 22.5 percent; (iv) high cost of
service at US$0.32/kWh, and (e) weak financial viability of the sector with continued reliance on
government subsidies. Rwanda implemented deeper institutional energy sector reforms commencing in
2013; and a concerted effort was needed to build on those efforts and achieve improvements in the sector's
performance.

Relevance to Government Strategies at approval. Increased access to electricity services was a
Government priority under the country’s Vision 2020. The Energy Sector Strategic Plan (2013/14–2017/18)
was approved in 2015, with the goals of (a) ensuring the availability and affordability of energy supply for all
Rwandese; (b) encouraging the rational and efficient use of energy; and (c) establishing environmentally
sound and sustainable systems of energy production, procurement, transportation, distribution, and end
use. In 2009, the Government, with support from the World Bank, launched the national Electricity Access
Rollout Program (EARP). The goal of reaching 48 percent on-grid electrification rate by 2018 from the 22
percent in 2014 required significant funding, and a US$400 million funding gap was identified. The Project
would contribute to alleviating this gap.


                                                                                                      Page 4 of 15
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Electricity Sector Strenghtening Project (P150634)



               Relevance to Government Strategies at closure. The Government’s target at closure was to achieve
               universal access by 2023/24, including 52 percent of the on-grid connections and 48 percent of the off-grid
               connections. Universal access to electricity was one of the key strategic interventions under Priority Area 5
               “Moving Towards a Modern Rwandan household”, in the Rwanda’s Seven Years Government Program:
               National Strategy for Transformation (NST1) 2017–2024.

               Relevance to the World Bank Group's (WBG’s) Assistance Strategies at approval. The Project was
               fully aligned with the World Bank’s Rwanda Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) FY2014–18. Under Theme
               1 “Accelerating economic growth that is private sector driven and job creating,” the energy sector was
               highlighted as the key sector for World Bank support, and increased access to electricity was a core
               objective under this theme.

               Relevance to the World Bank Group's (WBG’s) Assistance Strategies at closure. The Project was also
               aligned with the Country Partnership Framework (CPF) FY2021-26. The Objective 1 “Expanded Access to
               Infrastructure and the Digital Economy” highlighted the Bank’s further support to the Government’s energy
               sector reform, electrification agenda, and enhanced efficiency and reliability of energy services.

               The relevance of objectives is rated High because they were fully aligned with the electricity access and
               energy sector development goals of the Government and with the related objectives of the WBG’s Rwanda
               CPS FY2014-18 and the WBG’s Rwanda CPF FY2021-26.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To enhance the operational efficiency of the electricity utility.

                             Rationale
                             The theory of change (ToC) for the Project was developed for the ICR. It showed a direct, logical causal link
                             from inputs to outputs, and to the PDO outcomes of this Project. The first results chain showed that the
                             developed MIS, established RPP, and improved capacity to perform key EUCL functions (outputs) would
                             support the achievement of the PDO. The second results chain showed that the strengthening of the
                             distribution network and its extension (outputs) would result in improved access to electricity services.

                             The TOC had the following shortcoming: the intermediate outcomes were missing, and therefore there
                             were no articulation of how the PDO objectives were to be built on preliminary changes as part of project
                             activities. The logic of the Project’s interventions would be clearer if the intermediate outcomes were



                                                                                                                               Page 5 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Electricity Sector Strenghtening Project (P150634)



formulated across the results chain, showing how and through what processes the combination of outputs
would result in the Project level outcomes and therefore in the achievement of the Project’s objective.

Note: While two PDO targets and one intermediate indicator target were revised during the May 2021
restructuring, this did not constitute a reduction in the Project’s ambition or scope, but rather corrected RF
measurement mistakes made at Project design and updated the baselines using recent analysis, which was
not available at appraisal. Therefore, a split rating will not be applied.

Outcomes:

- PDO indicator 3. At closure, commercial losses amounted to 5.39 percent, from the baseline of 8.78
percent, and against the target of 5.18 percent. The target was almost fully achieved

- PDO indicator 4. By closure, annual unserved energy in Kigali City’s 15kV distribution network was reduced
by 0.2 GWh, as targeted. Thus the target was reached. This indicator was used as a proxy for technical
losses in the distribution network.

- By closure, average annual outage duration in the 15 KV system of Kigali distribution network was 125.72
hours, from the baseline of 838 hours, against the target of 400 hours. The target was exceeded. It is worth
noting that the target was reduced at the May 2021 restructuring, in line with the adjustment made to the
baseline data for this indicator, which was updated using the March 2021 EUCL’s data for 2017. Also worth
noting that this indicator was used to calculate PDO indicator 4 (annual unserved energy in Kigali City’s 15 kV
distribution network).

Outputs:

- At closure, all industrial consumers were covered by the Revenue Protection Program (RPP), against the
target of 75 percent. The target was exceeded.

- At closure, 19 switching stations were rehabilitated, as targeted. The target was reached.

- At closure, the average receivables’ delay amounted to 10 day, against the target of 60 days. The target
was exceeded.

- At closure, all four quarterly financial reports were prepared by the 5th of the month, following the end of the
quarter, as targeted. The target was reached.

- By closure, the corporate strategic plan (including key KPIs and a dashboard) was developed, as planned.
The target was reached.

- By closure, utilities were publishing annual reports on citizen engagement, as planned. The target was
reached.

Overall, under Objective 1, the outcomes and outputs achieved or exceeded their targets.

Rating. Objective 1 efficacy is rated High.




                                                                                                    Page 6 of 15
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Electricity Sector Strenghtening Project (P150634)




                            Rating
                            High


                            OBJECTIVE 2
                            Objective
                            To increase electricity access.

                            Rationale
                            Please see the discussion of the TOC under objective 1, Original Project.

                            Outcomes:

                            - By closure, 375,319 people in the household sector were provided with access to electricity, as compared
                            with the targeted 324,000 people. The target was exceeded. The gender-specific sub-target of 50 percent
                            female beneficiaries was also reached. Given the considerable progress made in infrastructure
                            improvements, the increases in beneficiaries is unsurprising, but notable.

                            Outputs:

                            - By closure, 1,046 community electricity connections were constructed, as compared to the 792 connections
                            targeted. The target was exceeded.

                            - By closure, 2,145 distribution lines were constructed or rehabilitated, as compared to the 1,666 lines
                            targeted. The target was exceeded.

                            Overall, under Objective 2, as the review of the efficacy of the Project’s outcomes and outputs indicates, the
                            Project achieved or exceeded all of its targets.

                            Rating. The Project achieved all of its Objective 2 targets, and thus its efficacy is rated High.



                            Rating
                            High


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Overall efficacy is High based on efficacy ratings of Objective 1 and Objective 2.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating


                                                                                                                                Page 7 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Electricity Sector Strenghtening Project (P150634)



  High



 5. Efficiency
I. Economic Analysis

Economic analysis was performed both at appraisal and closure. At closure, an update of the appraisal level
analysis was conducted, to ensure comparability. The analysis was done for Component A Electricity Sector
Capacity Strengthening and Component B Increased Access to Electricity Services. The net present value
(NPV) of both benefits and costs was calculated using a discount rate of 10 percent.

The following benefits were estimated: (i) energy cost savings due to reduced commercial losses; (ii) energy
cost savings due to reduced technical losses and unscheduled outages; and (iii) energy cost savings for
households, communities, and enterprises due to new connections (estimated as the cost of switching from
kerosene and diesel to electricity). In addition, the avoided greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions due to switching
from kerosene and diesel to electricity were added to both the updated appraisal analysis and the ICR analysis
following the World Bank’s 2018 guidance note on the shadow price of carbon in economic analysis. The
benefits were assumed to be occurring for 10 years for Component A, 15 years for Subcomponent B-1, and 20
years for Subcomponent B-2, in line with the typical economic life of MIS and electricity distribution
infrastructure.

The costs were estimated in the following way. The capital costs were based on the cost of the Project
components, but excluded value added tax (VAT) of 18 percent, as well as the contingencies priced at 10
percent, and were therefore as follows: US$14.4 million for Component A, US$18 million for Subcomponent B-1,
and US$32.4 million for Subcomponent B-2. O&M costs were assumed at a standard 2 percent per year of the
cost of infrastructure procured under Subcomponents B-1 and B-2. O&M costs under Component A were
assumed at 10 percent given the higher O&M cost of the MIS.

Results at appraisal:

- Without accounting for the externalities (GHG emissions): the economic internal rate of return (EIRR) was
36.91 percent and the NPV was US$77.59 million.

- Accounting for the externalities (GHG emissions): the EIRR was 37.77 percent and the NPV was US$80.59
million.

Results at closure:

- Without accounting for the externalities (GHG emissions): the EIRR was 35.76 percent and the NPV was
US$63.51 million.

- Accounting for the externalities (GHG emissions): the EIRR was 36.53 percent and the NPV was US$66.27
million.

The ICR states that while the EIRR and the NPV at completion are slightly lower than the appraisal estimates
(pointing to some shortcomings in Project efficiency), the reason for that was a reduced cost of electricity


                                                                                                   Page 8 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Electricity Sector Strenghtening Project (P150634)



generation and supply between 2015 and 2020, which reflected the progress Rwanda made in lowering the
overly high costs of electricity (ICR, page 22).

II. Administrative efficiency.

The Project was able to achieve its objectives within the original financing envelope. However, there were
delays in the initial two years, mainly due to significant delays in procurement processes; but they were
eliminated later on. The main reason for the 12-month extension during the May 2021 restructuring was the
impact of COVID-19. The location of the task team leader in Rwanda since 2019 was important for the
administrative efficiency.

The Project’s efficiency is rated as Substantial, mainly due to the EIRR estimated at a slightly lower rate at
closure than at appraisal and due to the 12-month implementation delay.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                 Rate Available?            Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      94.70
 Appraisal                                                  37.77
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      94.80
 ICR Estimate                                               36.53
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The relevance of objectives is High. The overall efficacy rating is High due to the achievement of both PDO
objectives. The efficiency rating is Substantial due to the minor implementation inefficiencies resulting in the
EIRR at closure being slightly below the EIRR at appraisal and in an extended Project closure date. Based on
these ratings, the overall outcome of the Project is Highly Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Highly Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome



                                                                                                       Page 9 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Electricity Sector Strenghtening Project (P150634)



Macroeconomic. The risk of an economic recession could delay or prevent fiscal transfers to the REG,
which would disrupt the utility operations due to its dependency on subsidies. A recession could also affect
the utilities functioning if customers stop paying utility bills and if the tariffs are not increased under such
circumstances. These issues were already encountered in 2020 with the COVID-19 impact. (ICR, page 34)

Financial. The Project financed the hiring of a highly competent expatriate REG CEO as well as some EUCL
staff salaries with competitive rates. As the project closed, the REG needs to find other resources to continue
to pay competitive salaries to retain and attract competent leadership and staff. As of the ICR submission,
the salaries for the CEO and other critical staff were financed from a consecutive World Bank project Energy
Access and Quality Improvement Project (P172594). It was not clear what the alternative would be. (ICR,
page 35)




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The ICR reports that the Project’s technical design was strong, given the Bank’s operational experience
  in similar projects globally and in the country. The Project relied on a thorough economic analysis, which
  showed strong justification for public financing. The assessment of fiduciary and safeguard capacity and
  arrangements was adequate, as well as the implementation planning. The implementation arrangements
  and the role of each institutional stakeholder involved, as well as the coordination mechanism within the
  EUCL, were clear and detailed, and proved to be reliable. The Project was coordinated with other energy
  sector projects in the country. (ICR, page 32)

  The overall Project’s risk rating was Substantial at appraisal, and it was mitigated, including through the
  following actions: several experts were hired to support EUCL in the preparatory activities; experts to
  coach the new staff in the aspects of utility operations and management were hired; an internal auditor
  was recruited; a functional audit committee of the Board was formed; the FM manual was revised; and
  robust FM procedures were developed. (ICR, page 33)

  The M&E design was adequate, although there were minor shortcomings leading to the need to update
  the baselines and target for two indicators and to rephrase one indicator, as discussed in Section 2d
  “Components”, under “Changes in components and indicators during implementation”, as well as in
  Section 9a “M&E Design” of this Review.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The World Bank provided intensive supervision through missions; supported the client in relation to
 technical, procurement, E&S safeguards, and FM aspects of the Project throughout the implementation;
 paid attention to any possible early warning signs; and was submitting Aide Memoires to the client after

                                                                                                      Page 10 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Electricity Sector Strenghtening Project (P150634)



 each mission. A total of 13 ISRs were filed. The presence of the task team leader and key specialists in the
 country enabled the team to provide continuous hands-on support.

 The Project experienced the following implementation issues, and those were resolved prior to closure:

       Significant delays in the initial years of implementation. The factors of the delays were identified as
        follows: (i) EDCL’s long contracting processes; (ii) poor quality of procurement documents
        submitted for World Bank’s review; (iii) a failure of two big EPC contracts; and (iv) delays in
        expropriation and compensation of PAPs. All these issues were resolved by Project closure.
       The MTR flagged the need to update two indicators and reformulate one indicator. This was
        accomplished through a restructuring in May 2021.
       The COVID-19 pandemic delayed the implementation, requiring a 12-month extension of closure,
        accomplished through a restructuring in May 2021. (ICR, pages 33-34)



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 Overall, the Project's RF mostly reflected the logic of Project interventions in the PAD and was sufficiently
 linked to the PDO and to the ToC. Most of the RF indicators were quantitative, and all of them were time-
 bound, had baselines and targets, and were attributable to the Project. There was one gender-
 disaggregated indicator. The RF measured the PDO outcomes (such as reduction in commercial losses
 and in unserved energy), intermediary outcomes (such as average annual outage duration), and outputs
 (such the development of a corporate strategic plan).

 However, the RF design had minor deficiencies, which had to be corrected during
 implementation. Specifically, two indicators - a PDO indicator “Reduction in commercial losses
 (percentage)” and an intermediate indicator “Reduced average outage duration…” - were revised at the
 May 2021 restructuring to update the baseline data and adjust the targets accordingly. Another PDO
 indicator had to be reformulated (at the same time) from “Reduction of technical losses…(GWh)” to
 “Reduction in energy not served…(GWh)” because the original indicator was not fully attributable to the
 Project and did not use an adequate unit of measurement (it should have been expressed in percentage
 terms) (see more details in this Review: Section 2 Project Objectives and Components, Subsection d
 Components, under “Changes in components and indicators during implementation”).




                                                                                                    Page 11 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Electricity Sector Strenghtening Project (P150634)



b. M&E Implementation
  The ICR reported that the EUCL was responsible for data collection and reporting, with support from the
  EARP for indicators related to electricity access. The Engineering, Procurement, and Construction (EPC)
  contractors collected data as they made connections, and the M&E team verified the data collected. The
  data was then integrated into the sector performance indicators and reported to the biannual Sector
  Working Group (SWG) Joint Sector Performance Review for discussions. Other reports that were part of
  the M&E system (for example, quarterly and annual progress reports, IFRs, and the borrower’s
  implementation completion report) were submitted to the relevant stakeholders on time and were of good
  quality. (ICR, page 29)



c. M&E Utilization
  The ICR reported that the M&E data were used to inform Project management and decision-making in a
  timely and appropriate manner, in the following ways:

  • To identify the bottlenecks of the implementation, particularly on procurement, and design plans to
  address them.

  • In sector annual and quarterly electrification forecasts.

  • To inform the design of the DPO series on prior actions and triggers.

  • In the MTR, to make decisions to revise specific RF indicators.

  • To inform the agenda for mission discussions, and to prepare Implementation Status and Results
  Reports (ISRs) and other reports. (ICR, page 32)



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Environmental and Social Safeguards. The Project was classified as Environmental Category B.
   Construction of the distribution lines required temporary and sometimes permanent land acquisition, thus
   triggering OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement. Limited earth works triggered OP/BP 4.11 - Physical
   Cultural Resources. The Project also triggered OP/BP 4.01 - Environmental Assessment. The civil works
   could lead to minor air, land, and water pollution during the construction phases, as well as noise.

   The ICR reports that the safeguards rating at closure was Satisfactory for all triggered safeguards policies.
   The Project complied with all triggered safeguard policies. It prepared and disclosed an Environmental and
   Social Management Framework and a Resettlement Policy Framework, both in the country and on the
   World Bank website, prior to Project appraisal. Environmental and Social (E&S) Impact Assessment and
   Resettlement Action Plans and E&S completion reports were prepared for all subprojects. Each contractor

                                                                                                   Page 12 of 15
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Electricity Sector Strenghtening Project (P150634)



  prepared a Contractor E&S Management Plan and Contractor Environmental Health and Safety Plan before
  construction. E&S safeguards progress reports were submitted quarterly. The expropriation report on some
  occasions was submitted monthly.

  However, there were some delays in expropriation and compensation of project-affected persons (PAPs),
  which affected Project implementation progress. In total, 2,314 grievances were received, and all were
  solved before Project closure. (ICR, page 33)




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial management. The ICR reports that the FM rating was Satisfactory throughout Project
  implementation, and the FM risk rating was Moderate. The Project maintained an adequate accounting
  capacity, including an internal auditor. Financial reports and audited financial statements were generally
  submitted on time, and there were no outstanding audit report at Project closure.

  The following FM issues were experienced by the Project:

          An ineligible expenditure of US$1,321,934.5 was declared by the World Bank on September 30,
           2022, in relation to an advance payment to an EPC contractor whose contract was terminated for
           nonperformance. The related court case went into arbitration, and after the ruling against the
           contractor, it went to appeals court, which was its status at the time of the ICR submission.
           However, the Government has agreed to reimburse the Bank irrespective of the court decision.
          The Project was exposed to cyber theft: a payment of US$264,442 was made on July 14, 2022 to a
           fraudulent account in Barclays Bank through Citibank, based on an invoice sent by a phisher. At the
           time of the ICR submission, US$199,266.32 has been recovered and the remaining US$65,000
           were under investigation. EUCL will cover the remaining balance to the supplier should the ongoing
           investigations fail to recover it. (ICR, page 33-34) It is worth noting that these risks will continue to
           be a potential area of exposure for the Bank and is worthy of careful training and oversight.

  Procurement. The procurement rating at closure was Moderately Satisfactory. However, due to significant
  delays in procurement in the first years of implementation and the EDCL’s lengthy internal procurement
  processes, the procurement rating was Moderately Unsatisfactory between August 2018 and August 2019.
  The World Bank’s task team provided close technical and implementation support. By streamlining the
  internal procurement processes, the procurement performance substantially improved and maintained the
  Moderately Satisfactory rating until the Project closure.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---



                                                                                                      Page 13 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Electricity Sector Strenghtening Project (P150634)



11. Ratings
                                                                                    Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                      IEG
                                                                                    Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                          Highly Satisfactory      Highly Satisfactory

Bank Performance                 Satisfactory             Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                   Substantial              Substantial

Quality of ICR                   ---                      High


12. Lessons

The following lessons were derived from the ICR (ICR, pages 35-38):

1. The Government’s ownership and commitment to sector reforms are essential for the
achievement of project objectives. During Project implementation, the Government showed a strong
commitment to institutional strengthening of the electricity sector. The REG and its subsidiaries,
EUCL and EDCL, were supported by a new legal framework, giving them autonomy to make
decisions in key areas such as organization structure, recruitment, attraction and retention of staff,
procurement, and expenditure approval, which contributed to a turnaround in the performance of the
sector. The REG and its subsidiaries were encouraged and empowered to apply good corporate
governance practices and adopt ‘best-in-class’ business processes, which were fundamental for
making the project successful. The lesson is that government commitment is essential and can lead
to project’s success even when the objectives are ambitious.

2. The World Bank’s early involvement in the design of sector reforms is important in ensuring
proper design of the follow-up investment operations. The Bank had been at the forefront in
supporting Rwanda’s power sector reforms and providing technical assistance on policy,
institutional, organizational, and regulatory aspects of the reforms for a long time. The project design
reflected the World Bank’s experience and lessons learned from similar activities in other countries
and embedded three core elements for developing an efficient and accountable performance culture
in the utility during the change process: (a) an appropriate organizational structure with a clear
vision, (b) a skilled workforce, and (c) tools and systems to support staff performance and inform
decision-making. The lesson is that investment operations benefit when based on a long-term
involvement in the sector reforms in a country and when in-depth analytical work and operational
experience have been prioritized.

3. Developing and implementing good utility management information systems (MIS) can modernize
and transform utility’s operations. The design, supply, installation, and operationalization (including
staff training) of the IBMS played a transformative role in improving efficiency, transparency,
accuracy, and accountability of the utility’s business processes, which had a profound impact on the
utility’s operation. The lesson is that making investments in such systems a high priority is critical.
This lesson is consistent with the finding by the World Bank 2021 report Utility Performance and
Behavior in Africa Today (UPBEAT) that utilities with good MISs and sound performance
management reporting and disclosure tend to have better financial performance.


                                                                                                      Page 14 of 15
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Electricity Sector Strenghtening Project (P150634)




13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provides sufficient technical details to understand the value-added of the activities and the outcomes
of the Project; a good justification of the PDO relevance; comprehensive and robust evidence on all aspects of
Project’s evaluation; and a clear linking of evidence to findings. The ICR is technical, analytical, and has
internal consistency. The lessons learned are linked to the narrative and the ratings and are useful for future
lending operations.

In fact, the ICR provided all the information needed for the ICR Review (there was no need to refer to other
Project documents), was written very logically and clearly, with no errors of either quantitative or qualitative
nature. The Project costs were presented precisely, with comments on all necessary details. The arguments
about Project’s efficacy were articulated with perfect clarity and supported by succinctly presented facts. The
efficiency section contained an excellent summary of the economic analysis, and the analysis itself was done
diligently and knowledgeably. The ICR is of excellent quality.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       High




                                                                                                    Page 15 of 15
