     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     WARCIP GUINEA-BISSAU (P155876)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0023574

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P155876                                     WARCIP GUINEA-BISSAU

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Western and Central Africa                  Digital Development


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-59970                                   31-May-2022                                         34,722,547.78

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 24-Mar-2017                                 30-Nov-2022

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            35,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                             35,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Actual                                         34,722,547.78                                               0.00




 Prepared by                  Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Ranga Rajan                  Avjeet Singh                 Avjeet Singh                   IEGSD (Unit 4)
 Krishnamani




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development objectives (PDO) as stated in the Financing Agreement (FA, Schedule 1, page 5)
   and in the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, page 8) are:

   " To contribute to increasing the geographic reach of broadband networks and reduce costs of
   communication services in Guinea Bissau and between Guinea Bissau and the Economic Community
   of West African States (ECOWAS) ".


                                                                                                   Page 1 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     WARCIP GUINEA-BISSAU (P155876)



   The PDOs are unpacked for this Implementation Completion Report (ICR) review as follows:

   PDO 1. To contribute to increasing the geographic reach of broadband networks in Guinea Bissau.

   PDO 2. To reduce costs of communication services in Guinea Bissau.

   PDO 3. To contribute to reducing costs of communication services between Guinea Bissau and ECOWAS
   countries.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   This project was the third phase of the World Bank's West Africa Regional Communications Infrastructure
   Program (WARCIP) Series of Projects (SoPs) aimed at increasing the geographic reach of broadband
   networks and reducing the costs of communication services. The first phase was in Liberia, Sierra Leone
   and Guinea, the second in Gambia, Burkina Faso and Benin and the third in Mauritania and Togo. There
   were four components (PAD, 9 -12).

   Component 1. Supporting Connectivity. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$31.5 million. The actual
   cost was US$31.4 million. There were two sub-components:

   A. Connection to the West Africa to Europe ACE international submarine cable. This sub-component
   planned to finance the connection to the ACE (Africa Coast to Europe) international submarine cable by
   covering the cost of the ACE consortium fee and construction of a landing station in Guinea Bissau and a
   submarine fiber optic link connecting the domestic landing station in Guinea Bissau to the ACE landing
   station in Senegal; and

   B. Building a Critical Terrestrial Fiber Optic Missing Link. This sub-component planned to finance the
   construction of a terrestrial fiber optic missing link connecting the ACE landing station in Guinea Bissau to
   the entry point of the regional power transmission infrastructure - West Africa Power Pool (WAPP) and its
   sub-program, Organization for the Development of the Gambia River (OMVG).

   Component 2. Creating an enabling environment for improved connectivity. The estimated cost at
   appraisal was US$2.0 million. The actual cost was US$1.0 million. This component planned to finance
   technical assistance (TA) for sector reforms aimed at increasing competition and promoting broadband use.
   There were four sub-components:

   A. Transaction design for Public-Private Partnership (PPP). This sub-component aimed to support the
   design, commercial and financial closing of the transaction and operating model for the ownership and
   management of the international, regional and national infrastructure using PPP frameworks and open
   access principles, including signature of the Contractual Arrangement by public-private stakeholders.



                                                                                                     Page 2 of 16
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    WARCIP GUINEA-BISSAU (P155876)



  B. Strengthening the institutional capacity. This subcomponent planned to strengthen the institutional
  capacity of the Ministry of Transport and Communications (MTC) through: (i) developing a master plan for
  the Information and Communication Technologies (ICT) sector, including strategic orientations on e-
  government and universal access; (ii) revising the outdated telecom law of 2010 and preparing new laws
  and decrees; (iii) financing a feasibility study for an Internet Exchange point in Guinea Bissau under PPP
  arrangement and open access principles: (iv) a strategic study on the regulation of public domain
  occupation and cross sector synergies between civil works conducted under public infrastructure projects
  (transport, telecom, and electricity); (v) a strategic study on telecom taxation; and (vi) an audit and due
  diligence of the Universal Service Proceeds and e-government strategy.

  C. Options for strategic repositioning of GuineTelecom/GuineTel). This subcomponent planned to
  support the preparatory work for restructuring GuineTelecom/GuineTel through a study to identify options
  for the strategic repositioning of GuineTelecom/GuineTel.

  D. Regulatory capacity building. This subcomponent planned to strengthen the institutional capacity of
  the National Regulatory Authority for Information and Communication Technologies (ARN) for regulating a
  competitive telecom market through: (i) defining procedures and preparing regulation decisions to attribute
  licenses and authorizations to new market players (such as internet service providers, infrastructure
  operators, Mobile Virtual Network Operators (MVNOs); (ii) preparing regulation decisions on passive
  infrastructure sharing and national roaming practices: (iii) preparing a cost model, wholesale catalogs and
  regulation decision on dominant position in relevant markets: and (iv) preparing a feasibility study for
  implementing an ICT observatory.

  Component 3. Project Implementation. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$1.4 million. The actual
  cost was US$1.4 million. This component planned to finance: (i) environmental and social studies; (ii)
  support the Government in implementing components one and two; and (iii) financing the cost of setting up
  a Project Implementation Unit (PIU), office equipment and operating, training, audits, communication and
  monitoring and evaluation (M&E) costs.

  4. National backbone and Restructuring of GuineTelecom/GuineTel (through private sector
  contribution). The estimated cost at appraisal was US$16.0 million. The actual cost was US$2.8 million.
  There were two subcomponents:

  Sub-component one. The activities included: (i) constructing terrestrial fiber optic missing links connecting
  Bissau city to the secondary cities; and (ii) TA for determining the technical aspects related to the design of
  the missing terrestrial links through an engineering survey; (iii) identifying and selecting the PPP
  arrangement through a feasibility study of backbone ownership and management options and preparing the
  bidding documents for constructing the terrestrial missing links and the necessary control/evaluation
  contracts.

  Sub-component two. TA aimed at preparing a privatization transaction for Guine Telecom/GuineTel.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project cost. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$35.0 million. The private sector contributed to the
  component four activity. With private sector contribution the total actual cost was US$36.6 million.



                                                                                                    Page 3 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     WARCIP GUINEA-BISSAU (P155876)



   Project financing. The project was financed by an International Development Association (IDA) credit of
   US$35.0 million. The amount disbursed was US$34.7 million.

   Borrower contribution. Borrower contribution was not planned at appraisal. There was no borrower
   contribution during implementation.

   Dates. The project was approved on March 24, 2017, became effective on May 29, 2018, and scheduled to
   close on May 31, 2022. The project closed six months behind schedule on November 30, 2022.

   Changes. These changes were made through a level 2 restructuring on April 26, 2022.

         The closing date was extended by six months for completing the remaining activities which were
          delayed due to the combined impact of the COVID - 19 pandemic and political and social
          challenges.
         Four planned TA activities were cancelled due to the lack of government interest in pursuing them.



3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country context. Guinea Bissau is one of the most politically fragile countries in the world, with four
successful military coups, 16 attempted/plotted or alleged coups since its independence in 1974 and
governance turnover every year between 1999 and 2009. The World Bank classifies Guinea Bissau as a
fragile, conflict and violent (FCV) country due to its weak governance and social fragility.

Regional sector context. Guinea Bissau is part of the ECOWAS region. The telecommunications market
of the ECOWAS region is fragmented, with high prices for Information and Communication Technology
(ICT) services that hindered economic and social exchanges between ECOWAS member countries. A
regional approach to improving cross-border communications so that the region could leverage scale
economies and reap the development benefits of internet was important in the regional context.

Country sector context. The Government had taken several steps to liberalize the ICT sector before
appraisal. The Government privatized the state-owned telecommunications operator, created a mobile
operator subsidiary, awarded a global system for mobile communications license to GuineTel, liberalized
the mobile market by awarding two licenses to international operators and set an independent regulatory
authority (ARN) in 2010. With the exception of the fixed-line segment which remained a monopoly, the
telecommunications market was fully liberalized and telecommunications operators and internet service
providers (ISPs) could deploy their infrastructure and provide international communications.

However, the sector faced challenges with respect to coverage, quality and price of broadband
services. Affordability was a problem as on average, a mobile user spent over 19% of their monthly income
on mobile services. International connectivity was poor as each operator deployed their own satellite to
bring international connectivity. Internet usage was limited to 4% of the population in 2015 (as compared to
19% in The Gambia and 51% in Senegal). Guinea Bissau's broadband market was concentrated in the
capital and had a penetration rate of only 0.9% (as compared to the ECOWAS average of 7%). Hence,
improving access to international (via the submarine cable) and national terrestrial fiber optic connectivity

                                                                                                   Page 4 of 16
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      WARCIP GUINEA-BISSAU (P155876)



               for every operator was seen by the Government as an effective option for improving coverage, quality and
               price of broadband services in Guinea Bissau.

               ECOWAS strategy. The PDO was consistent with the ECOWAS Regional Infrastructure Development
               Master Plan and its strategic framework for 2015-2020. This framework underscored the need for
               addressing the challenges highlighted in the ICT sector.

               Government strategy. The PDO was well-aligned with Guinea Bissau's strategic and operational plan
               Terra Ranka for 2015 - 2025 and with the National Development Plan for 2020 - 2023. These plans put
               digital transformation at the forefront and articulated the need for ICT sector reforms for modernizing
               political institutions.

               Bank regional strategy. The PDO is very relevant to the Bank's Regional Strategy - Regional Integration
               and Cooperation Assistance Strategy (RIAS) of 2018, and its update for the period 2021 - 2023. The focus
               area one of the RIAS specifically articulated the need for improving regional connectivity.

               Bank country strategy. At appraisal, the project was in line with the Country Engagement Note (2015) and
               the Turnaround Eligibility Note (2016). These papers underscored the need for strengthening service
               delivery and improving governance. The Bank's Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD, 2016) highlighted the
               role the ICT sector can play in increasing economic opportunities, productivity and financial inclusion in
               Guinea Bissau. The Bank's 2020 Country Economic Memorandum (CEM) recognized that ICT services can
               be an important driver of economic diversification and observed that increased connectivity with
               neighboring countries would allow Guinean farmers to take advantage of the growing demand for their
               products in the region. The PDO is well-aligned with the objective three of the Bank's Country Partnership
               Framework for 2018 - 2023. The CPF highlighted the role that ICT can play in improving market access.

               Previous Bank experience. The Bank had financed two phases of the WARCIP program aimed at
               increasing the geographic reach of broadband networks and reducing the costs of communication services
               in West Africa. This project in Guinea Bissau had ICT infrastructure investments and enabling environment
               reforms adapted to the country context but set within a coordinated regional framework. The regional
               framework was appropriate as this could be expected to ensure seamless options for connectivity and help
               in leveraging scale economies.

               Overall, given the alignment of the PDO to the Government strategy, ECOWAS strategy, and the Bank
               strategies for Guinea Bissau, as well as the appropriate level of ambition within the coordinated regional
               framework, the relevance of the PDO is rated as High.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                                                                                                                   Page 5 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   WARCIP GUINEA-BISSAU (P155876)




OBJECTIVE 1
Objective
PDO 1. To contribute to increasing the geographic reach of broadband networks in Guinea Bissau.

Rationale
Theory of change. The outputs of infrastructure investments such as connecting to the ACE submarine
cable, constructing domestic landing station, the submarine fiber optic link and the terrestrial fiber missing
link were likely to result in increasing the geographic reach of broadband networks in Guinea Bissau. The
causal links between project activities, outputs and outcomes were logical, and the intended outcomes were
monitorable.

Outputs/ Intermediate results (ICR, para 24).

      The ACE submarine cable landing station - the project's major activity - was constructed as targeted.
       However, this activity which was to be completed by 2018, became operational just two weeks before
       project closure on November 30, 2022. The technical team in charge of day-to-day operation of the
       landing station was established and trained by the Africa Coast to Europe (ACE) as targeted.
      The strategic fiber optic backbone linking the cable landing station in Suro to the Organization for the
       Development of the Gambia River (OMVG) fiber optic network in Antula and the terrestrial fiber
       missing link were constructed as targeted.
      Two operators and Internet service providers (ISPs) were buying capacity from the deployed
       infrastructure, short of the target of three.

Outcome.

The outputs of activities described above were expected to lead to the outcomes of: (i) increasing the volume
of international traffic; (ii) increase the number of people with internet access; (iii) increase the number of
people with access to telephone services; and (iv) increase the number of project beneficiaries (including
women).

      The international internet bandwidth (bandwidth in Kilobits (Kbits/s per person) increased from 3.70
       Kbits/s per person at the baseline in 2016, to 24.70 in 2022 (target 12.90). The end target was already
       exceeded in 2020 when the volume reached 17.33 Kbit/s per person. This outcome was not
       attributable to the project as the ACE submarine cable landing station - the project's major activity -
       became operational just two weeks before project closure on November 30, 2022. The realized
       outcomes were due to a combination of external regional trends (such as evolution of technology,
       increased competition, decrease in the cost of internet bandwidth and impact of investments made by
       private telecommunications operators in Guinea Bissau.
      The number of people with internet access (number of subscribers per 100 people) increased from
       4.60 in 2016 to 73.00 in 2022 (target 22.00). The number of people with access to telephone services
       (fixed mainlines plus cellular phones per 100 people) increased from 72.00 in 2016 to 110.00 in 2022
       (target 82.00). The number of direct beneficiaries increased 1.3 million in 2016, to 1.8 million in 2022,
       (target 1.7 million). 51% of the beneficiaries were women as per the target. Although the outcomes
       were exceeded, they were due to external factors and not to the main project activity, which was
       completed just two weeks before project closure.



                                                                                                  Page 6 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   WARCIP GUINEA-BISSAU (P155876)



Although the outputs were achieved as targeted and the outcomes were exceeded, the latter was largely due
to external factors (ICR, para 31) and could not be attributed to the project. Therefore, the efficacy of this
PDO is rated as Modest.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
PDO 2. To reduce costs of communication services in Guinea Bissau.

Rationale
Theory of change. The activities listed above together with the activities aimed to promote PPP in the ICT
sector, strategic repositioning of Guinea Telecom/Guinea Tel and building the regulatory capacity of
the Ministry of Transport and Communications (MTC) were likely to help in providing an enabling environment
for private sector development in the ICT sector. The outputs were likely to reduce the costs of
communication services in Guinea Bissau. The causal links between the project activities, outputs and
outcomes were logical. The intended outcomes were monitorable. The outcomes were predicated on the
assumption that the Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV) is established and operational.

Outputs/ Intermediate results. (ICR, pages 12 -13).

      The operating model for the ownership and management of the financed connectivity infrastructure
       using PPP frameworks and open access principles was completed as targeted. This led to the
       creation of the Cape Guinea Bissau Company (SCGB) - the Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV) - that
       owns and operates the submarine cable landing station and the Suro - Antula backbone. The private
       sector owned 51% of the shares of SPV.
      Under the TA activities for the project: (i) A master plan for the ICT sector was developed; (ii) The
       outdated telecom law of 2010 was reviewed and new laws and decrees were enacted; (iii). A
       feasibility study for a future Internet Exchange Point (IXP) and a strategic study on telecom taxation'
       were completed as targeted.
      A study identifying the strategic repositioning of Guine Telecom/Guine Tel was completed. Some
       recommendations of this study such as amicable conclusion of the worker's contract and payments of
       the debts of Guine Telecom/Guine Tel were completed.
      Four planned TA activities were cancelled due to the lack of government interest in pursuing them.
       These activities were: (i) Strategic study on regulation of public domain occupation and cross sector
       synergies between the civil works conducted under public infrastructure projects; (ii) audit and due
       diligence of the Universal Service Proceeds and e-Government agency; (iii) definition of procedures
       and preparation of regulation decisions to attribute licenses to new market players; and (iv) feasibility
       study for the implementation of an ICT observatory.

Outcomes.




                                                                                                   Page 7 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   WARCIP GUINEA-BISSAU (P155876)



The construction of the ACE submarine cable and the TA activities aimed at facilitating private sector
investments in the ICT sector were expected to contribute to the outcome of reducing the costs of
communication services in Guinea Bissau.

      The domestic retail price of internet services (per megabit/per month (Per Mbit/per month) in US$ fell
       rather substantially from US$736.00 to US$15.69 when the project closed, far exceeding the target of
       US206.00.
      The average monthly price of international wholesale E1 capacity link from Guinea Bissau to Europe
       dropped from a baseline of US$4,000.00 in 2016, to US$140.00 in 2021 and 2022. (Target
       US$169.00). However, this outcome was due to exogenous regional developments in the ICT sector,
       rather than due to the main project activity, which was only completed just two weeks before closure in
       2022.

Although the project did contribute substantially to creating an enabling environment for private sector
participation in the ICT sector, the realized outcomes were not entirely attributable to the main project activity.
Therefore, the efficacy of this PDO is rated as Modest.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
PDO 3. To contribute to reducing costs of communication services between Guinea Bissau and ECOWAS
countries.

Rationale
Theory of change. The outputs of activities listed under the two PDOs listed above together with the number
of cross border interconnections that were built were likely to help in reducing the costs of communication
services between Guinea Bissau and ECOWAS countries. The causal links between the project activities,
outputs and outcomes were logical and the intended outcomes were monitorable.

Outputs. (ICR, page 28)

In addition to the outputs listed above, which were also relevant for this objective, the following output was
pertinent for this PDO.

      One cross-border connection was built, short of the target of two.

Outcomes.

The project activities were expected to lead to the outcome of reducing the costs of communication services
between Guinea Bissau and ECOWAS countries.




                                                                                                     Page 8 of 16
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               WARCIP GUINEA-BISSAU (P155876)




                                  It is reasonable to assume that costs of communication services between Guinea Bissau and
                                     ECOWAS countries reduced given the observed reduction of domestic prices discussed above.
                                     However, the reduction was likely due to exogenous regional developments in the ICT sector.

                            The efficacy of this PDO is rated as Modest.



                            Rating
                            Modest


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Even though the project achieved the outputs, and contributed towards building an enabling environment
                            conducive to the achievement of the outcomes, the overall efficacy is rated as Modest, since the achievement
                            of outcome indicators is largely attributed to other factors.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating                                Primary Reason
                            Modest                                                 Insufficient evidence


    5. Efficiency
   Economic analysis. The economic analysis was based on a World Bank 2019 study which noted that a 10
   percentage point increase in internet usage would increase Gross Domestic Product (GDP) by 1.38%. A " with
   the project ' and " without the project ' cost-benefit analysis was conducted at appraisal for connectivity
   infrastructure investments. These activities accounted for 90% of the estimated cost at appraisal and 92% of the
   actual cost.

   The analysis at appraisal assumed the following: (i) ACE investment participation cost are paid in 2017 and
   2018 and the maintenance cost are paid; (ii) cost of the terrestrial link between the landing station in Suro and
   the OMVG point of presence in Antula; (iii) discount rate of 10%; and (iv) revenues from the ACE would begin in
   2018. The expected benefits were to come from reduction in wholesale internet prices. The ex-ante Internal
   Rate of Return (IRR) would range between 11% and 22% and the Net present Value to 2032 would range
   between US$17.6 and US$48.8 million.

   The ACE submarine cable landing station was constructed just two weeks before the project closed. The ICR
   (page 36) noted that the operating time of two weeks was too short to assess the return on investment
   generated by an infrastructure with a 20 year life time. Hence, the NPV and the ex-post IRR were not calculated
   at project closure.

   The economic impact of the project on GDP was estimated at US$115,453,927 over the 2017 - 2021
   period, was almost four times the amount invested in the project. This did not include the 2022 GDP impact due

                                                                                                                           Page 9 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      WARCIP GUINEA-BISSAU (P155876)



to data constraints. The ICR (para 33) noted that the direct and indirect positive development impacts on the ICT
sector will continue well beyond this project, which showed the great value for money in an FCV country
context.

Administrative and operational issues during implementation. Delayed annual contributions from the
Government and the Mobile Telecommunications Network (MTN) to the Cape Guinea Bissau Company's
(SCGB) operational budget hindered SCGB's ability to hire the technical staff required to operationalize the ACE
submarine cable. Implementation was also significantly affected by factors such as prolonged political instability
(including eight major changes at the ministry level. Due to these factors the ACE submarine cable which was to
be operationalized by 2018, was completed just two weeks before project closing on November 2022. However,
investments supporting connectivity were for the most part completed, albeit with significant delays when the
project closed.

In the absence of an ex-post NPV and EIRR estimate as well as implementation delays which led to the
completion of activities just two weeks before closure due to which the intended outcomes could not be realized
during the project period, overall efficiency is rated as Modest.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     90.00
 Appraisal                                                 16.50
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     0
 ICR Estimate                                               0
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The relevance of the PDOs to the Government, regional and Bank strategies for Guinea Bissau and the region
are rated as High. Efficiency is rated as Modest in the absence of ex-post EIRR and due to implementation
delays which affected the realization of outcomes within the project period. Even though the outcomes were
substantially achieved, overall efficacy is rated as Modest, due to attributional issues discussed earlier. The
overall outcome is rated as Moderately Unsatisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Unsatisfactory



                                                                                                    Page 10 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      WARCIP GUINEA-BISSAU (P155876)




7. Risk to Development Outcome

Government commitment. There is a moderate risk to the sustainability of development outcomes. The
ICR (para 61) notes that the development outcomes of facilitating private sector development in the ICT
sector are likely to be sustained, given the signing of shareholder agreements for the financing, operation,
and maintenance of the Cape Guinea-Bissau Company (SCGB).

However, there is a moderate risk of non-compliance with the shareholders' agreement by the private
operator (the Mobile Telecommunications Network (MTN), given the persistent lack of financial contributions,
which could compromise the operation and maintenance of this infrastructure. There is also a risk that MTN's
financial performance may affect the SCGB's ownership and performance.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  At appraisal, the Bank conducted a background analysis to evaluate options to address the connectivity
  challenges specific to Guinea Bissau. Best practices and international experience from Bank-financed
  regional connectivity programs indicated that the best management structures for high-capacity
  broadband networks were under a PPP. The Bank prepared this project based on the lessons learned
  from regional connectivity projects in West, Central, Eastern and Southern Africa and the Caribbean
  region. The lessons incorporated at design included (i) safeguards assessments of the landing stations
  and (iii) formulating a tailored PPP arrangement and open access principles in consultation with
  stakeholders as early as possible in project life. The design included a Project Preparation Advance
  (PPA). This ensured that the PPP framework was in place for project effectiveness. Also, the
  Government officially committed in the form of a Memorandum on creating a Special Purpose Vehicle
  (SPV) that was signed by the Government and the private operators.

  The implementation arrangements were appropriate with a new Project Implementation Unit (PIU)
  established under the Secretary of State for Transportation and Communications in charge of project
  implementation.

  The Bank identified several risks at appraisal including high political and governance risks. The mitigation
  measures included maintaining continued dialogue with stakeholders and establishing an SPV to
  international best practices standards to ensure stakeholders' accountability. The mitigation measures
  proved adequate, as the project performance was not undermined by the risks identified at appraisal. The
  arrangements made at appraisal for safeguards and fiduciary compliance were appropriate (discussed in
  section 10).



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


                                                                                                    Page 11 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     WARCIP GUINEA-BISSAU (P155876)




b. Quality of supervision
 The Bank's supervision team included an ICT policy specialist and social development, environmental,
 M&E, and fiduciary specialists with experience supporting similar projects in challenging circumstances
 (ICR, para 59). The Bank's technical and fiduciary teams provided guidance and support through the
 project restructuring to give additional time for completing the ongoing activities that were delayed due to a
 combination of factors, including political challenges and restrictions in the wake of the COVID-19
 pandemic. The Bank conducted supervision missions in Guinea Bissau when possible or through virtual
 missions when necessary. The project's Mid-Term Review (MTR) was held in July 2021.

 There was one shortcoming. Given that the major outcomes were realized and the major project activity
 was completed two weeks before project closure, the supervision team could have restructured the project
 to rectify the M&E shortcomings (discussed in section 9). The Implementation Status Results (ISR) Reports
 could have also been more candid since the project was consistently rated in the satisfactory range during
 implementation.

 Overall, the Bank performance at Supervision is rated as Moderately Satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The M&E framework was based on the design of the other phases of the WARCIP program and used
 similar indicators. The key outcome indicators - the volume of international traffic, increase in the number of
 people with access to internet and telephone services, the average monthly price of an international
 capacity link from Guinea Bissau to Europe, and the number of direct project beneficiaries were
 measurable and appropriate for monitoring project performance. The WARCIP PIU was responsible for
 collecting, reviewing, and validating data collected by the National Regulatory Authority for Information and
 Communication Technologies (ARN) and the Cape Guinea Bissau Company (SCGB).



b. M&E Implementation
  The ICR (para 51) noted that the PIU made several efforts to improve the quality of data collected by the
  ARN. These efforts helped ARN to resume sharing indicator values from 2021 in coordination with the
  telecommunication operators. However, there were issues with the data submitted by the Mobile
  Telecommunication Network (MTN). There were significant delays in receiving the data from MTN; the
  data submitted by MTN was either partial or inaccurate. The Bank team provided intense support by way


                                                                                                    Page 12 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     WARCIP GUINEA-BISSAU (P155876)



  of capacity building exercises. Despite these efforts by the Bank team, these deficiencies triggered the
  downgrading of the M&E rating to Unsatisfactory during a large part of the implementation period.



c. M&E Utilization
  The M&E utilization was undermined by the delays during implementation. There was a mismatch
  between the value of the indicators and the pace of project implementation. As a result, while the
  indicators showed that the PDOs were realized, the implementation of the ACE submarine cable (tied to
  the indicators) experienced major delays and was completed only two weeks prior to project closing. The
  realized outcomes were hence not due to the project activities, but due to investments made by private
  telecommunication operators. The ICR (para 52) reports that this although this mismatch was reported in
  the World Bank internal supervision documentation, there were no related actions. The ICR
  acknowledges that since this mismatch was known, the Bank could have adjusted the indicators through
  a restructuring to reflect the project delays.

  Overall M&E is rated as modest, mainly because of the shortcomings in M&E implementation and
  utilization.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as a Category B (partial assessment) project under the World Bank safeguard
   policies. Four safeguard policies were triggered at appraisal (PAD, page vii): Environmental Assessment
   (OP/BP 4.01); Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04); Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) and Involuntary
   Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12).

   The PAD (para 44) observed that the project had minor and manageable adverse impacts, such as
   temporary/permanent displacement of populations, restriction of access to livelihoods, impacts on ocean
   water and marine life, other temporary nuisances to people living in the vicinity of civil works sites, and
   potential destruction of covered cultural artifacts. At appraisal, the Ministry of Economy and Finance (MoF)
   prepared and publicly disclosed an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and
   Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) to mitigate any environmental and social impacts.

   Environmental Assessment, Natural Habitats, and Physical Cultural Resources. The ICR (para 54)
   observes that during implementation. an Environmental Impact Assessment, an updated version of the
   ESMF) and Heath and Safety Procedures were prepared. The project complied with these safeguards
   during implementation, with no adverse impacts.

   Involuntary Resettlement. The project complied with social safeguards (ICR, para 55). 72 people were
   displaced due to the construction of the Suro-Antula backbone. The PIU maintained a grievance
   management system during implementation. Since construction started in January 2022, there have been

                                                                                                   Page 13 of 16
        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
        WARCIP GUINEA-BISSAU (P155876)



   15 complaints (in addition to 14 previous complaints since the project started). There were operational
   deficiencies, which resulted in eight accidents (including a serious one that affected a young woman in April
   2022. The PIU addressed these complaints.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management. The Bank conducted an assessment of the financial management arrangements
   at appraisal. Given the fragile country context, the financial management risk was rated as Substantial at
   appraisal. The ICR (para 56) noted that financial management was rated as moderately satisfactory due to
   the recurrent delays in submitting external audit results and the low quality of the audits in the initial years
   of implementation. However, the quality of audits improved by 2021 and 2022. Financial management was
   rated as satisfactory when the project closed and the final audit reports were unqualified.

   Procurement Management. The Bank conducted an assessment of the project arrangements of the PIU
   at appraisal. The assessment concluded that procurement risks were associated with delays and the poor
   quality of deliverables. To mitigate the risk, the procurement assessment recommended that another
   existing PIU in the Ministry of Finance, which was already in charge of other Bank-supported projects,
   support the PIU of this project. The procurement was rated moderately satisfactory during implementation
   (ICR, para 57).




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   .



d. Other
       ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                   Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                    IEG
                                                                                   Disagreements/Comment
                                 Moderately            Moderately
Outcome
                                 Unsatisfactory        Unsatisfactory
                                 Moderately
Bank Performance                                       Moderately Satisfactory
                                 Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                   Modest                Modest

Quality of ICR                   ---                   High


12. Lessons


                                                                                                      Page 14 of 16
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       WARCIP GUINEA-BISSAU (P155876)



The ICR draws the following two main lessons from the experience of implementing this project, with
some adaptation of language.

1. Intense efforts by the Bank team may be required in implementing a PPP in an FCV
environment. The project had a Project Preparation Advance (PPA), so the PPP framework was
ready by project effectiveness. Despite this, the Bank team had to make intense efforts to clarify the
suitability of those agreements to mobilize private-sector financing, given the frequent changes in
government.

2. A candid assessment of the project interventions would help ensure the optimal use of the
M&E framework as a feedback mechanism. In this project, the intended outcomes were either
realized or exceeded, even though the main project activity was only completed two weeks before
the project closed. Hence, the outcomes could not be attributed to the project interventions. The
lesson is that it would help rectify the M&E framework with a project restructuring and enhance
candor during implementation in such cases.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is clear, candid, and well-written. The ICR, for the most part, adheres to the OPCS guidelines and
recommended length (the main body of the text is 18 pages compared to the recommended length of 15). The
theory of change articulated in the text clearly articulates the causal links between the project activities, outputs,
and outcomes. The analysis and evidence provided in the text are adequate to assess project performance.
The ICR is candid and acknowledges the attribution concerns and shortcomings with M&E. The lessons
learned are based on project implementation experience.

Overall, the ICR quality is rated as High.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       High




                                                                                                       Page 15 of 16
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
WARCIP GUINEA-BISSAU (P155876)




                                                                  Page 16 of 16
