     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Enhanced Road Access Project (P145545)



                                                                                Report Number: ICRR0023491

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P145545                                   Enhanced Road Access Project

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Samoa                                     Transport


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-H8840,TF-17563,TF-A6371               30-Apr-2019                                         27,602,364.24

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 17-Oct-2013                               31-Oct-2022

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                          20,000,000.00                                    12,225,008.00

 Revised Commitment                           29,629,479.18                                     9,629,479.18

 Actual                                       27,671,096.16                                     9,629,479.18




 Prepared by               Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Gouthami Padam            Vibecke Dixon                 Avjeet Singh                   IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The PDO, as stated in the PAD (Page 6) and Financing Agreement (Schedule 1, Page 5), was to “restore
   key road sector assets damaged by extreme weather events and enhance the climate resilience of
   critical roads and bridges in Samoa.”




                                                                                                 Page 1 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Enhanced Road Access Project (P145545)



   For the purposes of this evaluation, the PDO will be assessed as is and will not be unpacked. This is because
   while building back better, restoring key road sector assets is an inseparable part of enhancing climate
   resilience. This is also noted in the ICR (Para 23).



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   Road and Bridge Reconstruction: (estimated cost US$28.60 million; Actual Cost: 24.87 million)

   This component aimed to repair roads and bridges damaged by Tropical Cyclone Evan (TCE) and upgrade,
   rehabilitate, and/or reconstruct existing road sector assets to higher standards. The main activities included:
   (a) Widening of 2.3 km of Vaitele Street; (b) Repair to or replacement of Leone Bridge; (c) Reconstruction of
   other roads and bridges to be selected during implementation based on both economic and social factors;
   and (d) Detailed design and supervision of the civil works.

   Technical Assistance: (estimated cost US$2.00 million; Actual Cost: US$ 1.73 million).

   This component aimed to support institutional and regulatory reforms for road sector assets management
   and maintenance and to increase the sustainability of sector investments. This included: (a) Revision of
   standards for maintaining and constructing roads and bridges to be more climate resilient; (b) Update of
   legal, regulatory, and enforcement arrangements for enforcing axle load limits; (c) Strengthening the Land
   Transport Authority (LTA)’s technical capacity to effectively plan and manage the sector; and (d) Addressing
   emerging priority issues that could have an impact on the Government’s ability to create more climate
   resilient road sector assets.

   Project Management (estimated cost US$1.40 million; Actual Cost: US$ 1.07 million).

   This component aimed to support the Government in project management, including the services of a
   consulting firm to assist LTA in project implementation.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project Cost: The actual project cost is US$27.67 million, lower than the appraisal estimate of US$ 32
   million.

   Project financing. The project was financed by IDA and trust funds. The total project cost at appraisal of
   US$ 32 million. The actual cost at closing was US$ 27.67 million.


                                                                                                     Page 2 of 17
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  Enhanced Road Access Project (P145545)



Borrower contribution. There was no Borrower contribution for this project.

Dates. The project was approved on October 17, 2013, became effective on February 20, 2014, and was
scheduled to close on April 30, 2019. It was extended four times on October 25, 2018 (for 18 months), on
April 22, 2020 (for 6 months), on April 20, 2021 (for 6 months) and on October 27, 2021 (for 12 months).
The final closing date was October 31, 2022.

Other changes. There were six level 2 restructurings during the project lifetime, including the restructuring
and additional financing in May 2018. The main changes were as follows:

First Restructuring: During the February 29, 2016 project restructuring, the scope of Component 1 was
expanded to finance outstanding claims associated with the construction and supervision of relatively minor
parts of the East Coast Inland Route, including pedestrian access routes. This restructuring also revised the
end target of the second original PDO indicator on the number of ‘Bridges rehabilitated to improved
standards’ from seven to six.

Second Restructuring: During the second restructuring and additional financing approved on May 31,
2018, the following changes were made:

      Provision of an additional financing in a net amount of US$3.36 million provided by GoA. This was
       needed to cover cost overruns for Leone Bridge and projected overruns for Mali’oli’o Bridge and
       support financing of the climate-resilient road network associated with the new access road for
       Mali’oli’o Bridge
      All four original PDO indicators were dropped and two new PDO indicators were added: (i) improved
       connectivity through rehabilitation or construction of the road network to improved standards (which
       could include raising the road elevation, strengthening the pavement, and improving the drainage
       capacity) and (ii) improved connectivity through rehabilitation or replacement of water crossings to
       improved standards (through single span designs, raised crossings, and scour protection). The
       target value of the first revised PDO indicator was reduced to 3.9 km, down from 10 km for the
       original first PDO indicator for the kilometer of roads rehabilitated to improved standards. The target
       value of the second revised PDO indicator was 3, down from 7 for the original second PDO indicator
       for the number of bridges rehabilitated to improved standards.

Third Restructuring: During the restructuring approved on October 25, 2018, the project’s closing date
was extended by 18 months from April 30, 2019, to October 31, 2020. This was needed to allow sufficient
time for completing primarily the civil works for Mali’oli’o Bridge, but also for the remaining activities,
including the axle-load limit reforms and construction standards, and the design and construction of
Moamoa Crossing, Aia Bridge, and Nu’usuatia Bridge.

Fourth Restructuring: During the restructuring approved on April 22, 2020, the project’s closing date was
extended by six months from October 31, 2020, to April 30, 2021. This was needed due to major
implications of the COVID-19 pandemic which Samoan road projects were facing. It was needed to allow
the civil works and other outstanding contracts to be completed.

Fifth Restructuring: During the restructuring approved on April 20, 2021, the project’s closing date was
extended by six months from April 30, 2021, to October 29, 2021. This was done to finance the rectification
works of the most critical road safety hazards on the West Coast Road (WCR) financed under Enhancing



                                                                                                 Page 3 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Enhanced Road Access Project (P145545)



   the Climate Resilience of the West Coast Road Project (CRWCR) and ERAP, which were identified through
   the post-construction road safety audit in March 2021.

   Sixth Restructuring: The restructuring approved on October 27, 2021 extended the project’s closing date
   by 12 months from October 29, 2021, to October 31, 2022. This was needed to rectify road safety hazards
   on the WCR and enhance the safety of Mali’oli’o Bridge, Moamoa Crossing, Aia Bridge, and Nu’usuatia
   Bridge, using additional project savings of around US$1.6 million identified by GoS in September 2021.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country and sector context. Samoa is a small and remote Pacific Island nation comprising two large
islands, Upolu and Savai’i, and eight smaller islands. It is approximately 3,000 km from New Zealand and
4,000 km from Hawaii and Australia. The country faces significant vulnerability to climate change and
natural disasters, experiencing an increase in extreme weather and climate events such as heavy rainfall,
strong winds, storm surges, and rising sea levels. These events, along with earthquakes and tsunamis,
have caused severe damage to infrastructure, economic assets, and livelihoods. Flooding, particularly in
urban areas like the capital Apia, has been a recurring issue throughout Samoa's history.

The Enhanced Road Access Project (ERAP) was prepared as an emergency response to Tropical Cyclone
Evan (TCE), which hit Samoa on December 13 and 14, 2012. Over a two-day period, the cyclone resulted
in five fatalities and approximately 4,250 people being temporarily displaced. The Government of Samoa
(GoS) estimated the combined physical and economic losses to transport infrastructure, houses, and
tourism facilities at US$204 million, equivalent to about 28 percent of the country's total value of goods and
services produced in 2011. Several key road sector assets were damaged, including Central Cross Island
Road (a key economic artery between North and South Upolu) and Leone Bridge (which could no longer be
used by vehicles and was one of two bridges capable of carrying heavy vehicles between Apia Port and the
principal industrial area at Vaitele).

Alignment with Government strategy. The PDO of the ERAP project was relevant to Samoa's
development priorities that were outlined in the country’s long term development strategy, “Samoa 2040”. It
directly contributed to climate-resilient infrastructure investment, which was noted in Samoa 2040 as a key
action to fully realize the transformative opportunities in tourism, agriculture and fishing, digital economy,
and labor mobility. ERAP aligned with Key Priority Area 15 'Build Climate Resilience' and Key Priority Area
21 'Consolidated Infrastructure Management' in The Pathway for the Development of Samoa (FY2021/22–
FY2025/26). The Transport and Infrastructure Sector Plan 2022/23–2027/28 emphasized improving
connectivity, mobility, and accessibility through safe and climate-resilient road infrastructure, which ERAP
supported. The LTA Corporate Plan 2023–2026 set strategic goals in line with ERAP's objective of
enhancing and climate-proofing road networks. ERAP's focus on climate resilience and infrastructure
development aligned with Samoa's broader vision for sustainable prosperity and a safe and efficient
national land transport network.

Alignment with Bank strategy: At project closing, the PDO of ERAP aligned with the World Bank Group's
Regional Partnership Framework (RPF) for nine Pacific Island Countries, including Samoa, from FY2017 to
FY2021. The RPF focused on maximizing economic opportunities, improving access to economic

                                                                                                    Page 4 of 17
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                     Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Enhanced Road Access Project (P145545)



               opportunities, safeguarding incomes and livelihoods, and enhancing growth and opportunities through
               macroeconomic management, infrastructure, and knowledge development. ERAP was recognized as one
               of the projects contributing to achieving the RPF objectives, primarily supporting the fourth focus area of
               increasing access to basic services and improving connectivity infrastructure. It also aligned with the third
               focus area of strengthening preparedness and resilience to natural disasters and climate change.

               Previous World Bank Experience. At project appraisal, the World Bank had a successful and long-term
               involvement in Samoa's road sector through various past and ongoing projects, such as the Samoa
               Infrastructure Asset Management Program SIAM - Phase 1 (1999-2003) and Phase 2 (2004-2014), the
               Post-Tsunami Reconstruction Project (PRTP (2010-2016)). These projects supported reforms and technical
               assistance to help manage road maintenance and rehabilitation works, establishment of the LTA and other
               reforms that were in line with Samoa's strategic direction. The EARP also aimed to continue the Bank's
               engagement with Samoa in the road sector, specifically supporting post-TCE rehabilitation efforts.

               Level of the PDO. There is a clear alignment between the project’s development objectives and the
               country- and WB strategies. Even though the project was initially prepared as an emergency project, given
               Samoa’s high vulnerability to climate change and natural disasters, the objective of “restoring key road
               sector assets damaged by extreme weather events and enhancing the climate resilience of critical roads
               and bridges in Samoa” is highly relevant. While the PDO formulation of "restoring key roads" is pitched
               relatively at an output level and not at a higher development outcome level, this is justified given that the
               project was prepared as a response to an emergency.

               Hence, this review rates the relevance of the PDO as High.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To restore key road sector assets damaged by extreme weather events and enhance the climate resilience of
                             critical roads and bridges in Samoa

                             Rationale
                             Theory of change.

                             ERAP aimed to restore key road sector assets damaged by extreme weather events and enhance the climate
                             resilience of critical roads and bridges in Samoa by focussing on ‘hard’ infrastructure investments combined
                             with ‘soft’ capacity development activities.



                                                                                                                            Page 5 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Enhanced Road Access Project (P145545)



The project was to finance activities including reconstruction and repair of roads and bridges in the areas
affected by the cyclone; provision of technical assistance including the revision of national road and bridge
standards, updating axle-load limit standards and enforcement; and other capacity development activities.
The expected outputs from these activities included agreement on key roads for reconstruction and
identification of specific bridges to be improved. These outputs were expected to lead to the outcomes of
rehabilitated roads and water crossings to improved standards, reduction in disruptions in traffic flows at
targeted locations, and project designs being informed by access audits. The anticipated long-term impact
would be the provision of safer and more efficient transport services, improved reliability of road and bridge
infrastructure in the event of a natural disaster and increased access to economic activities and social
services.

Overall, the theory of change (TOC) of the project was straightforward and the causal pathways from inputs to
outcomes were valid and direct

Outputs

      Works for three roads out of the originally targeted five were finished (target not achieved). This
       indicator was dropped at the restructuring in May 2018.
      Works for five water crossings of the originally targeted six were finished (target almost achieved).
       This indicator was dropped at the restructuring in May 2018.

Outcomes:

      5.72 km of the project roads were rehabilitated or constructed as opposed to the original target value
       of 10 km (target not achieved).
      Five water crossings were rehabilitated to improved standards, compared to the original target of
       seven (target not achieved). This indicator was dropped, and a similar indicator measuring the number
       of water crossings replaced or rehabilitated was added to the intermediate level, both at the
       restructuring in May 2018.
      Disruptions in traffic flows were reduced at seven locations (Vaitele Street, WCR Lot 2b, Mali’oli’o
       Bridge and access road, Leone Bridge, Moamoa Crossing, Aia Bridge, and Nu’usuatia Bridge),
       exceeding the original target of zero. This indicator was dropped, and a same indicator (with a
       baseline of 3 and target of 4) was added to the intermediate level, both at the restructuring in May
       2018.
      Eight project designs were informed by access audits, exceeding the original target of seven. This
       indicator was dropped, and a same indicator was added to the intermediate level at the restructuring
       in May 2018.

The project managed to successfully reduce disruptions in traffic flows at the targeted locations and inform
project designs by access audits, but fell short of achieving its targets for rehabilitation and construction of
roads and bridges to improved standards. Therefore, efficacy before restructuring is rated as Modest.



Rating
Modest


                                                                                                     Page 6 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Enhanced Road Access Project (P145545)




OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
To restore key road sector assets damaged by extreme weather events and enhance the climate resilience of
critical roads and bridges in Samoa

There was no change in the PDO formulation, but the PDO indicators and targets were revised during the
restructuring in May 2018.

It is to be noted that the initial purpose of the PDO was to respond to a particular disaster, however, as the
project progressed, its focus somewhat shifted to enhancing the climate resilience of crucial roads and water
crossings to improve connectivity. This shift was reflected in the updated PDO indicators in 2018. While the
ERAP’s only emergency works for Leone Bridge were completed by then, the PDO remained unchanged due
to the Samoa’s high and growing vulnerability to climate change and natural disasters.


Revised Rationale
Theory of change.

While the project’s PDO remained the same through the restructuring and additional financing of 2018, the
outcome indicators and intermediate indicators were revised.

The key activities that the project was to finance remained the same and included reconstruction and repair of
roads and bridges in the areas affected by the cyclone; provision of technical assistance including the revision
of national road and bridge standards, updating axle-load limit standards and enforcement; and other capacity
development activities. The expected outputs from these activities included key rehabilitated roads and water
crossings to improved standards; reduction in disruptions in traffic flows at targeted locations, project designs
being informed by access audits; gender responsive features incorporated into design; and grievances
related to delivery of project benefits that are addressed. These outputs were expected to lead to the
outcomes of improved connectivity through roads being constructed or rehabilitated to improved standards,
improved connectivity through rehabilitation or replacement of water crossings to improved standards,
improved road safety for roads and water crossings and strengthened enabling environment for planning and
managing the road sector and other sector issues. The anticipated long-term impact would be the provision of
safer and more efficient transport services, improved reliability of road and bridge infrastructure in the event of
a natural disaster and increased access to economic activities and social services.

Under the revised TOC, the causal pathways between activities, outputs and outcomes were clearer and
more direct and there were no logical gaps. The revised output and outcome indicators were better aligned
with the PDO, were more measurable and could be monitored.

Outputs:

        1.60 km of a road constructed, achieving the revised target of 1.60 km.
        4.12 km of roads rehabilitated, exceeding the revised target of 2.3 km.
        Five water crossings replaced or rehabilitated, exceeding the revised target of three.
        Traffic flows at seven locations less disrupted, exceeding the revised target of four.


                                                                                                     Page 7 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Enhanced Road Access Project (P145545)




      Eight designs for Leone Bridge, Central Cross Island Road, Vaitele Street, Mali’oli’o Bridge and
       access road, WCR Lot 2b, Moamoa Crossing, Aia Bridge, and Nu’usuatia Bridge informed by access
       audits, exceeding the revised target of five.
      100 percent of grievances registered related to delivery of project benefits were addressed (Revised
       target fully achieved)
      Gender-responsive design features incorporated into seven designs for Central Cross Island Road,
       Vaitele Street, Leone Bridge, Mali’oli’o Bridge and access road, Moamoa Crossing, Aia Bridge, and
       Nu’usuatia Bridge, exceeding the revised target of 5.

Outcomes:

      5.72 km of roads were rehabilitated or reconstructed to improved standards, exceeding the revised
       target of 3.90 km. This included rehabilitation of 2.30 km of Vaitele Street and construction of 1.60 km
       of Mali’oli’o Bridge access road. In addition, 1.82 km of WCR Lot 2b, which was transferred from
       CRWCR to ERAP, was rehabilitated to improved standards. These investments in the project roads
       enhanced road network connectivity, as demonstrated in the fourth revised intermediate indicator
       ‘Targeted locations where traffic flows will have reduced disruptions’.
      Five water crossings (at Leone, Mali’oli’o, Moamoa, Aia, and Nuusuatia) were replaced to improved
       standards, exceeding the revised target of three. These water crossings enhanced road network
       connectivity by providing year-round access to road users and is reflected in the fourth revised
       intermediate indicator ‘Targeted locations where traffic flows will have reduced disruptions’.

In addition to the above outcomes listed in the Results Framework (RF), the ICR also reported on the
following outcomes not covered in the Results Framework and hence without target values:

      The ICR claims that the project enhanced road safety on roads and bridges by implementing
       engineering measures such as sealing road shoulders, developing bus stops, installing signages, and
       implementing safety features like thermoplastic line markings, rumble strips, guard rails, flexible
       bollards, and reflectors. A post-construction road safety assessment identified high-risk concerns
       related to drains and driveway culverts on WCR. To address this, the project repaired critical drains,
       culverts, and safety hazards on WCR, Mali’oli’o Bridge, access road, and three crossings. All of these
       measures adhered to global best practices that have been proven to reduce the number of serious
       road crashes. However, it must be noted that no specific indicators were identified to measure the
       outcomes and no data to support this claim was collected as part of the project. Gathering data on
       some indicators such as road crashes before and after implementation was challenging given that the
       project was also prepared as an emergency project. Nevertheless, it was communicated to the IEG
       review team [September 5, 2023] that the Bank is working on developing a crash database system
       through another ongoing project in Samoa which aims to map all road crashes in the country including
       historical data where available. This information should potentially allow for a future analysis on the
       impact of Bank investments on savings lives from road crashes in the country.
      ERAP improved access to markets and social services, particularly in rural areas. This was mainly
       through improved connectivity by re-establishing direct routes such as the replacement of Leone
       Bridge, and by increasing climate resilience and helping to ensure access during extreme weather
       events such as at the Mali’oli’o river crossing and the three water crossings on Upolu. For instance,
       the Mali’oli’o river crossing used to be impassable for about ten days each year during the average
       wet season. This isolation cut off the local population from basic education, healthcare, cultural and
       religious services, job opportunities, and economic centers. A new bridge that was constructed at a

                                                                                                  Page 8 of 17
                                 Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                 Enhanced Road Access Project (P145545)



                                     new location, which was more inland, has been able to provide safer and more reliable access to the
                                     local population, particularly during severe weather events. The project team has reported that this
                                     new bridge was able to hold up well and was fully passable during a recent severe storm and heavy
                                     rainfall and flooding over the past few months.

                              In addition to reconstruction and rehabilitation of roads and bridges as targeted, the project was successful in
                              reducing disruptions in traffic flows at the targeted locations, inform project designs by access audits,
                              incorporate gender responsive features into design, and address grievances related to delivery of project
                              benefits. The targets for the two main outcome indicators of improved connectivity through roads constructed
                              or rehabilitated to improved standards and improved connectivity through rehabilitation or replacement of
                              water crossings to improved standards were also achieved or exceeded. However, there were insufficient
                              indicators for technical assistance activities; while some indicators covered access audits and gender-
                              responsive design features, none of them addressed the revision of road and bridge design standards or
                              vehicle loading laws and regulations.

                              Based on this, efficacy of the revised objective is rated Substantial.




                              Revised Rating
                              Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            As described above, the main outcomes were only partially achieved before the project was restructured.
                            Hence, the overall efficacy is rated Modest



                            Overall Efficacy Rating                                    Primary Reason
                            Modest                                                     Low achievement
                  OBJR1_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
                            As described, the project either achieved or exceeded its PDO indicators and as well its intermediate results
                            after the project was restructured. The overall efficacy is rated Substantial.



                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating



                                                                                                                                 Page 9 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Enhanced Road Access Project (P145545)



  Substantial



5. Efficiency
Economic Efficiency.

The efficiency analysis reported in the ICR was based on an ex-post economic analysis. The methodology used
at project completion was the same as that used at appraisal and the restructuring and additional financing, and
it focused on the economic appraisal of Component 1, which represented 90 percent of project costs. The
economic model covered a 23-year period from 2013 to 2035, and used a discount rate of 5 percent. The
quantifiable benefits included reduced vehicle operating costs, decreased passenger time costs, and fewer
disruptions due to improved climate resilience. The results of the ex-post analysis showed that the ex-post
economic internal rate of return (EIRR) was 18.5 percent, and the net present value (NPV) was US$29.7 million.
This showed higher returns and increased net present value compared to earlier assessments both at project
appraisal (EIRR of 16 percent and NPV of US$19.7 million) and at the time of restructuring and additional
financing in May 2018 (EIRR of 15.6 percent and NPV of US$20.0 million) (ICR, para 35).

Operational efficiency.

Several aspects of the project’s design and implementation affected its efficiency. Despite some initial delays,
which were mostly attributable to slow progress of design for Leone Bridge, performance challenges of the
Project Management Company (PMC), and frequent changes in counterpart staff, the project managed to
complete all activities before the revised closing date of October 31, 2022. The Government of Samoa (GoS)
used additional time to address unexpected events like the measles outbreak, election challenges, and the
COVID-19 pandemic. GoS was able to maximize the use of project savings through two restructurings, which
proved to be more effective than canceling the savings and using them under Samoa Aviation and Roads
Investment Project (SARIP), which started in October 2022, the same month ERAP closed. Component 2 and
Component 3 of the project demonstrated efficiency, with actual costs lower than the initial estimates at
appraisal, indicating successful cost management (ICR, para 36).

Based on the above, efficiency is rated Substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     0
 Appraisal                                                 16.00
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     0
 ICR Estimate                                              18.50
                                                                                      Not Applicable

                                                                                                    Page 10 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Enhanced Road Access Project (P145545)




* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Assessment against the original outcome targets: Relevance of Objectives was rated High. Efficacy was
rated Modest and Efficiency was rated Substantial. Based on this, the original Outcome is rated Moderately
Unsatisfactory (3)

Assessment against the revised outcome targets: Relevance of Objectives was rated High. Efficacy and
Efficiency were both rated Substantial. Based on this, the revised Outcome is rated Satisfactory (5)

A split rating is applied based on the disbursement shares before and after the project restructuring in
2018, when a disbursement share was at 63% and 37% respectively (amount disbursed was US$ 17.5 million
before restructuring, and US$ 10.17 million after restructuring). The weighted value of the outcome rating under
the original objectives is the outcome rating (3 for Moderately Unsatisfactory) times its weight (63%) = 1.89. The
weighted value of the outcome rating under the formally revised objectives is the outcome rating (5 for
Satisfactory) times its weight (37%) = 1.85. The weighted average score is the sum of the two: 1.89 + 1.85. =
3.74. Rounding up to the nearest whole number, it amounts to an overall outcome value of 4, i.e., Moderately
Satisfactory on the 6-point scale.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Environmental Risk. At project completion, the risk to the development outcome was considered substantial
due to the frequency of severe weather events in Samoa. ERAP significantly improved the climate resilience
of the project's roads and bridges, strengthening the local capacity to develop a more resilient road network.
However, natural hazards and climate risks continue to pose threats to the sustainability of the investments
and the likelihood of future severe weather events in Samoa is very high, and their potential impact could be
catastrophic. Even though the design of climate-resilient infrastructure investments under ERAP was guided
by the Vulnerability Assessment and a Climate Resilient Road Strategy and the upgraded roads and bridges
receive routine maintenance funded by the government, the increasing frequency and intensity of extreme
weather events still pose a substantial risk to the project's infrastructure within its lifespan. This was already
seen at Moamoa Crossing, where, as reported in the ICR, the newly completed crossing was overtopped
during the severe floods in December 2020 and again after heavy rainfall in February 2022.

Capacity and Institutional Risk. ERAP faced several challenges in the initial implementation stage as a
result of poor capacity of the PMC and there was a need for extensive implementation support. Eventually
the PMC’s responsibilities were cut back and it was replaced by a government agency, which also required
intensive support. While the project was successful in strengthening the institutional capacity, there is a risk
that changing circumstances and budget constraints may impact the availability of resources for local
government institutions to fulfill their responsibilities in the future.


                                                                                                      Page 11 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Enhanced Road Access Project (P145545)




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  Despite being prepared under emergency procedures, the project was strategically relevant to the
  development priorities of the Government of the State (GoS) and aligned with the World Bank's guiding
  documents during preparation. The project design was straightforward and practical, and aimed to
  achieve the PDO by focusing mainly on infrastructure investments combined with technical assistance
  activities. During preparation, the task team took into account lessons learned from previous projects,
  including SIAM - Phase 2, PTRP, and CRWCR. These included designing structural investments to
  account for natural hazards and climate risks, using proven technologies and procedures for civil works,
  coordinating closely with other donors for efficient assistance delivery, and providing intensive
  implementation support for emergency operations. The institutional capacity risk was assessed as
  ‘Moderate’ at appraisal, however, the team was able to appropriately identify the risks associated with
  implementing a large transport infrastructure project and develop suitable mitigation measures. On the
  World Bank’s side, the project’s preparation was overseen by a TTL who had prior experience working on
  projects in similar contexts, including CRWCR. (ICR, para 72)

  The quality-at-entry was Satisfactory



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The Bank team conducted 22 implementation support missions and for most of the implementation period
 these missions were conducted on a quarterly basis rather than semi-annually. This increased
 implementation support from the team was to provide support and address capacity gaps initially identified
 with the PMC. Eventually, the PMC's responsibilities were reduced, and a Government agency established
 through another WB project, took over, also requiring extensive implementation support. There were three
 changes in TTLs over the nine-year implementation period, which could have resulted in some loss of
 institutional knowledge. However, this was mitigated through strategies such as overlapping TTLs,
 maintaining continuity of TTLs and co-TTLs for subsequent projects, and assigning an incoming TTL who
 had previous experience as a TTL for a related project.

 The task team and the Country Management Unit actively collaborated with the GoS counterpart to
 address the changing needs of the country's transport sector throughout the implementation phase. The
 team monitored project progress, addressed issues as needed, identified opportunities for improvement
 and acted upon them, as reflected in the restructuring and additional financing in May 2018. The team
 facilitated six project restructurings, and demonstrated proactive engagement by leveraging synergies with
 other World Bank-funded projects and adapting the implementation modality. Despite some challenges
 encountered in implementation, safeguards, the need to modify the Results Framework, and multiple


                                                                                                 Page 12 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Enhanced Road Access Project (P145545)



 project closing date extensions, the Bank team’s implementation support contributed to the project
 achieving objectives.

 The quality of supervision was Satisfactory



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The original M&E design was weak and inadequate for measuring project progress effectively. The initial
 PDO and output targets were not specific or easily monitorable. Consequently, all the original PDO and
 intermediate indicators were replaced with new ones (two PDO and seven intermediate indicators) during
 the restructuring and additional financing in 2018. These revised indicators were better aligned with the
 updated project scope under Component 1, and were measurable, time-bound, and did not entail additional
 cost of collection. However, the revised indicators had a few shortcomings:

       There was an overlap of PDO and intermediate indicators, where the target for the first revised PDO
        indicator –“Improved connectivity through rehabilitation or construction of roads to improved
        standards” included the sum of two revised intermediate indicators, namely “Roads constructed”
        and “Roads rehabilitated”. Similarly, the second revised PDO indicator – “Improved connectivity
        through rehabilitation or construction of roads to improved standards” had the same target as the
        third revised intermediate indicator – “Water crossings replaced or rehabilitated”.
       Insufficient indicators for technical assistance activities - while some indicators covered access
        audits and gender-responsive design features, none of them addressed the revision of road and
        bridge design standards or vehicle loading laws and regulations. In addition, there were no specific
        targets to measure the improvement in road safety.
       Target values for some of the indicators could have been revised in the results framework – the
        length of roads or the number of water crossings financed under ERAP was longer or larger than
        what was planned during the restructuring in 2018 and this was not reflected in the target values in
        the RF.



b. M&E Implementation
  The project’s M&E reporting was initially handled by the PMC until June 30, 2019, and later by the
  Ministry of Finance’s Aid Coordination and Debt Management Division (MOF ACDMD) and Transport and
  Infrastructure Sector Coordination Division (TISCD) through semiannual project reports. It was reported
  that these were often delayed, particularly due to the PMC's failure to provide the January 1, 2019, to
  June 30, 2019, semi-annual report, which hindered accurate project tracking. Although TISCD managed

                                                                                                  Page 13 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Enhanced Road Access Project (P145545)



  to create the report using LTA's data in a new template developed for Samoa Climate Resilient Transport
  Project (SCRTP) and MOF ACDMD submitted it to the World Bank after review and verification, the lack
  of handover from the PMC to MOF ACDMD and TISCD resulted in gaps in project history, undermining
  M&E effectiveness (ICR, para 60).



c. M&E Utilization
  The M&E findings of the project, which were regularly shared with the stakeholders through the World
  Bank's Aide Memoires and ISRs after each implementation support mission, had a positive impact on
  the project's implementation direction andled to the restructuring and additional financing in 2018. The
  M&E data provided evidence of achieving the project's goals of improving connectivity by upgrading
  roads and replacing water crossings to higher standards. In addition, the M&E arrangements under
  ERAP have been institutionalized beyond July 2019, with TISCD overseeing and supporting M&E
  activities (ICR, para 61).

  While there was sufficient evidence from the ICR for a Substantial rating of Efficacy post restructuring,
  the overall M&E quality is rated Modest due to shortcomings of original M&E design and reporting
  delays during implementation.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was assigned Environmental Category "B" and three safeguards policies were triggered. These
   included - Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01), Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10), and Involuntary
   Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12). However, it was later decided not to apply the Indigenous Peoples policy to
   generally homogeneous island nations like Samoa, and this was reflected in the restructuring and additional
   financing in 2018.

   The ICR stated that the project undertook various measures to address environment and social compliance.
   During preparation, the Environmental and Social Safeguards Assessment Framework and the Land
   Acquisition and Resettlement Framework were prepared and disclosed. During implementation, the
   Environmental and Social Management Framework was prepared and disclosed. In addition, Environmental
   Management Plans (EMPs) and Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs) were prepared.
   The project was in compliance with the environmental safeguards.

   The social safeguards management system was also in compliance with WBG policies. A Social Impact
   Assessment and Abbreviated Resettlement Action Plans (ARAPs) were prepared. As specified in the
   ARAP, compensation for 13 affected lots due to the Mali’oli’o Bridge and access road projects was provided
   before construction began. Additionally, full compensation for land and non-land asset losses in WCR Lot
   2b was also provided for.



                                                                                                    Page 14 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Enhanced Road Access Project (P145545)




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Procurement

   ERAP’s procurement complied with the World Bank's Procurement Guidelines, relevant provisions in the
   Financing Agreement, and the project's Procurement Plan. There were, however, a few procedural errors
   and delays in the initial project period. Measures were taken to address the capacity shortfalls and
   concurrent implementation progress. The project was also transitioned to using the Systematic Tracking of
   Exchanges in Procurement (STEP) tool.

   During implementation, one issue that came up was the excessive burn rate of the PMC contract when
   compared to the rate of project progress. Despite its time-based payment model, the PMC submitted
   monthly invoices without time-sheets to validate hours worked. This prompted an investigation by the
   Integrity Vice Presidency into consultant contract payments under ERAP and CRWCR. This investigation
   led to the identification of questionable spending, followed by an analysis of contract invoices, ultimately
   resulting in the World Bank identifying some expenses as ineligible. Following this, corrective actions were
   implemented under MOF supervision, resulting in the repayment of the ineligible expenditures.

   Financial Management

   There were a few issues with the project’s Financial Management, including report delays and ineligible
   costs, leading to a downgrade in the FM rating to Moderately Unsatisfactory in January 2017. However, the
   transfer of FM responsibilities to MOF ACDMD in June 2017 helped enhance the project’s financial
   management. All Interim Financial Reports (IFRs), were submitted and accepted, as were the required
   audited project financial statements up to June 30, 2022, which were conducted in compliance with
   International Standards on Auditing.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                   IEG
                                                                                Disagreements/Comment
                                Moderately
Outcome                                               Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
Bank Performance                Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                  Modest                Modest


                                                                                                  Page 15 of 17
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Enhanced Road Access Project (P145545)



Quality of ICR                   ---                   High


12. Lessons

The following main lessons can be drawn from the experience of implementing this project.

        In smaller and highly exposed economies, using a thematically structured yet flexible project
         design like ERAP's PDO could be more effective in accommodating potential changes. A
         relatively broad PDO can offer flexibility to address emerging needs that could come up
         during implementation. Having such flexibility in this project, allowed for the addition of
         various infrastructure components to ERAP, such as the Mali’oli’o Bridge and access road,
         three water crossings on Upolu, and WCR Lot 2b during its implementation. This was
         possible as the PDO for ERAP was not too restrictive by focusing on “critical roads and
         bridges in Samoa."
        A design-phase road safety audit can help avoid extra cost and time for resolving road safety
         issues that may be identified after construction. A post-construction audit in March 2021
         identified high-risk safety concerns with culvert driveways on WCR, leading to an extension
         of the project closing date to rectify and address this issue. While this contributed to
         improving road safety on WCR, it resulted in both rectification costs of US$0.49 million and
         an 18-month extension.
        Intensive implementation support and sufficient budget allocation may be required for
         enhance the success of emergency operations. While the World Bank's prior engagement in
         Samoa's transport sector helped put in place the foundations for quick preparation of the
         emergency ERAP project, challenges including slow design progress, performance issues
         with the PMC, and staff changes led to a 45-month timeline from Board approval in October
         2013 to the opening of Leone Bridge in July 2017. Large infrastructure projects, particularly
         emergency projects such as the ERAP, are often developed within tight timeframes. In such
         cases, certain project details may need to be refined during implementation, underscoring
         the need for robust implementation support and adequate funding.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is clear and provides a detailed overview of the project. The evidence and analysis presented are
adequate for evaluating the performance of the project. It includes a clear discussion on the achievement of
outcomes and appropriately carries out a split rating for objectives, given the original indicators and targets
were changed during restructuring. The report is results-oriented, and the discussion is based on what the
project was able to achieve on the ground. The ICR is candid about the M&E shortcomings and provides



                                                                                                     Page 16 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Enhanced Road Access Project (P145545)



additional evidence to support the achievement of objectives. The ICR draws good lessons from the experience
of implementing this project, and they were based on evidence and analysis.

Overall, the quality of the ICR was High.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      High




                                                                                               Page 17 of 17
