     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Integrated Forest Ecosystem Management (P151102)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0023482

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P151102                                    Integrated Forest Ecosystem Management

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Kyrgyz Republic                            Environment, Natural Resources & the Blue Economy


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-57430,IDA-D0950                        30-Sep-2021                                         14,677,054.85

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 24-Nov-2015                                30-Sep-2022

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           12,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                            10,731,677.35                                               0.00

 Actual                                        10,676,794.25                                               0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Hassan Wally               Vibecke Dixon                 Avjeet Singh                   IEGSD (Unit 4)




 P153721_TBL
 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P153721                                    Integrated Forest Ecosystem Management ( P153721 )



 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
                                                                                                   4000260.60

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 24-Nov-2015

                                                                                                  Page 1 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Integrated Forest Ecosystem Management (P151102)




                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                                     0.00                                   4,109,589.00

 Revised Commitment                                      0.00                                   4,000,260.60

 Actual                                                  0.00                                   4,000,260.60




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) as articulated in the Financing Agreement (FA, page 5) was
   identical to the one stated in the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, paragraph 14) and aimed to:

   "strengthen the capacity of government institutions and communities to improve sustainable forest
   ecosystem management through investments in management planning, ecosystem restoration, and
   infrastructure."

   The Global Environmental Objective (GEO), according to the PAD (paragraph 15) was identical to the PDO
   stated above.

   Parsing the PDO. The PDO will be parsed based on the following objectives:

   1. To strengthen the capacity of government institutions to improve sustainable forest ecosystem
   management.

   2. To strengthen the capacity of communities to improve sustainable forest ecosystem management.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   The PDO was supported by the following four components:




                                                                                                 Page 2 of 23
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Integrated Forest Ecosystem Management (P151102)



  1. Forest Sector Institutional Reform (appraisal cost: US$0.88 million, actual cost: US$0.46
  million). The project would provide technical assistance, training, and capacity building at the national level
  to support the development of the policy, legal, regulatory, and institutional framework based on the lessons
  learned through the implementation of the pilot activities. The project would finance a national public
  awareness campaign aimed at educating the public about the new decentralized and participatory natural
  resource management planning approach and its benefits.

  2. Strategic Investments and Piloting of Sustainable Management Approaches (appraisal cost:
  US$11.38 million, actual cost: US$10.83 million). This component would support the development of
  Integrated Natural Resources Management Plans (INRMPs). It would also provide funding for the
  implementation of these plans and the priority activities at the Leskhoz level (Leskhozes are the local level
  state forest enterprises responsible for managing forested land and land set aside for afforestation within
  the State Forest Fund). The project would also help improve land use management practices and
  provide resource users with alternative livelihood opportunities identified during the management planning
  exercise.

  3. Information and Monitoring and Evaluation (appraisal cost: US$2.78 million, actual cost: US$2.34
  million). This component would update of the National Forest Inventory (NFI) which was partially completed
  in 2008 with the support of FAO. This component would also provide for the interpretation of
  new satellite imagery to define the extent of forest and SFE pasture resources. Also, it would finance the
  establishment, operation, and maintenance of the Forest Management Information System (FMIS).
  Technical assistance will be provided to users of the FMIS, including the Forestry Departments, leskhozes,
  local and regional governments, and local users and user associations.

  4. Project Management, Monitoring, and Evaluation (appraisal cost: US$1.07 million, actual cost:
  US$1.06 million). This component would finance project management activities by the Project
  Implementation Unit (PIU) established in the State Agency for Environmental Protection and Forestry
  (SAEPF). This would include budgeting, preparing annual work plans, contract management, financial
  management, procurement, and monitoring and evaluation



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost. The total Project cost was US$16.11 million. According to the ICR (Data Sheet, page 2), the
  actual cost was US$14.68 million.

  Financing. The project was financed through an IDA Credit worth US$6.60 million, an IDA Grant worth
  US$5.40 million, and a GEF Grant of US$4.11 million. The total financing was US$16.11 million. The actual
  amounts disbursed were US$5.29 million, US$5.38 million, and US$4.00 million for the original IDA Credit,
  the IDA Grant, and the GEF Grant, respectively. The total disbursed amount was US$14.68 million.
  According to the ICR (paragraph 106), US$1.36 million of funds were cancelled, leaving
  approximately US$69,000 in exchange rate loss.

  Borrower Contribution. The project was fully financed through IDA Credit, IDA Grant, and the GEF Grant
  with no borrower contribution.

  Dates. The project was approved on November 25, 2015, and became effective 17 months later on April
  28, 2017. The Mid-Term Review (MTR) was conducted on June 2, 2019, about two years after

                                                                                                    Page 3 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Integrated Forest Ecosystem Management (P151102)



   effectiveness. While the PAD did not specify a date for the MTR, this Review finds that the MTR was
   conducted slightly early relative to other Bank-financed operations. The project closed on September 30,
   2022, which was 12 months beyond the original closing date of September 30, 2021. The project was
   restructured three times, all of which were Level 2 restructuring as follows:

   1. On May 19, 2020, when the amount disbursed was US$2.86 million to reallocate funds between
   disbursement categories and revise the Results Framework.

   2. On May 11, 2021, when the amount disbursed was US$5.36 million to extend the Loan closing date
   from September 30, 2021, to September 30, 2022. According to the ICR (paragraph 24), the extension was
   "to ensure sufficient time for the completion of ongoing strategic investment contracts and completion of
   remaining project activities."

   3. On September 29, 2022, when the amount disbursed was US$10.42 million to change disbursement
   arrangements.

   The targets for the three PDO indicators were revised. For PDO indicator 1 (government institutions
   provided with capacity building to improve management of forest resources), the target was reduced to
   reflect Government re-organization and merger of some leskhozes. For PDO indicator 2 (the land area
   where sustainable land management practices were adopted), the original target was estimated as the total
   area of pilot leskhozes, whereas the revised target was based on a careful estimate of sustainable land
   management (SLM) investments included in the INRMPs to be implemented. For PDO indicator 3 (forest
   area brought under management plans), the original target was calculated as 26% of PDO indicator 2,
   equal in proportion to the forest cover on SFF land. To better capture integrated forest management, the
   target was revised to reflect the actual and entire areas of pilot leskhozes (some were later combined, which
   enlarged the area).

   IEG will assess the Outcome based on a split rating due to the significant reduction in the target pertaining
   to PDO indicator 2.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Context at Appraisal. The Kyrgyz Republic is ranked as the third-most vulnerable country to climate
change in Europe and Central Asia. The management of forest resources suffers from institutional
limitations combined with a lack of resources and capacity in state agencies. In addition, there are
persistent challenges related to a lack of adequate information, skills, and resources at State Agency for
Environmental Protection and Forests (SAEPF). This project aimed to improve sustainable forest
ecosystem management by supporting institutional reforms and addressing institutional and financial
capacity constraints at SAEPF and within its subordinate entities, introducing integrated natural resource
management planning in pilot leskhozes, and supporting the implementation of these plans.

Previous Bank Experience. The design of this project reflected lessons learned from Bank-financed
forestry and natural resource projects including from the Kyrgyz Republic, Bosnia, Albania, and Kenya. This
project complemented the ongoing Bank-financed Pasture and Livestock Management Improvement

                                                                                                    Page 4 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Integrated Forest Ecosystem Management (P151102)



Project (P145162) by strengthening the management and coordination of pastures under leskhoz
jurisdiction. The project design was informed by the Program on Forests (PROFOR) funded study titled 'The
Development Potential of Forests in Kyrgyz Republic (2012)', as well as preliminary case studies from pilot
leskhozes which tested new management models. The project design was also informed by the analytical
study, 'Understanding Communities Roles in the Governance of Forests and Pastures in Kyrgyz Republic
(April 2015)', which examined the institutional, legal, and operational capacity development needs for
integrated territorial governance, and opportunities for improved forest management.

Consistency with Bank Strategies. At appraisal, the PDO was in line with the Bank's Country Partnership
Strategy for the Kyrgyz Republic (CPS, FY2014-FY2017) which identified public management of scarce
natural resources as a priority for improved poverty outcomes, particularly for almost two-thirds of the
population (most of whom subsistence pastoralists) that live in isolated rural and mountainous areas of the
country. The project would contribute to poverty reduction by protecting and improving the natural resource
base of forests and pastures on which these communities are dependent.

At completion, the PDO continued to be in line with the Bank’s Country Partnership Framework for the
Kyrgyz Republic (CPF, FY2019-2022). Specifically, Objective 9 on enhancing resilience to climate change
and disaster risks, which addressed building environmental resilience through promoting sustainable
management and use of natural resources and improving management and mitigation of natural risks and
disasters. Also, the PDO continued to be in line with the most recent Bank’s Country Partnership
Framework for Kyrgyz Republic (CPF, FY2024-FY2028), specifically, with Objective 2.2: to enhance
efficiency and sustainability of natural resource sectors, which aimed to reduce land and forest degradation
through climate-adapted technologies and practices, and improved access to markets. The PDO was also
in line with the two objectives in the latest Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD) Update: 1) Building an
effective state: improving governance of state-owned enterprises (SOEs) and making public administration
more transparent and accountable; and 2) Implementing climate change strategies: developing legal
frameworks for environmental and social risk management and building capacity for landscape restoration
and sustainable resource management.

Consistency with Government Strategies/Priorities. At appraisal, the PDO was in line with the National
Forest Program to Support the Implementation of the Concept of the Development of the Forest Sector
(2005-2015) which was developed, along with the National Action Plan for the Development of the Forest
Sector (2006-2010), where promoting the sustainable development of the forest sector through improved
management of the leskhoz was emphasized.

At completion, the PDO continued to be in line with the Government priorities for the forestry sector.
Specifically, the priorities outlined in the Concept of Development of the Forest Industry of Kyrgyz Republic
(2019) including increasing the contribution of forestry to the country’s GDP by up to 1%, reducing the
poverty level of the rural population in forest areas by 10%, forest conservation and increasing forested
area by up to 6.5%. The PDO was also in line with the Government's National Development Strategy 2040,
which reflected a long-term vision for environmental protection, climate change adaptation, and disaster risk
reduction.

Summary of Relevance of Objectives Assessment. While the PDO statement was focused and clear, it
was pitched at a high level of ambition. The core aspect of the project was developing INRMPs through a
community engagement process. This process was entirely new to both leskhozes and communities, and
according to the ICR (paragraph 80) "it was a steep learning curve for everyone involved." The
project defined the change in institutional performance expected at the Forest Service and its subdivisions,


                                                                                                   Page 5 of 23
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Integrated Forest Ecosystem Management (P151102)



               however, PDO indicators were not well aligned to capture this outcome. At completion, the PDO continued
               to be in line with the Bank's strategies and the Government Priorities for the forestry sector. Therefore, the
               Relevance of Objectives is rated Substantial.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To strengthen the capacity of government institutions to improve sustainable forest ecosystem management.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change (ToC). To achieve the stated objective, the project would support developing legal and
                             regulatory institutional framework for decentralized planning and management of national resources, provide
                             capacity building and training for government staff, and establish data collection and information systems.
                             The expected outputs for the aforementioned activities would be an improved enabling environment for
                             government institutions to allow for forest management at local levels; monitored forest usage and planning;
                             evidence-based decisions made, and local government and national staff trained. The expected outcomes
                             would be a strengthened capacity of government institutions to improve Sustainable Forest Ecosystem
                             Management (SFEM), and the capacity of government institutions would be improved to manage forest
                             resources. This would contribute to improving sustainable forest ecosystem management and increase the
                             area of forests brought under management plans. Anticipated long-term impacts included: harnessing the
                             potential of forest resources to improve livelihoods and income of rural communities, promoting economic
                             development through SFEM that provides ecosystem values; goods; and services to the population through
                             improved management of natural resources, and generating local and environmental benefits including:
                             carbon sequestration; reduced land degradation; improved ecosystem functions; and resilience to climate
                             change.

                             The achievement of the PDO was underpinned by the following two critical assumptions: 1. Agency
                             commitment to reforms and stakeholder engagement; and 2. Local governments at the Leshkoz level would
                             be willing to co-manage forest resources with local communities.

                             Overall, the activities stated in the ToC were linked to the intermediate outcomes and the outcomes in a
                             plausible causal chain. The critical assumptions were logical and realistic.

                             Outputs/Intermediate Results

                                        13 Leskhozes and State Agency for Environmental Protection and Forestry (SAEPF) had
                                         operationalized three project supported instruments/interventions: Draft Forest code, adoption of


                                                                                                                                  Page 6 of 23
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Integrated Forest Ecosystem Management (P151102)



         standardized costs (LH), and guidelines for clarifying boundaries between leskhozes (LH) (target
         achieved).
        13 leskhozes reported confidence in their ability to generate income for re-investing into sustainable
         ecosystem management (target achieved).
        98.5% of leskhoze staff in pilot leskhozes reported increased/improved capacities for sustainable
         forest management exceeding the target of 50%. However, this evidence is relatively weak due to the
         lack of relevant indicators to measure improved capacity.
        The National Forest Inventory (NFI) was successfully updated for Kyrgyz Republic based on five
         deliverables: (i) the NFI-2 database has been submitted and data validation has been completed, (ii) a
         report has been developed with results of the analysis for NFI-2, (iii) a land cover classification map
         was prepared for six types of forests with the entire data set, (iv) allometric models of tree species with
         the application methodology were prepared, and (v) an Implementation Plan for NFI-3 was presented
         (target achieved).
        882,709 hectares were updated for forest management planning purposes using Forest Management
         Information System (FMIS) substantially exceeding the original target of 150,000 ha.
        41 leskhozes were using FMIS (target achieved).
        The project funded key research on natural capital accounting (NCA) and the impact of climate
         change on forest ecosystems. The results of the study were approved by the Academic Council of the
         National Academy of Sciences of the Kyrgyz Republic and published.

Outcomes

1. Strengthening the capacity of government institutions. The project provided 48 Government
institutions with capacity building to improve the management of forest resources exceeding the formally
revised target of 46 (PDO outcome indicator #1). The original target was set at 52 and included 51 leskhozes
(all leskhoz in the country) and SAEPF. The target was revised in the May 2020 restructuring to reflect the re-
organization and merger of some leskhozes (ICR, Annex 1).

Specific contributions by the project to strengthen capacity at the national and local levels are discussed
below:

(a) Strengthened capacity of the Forest Service to improve SFEM. The project achievements pertaining to
this element were as follows:

      At the national level, capacity was strengthened by amending the Forest Code. According to the ICR
       (paragraph 33) "the amendments eliminated contradictions with the Constitution and other legislative
       acts, harmonized key related legislation, e.g., Land Code, and introduced more precise terms and
       provisions that create the conditions for effective legal regulation of the sector." Also, the revised
       code adopted good practice in separating management and control functions between the central
       Forest Service and local leskhozes to ensure financial and institutional sustainability of the forest
       sector and to increase transparency and accountability.
      The project introduced a digital system for managing forest resources and activities. The FMIS was
       rolled out in all 41 leskhozes, rather than just the 13 pilot leskhozes as planned. The system was
       updated with information on forest resources and forest users covering an area of nearly 882,709 ha
       exceeding the target of 150,000 ha.



                                                                                                      Page 7 of 23
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Integrated Forest Ecosystem Management (P151102)




      The project supported establishing an updated National Forest Inventory (NFI) and a study on the
       National Capital Accounting. This aimed to equip the FS with critical knowledge for evidence-based
       policymaking and for fulfilling international reporting requirements (ICR, paragraph 36).

(b) Strengthened capacity of pilot leskhozes to improve SFEM. The project achievements pertaining to this
element were as follows:

      The project supported improvements in critical infrastructure and small forest patrol vehicles. This was
       expected to strengthen leskhoz capacity for forest conservation and protection. Fencing of forest
       crops was completed to protect from damage by livestock grazing on 1,350 hectares (no target
       provided), and additional fencing of established forest crops was helping to promote natural
       regeneration (ICR, paragraph 39).
      To improve conditions for efficient use of forest resources, the project supported the installation of drip
       irrigation for nurseries and orchards, sustainable agroforestry practices, fruit and nut processing
       facilities, and fertilizer production. Installation of drip irrigation enabled efficient use of water resources
       on lands where irrigation canals have been built and wells drilled, benefiting orchards and nurseries
       established. Planting of fruit trees with agricultural crops, such as barley, was expected to increase
       crop yields over time. Marketing benefited from the construction of refrigerated storage
       which allowed for gradual sale and/or processing of produce. In addition, fruit and berry processing
       facilities created value-added non-timber forest products (NFTP) and allowed communities to process
       dry fruits and berries beyond what is harvested from project-funded nurseries. The ICR did not report
       on the actual amounts of processed fruits and berries. The construction of cattle bridges allowed for
       more rational use of near-settlement pastures, including on SFF lands, by driving animals to distant
       pastures. Two leskhozes in the project area were producing vermicompost (biohumus) which
       improves the structure of the soil and its agrochemical indicators and makes seedlings more resistant
       to diseases and pests (ICR, paragraph 42).
      The project strengthened the financial foundation of pilot leskhozes through sales of seeds, saplings,
       and vermicompost, as well as through opportunities for leasing of previously unproductive land, and
       through future sale of crops. The ICR (paragraph 43) reported that the leskhozes’ self-assessment
       showed expected earnings of US$400,000 a year combined for all 13 pilots. This suggested improved
       confidence in the ability of the leskhozes to generate income for re-investment into sustainable
       ecosystem management going forward after project closing (intermediate indicator #2 achieved).

2. Improving sustainable forest ecosystem management. The achievement of this element of the PDO is
a result of combined contribution of the project activities under objective 1 (discussed above) and objective 2
(discussed below). By project completion, 970,338 ha of forest land was brought under management plans
exceeding both the formally revised target of 864,700 ha and the original target of 161,000 ha. The ICR
(Annex 1) noted that the target was increased to 864,700 hectares in May 2020 to reflect the actual area of
pilot leskhozes and municipalities brought under integrated forest management, based on data from the
Department of Forest and Hunting Management. The project also supported sub- and micro-projects which
introduced SLM practices on 174,849 hectares of land or 18% of the area covered under integrated natural
resource management plans (INRMPs) prepared under the project guidance (ICR, paragraph 47, more
details under objective 2).

Summary of Efficacy Assessment. The evidence provided in the ICR indicated that the project supported a
number of activities that were expected to improve capacity. By project completion, 41 leskhozes were using
FMIS, and 13 Leskhozes and State Agency for Environmental Protection and Forestry (SAEPF)

                                                                                                       Page 8 of 23
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Integrated Forest Ecosystem Management (P151102)



had operationalized the Draft Forest code, adopted standardized costs (LH), and guidelines for clarifying
boundaries between leskhozes. While the ICR reported that the project provided 48 Government
institutions with capacity building to improve the management of forest resources exceeding the formally
revised target of 46 (PDO outcome indicator #1), this outcome indicator was pitched at the output level. The
project also introduced integrated natural resource management planning on over 970,000 hectares, equal to
39% of the State Forest Fund (SFF) lands, in 13 leskhozes and six municipalities. Overall, based on the
evidence provided in the ICR, it is plausible to assume that the project contributed to improving the capacity
of government institutions at both central and local levels for sustainable forest ecosystem management.
Therefore, the efficacy with which this objective was achieved is rated Substantial with moderate
shortcomings.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
No change to objective. See above.

Revised Rationale
Detail outlined above applies to restructured project.



Revised Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To strengthen the capacity of communities to improve sustainable forest ecosystem management.

Rationale
Theory of Change (ToC). To achieve the stated objective, the project would support a comprehensive
awareness raising, training and capacity building plan for the public and communities; the project would also
promote participatory forest management planning and provide grants to implement the integrated natural
resource management plans (INRMPs) developed by leskhoz and communities. The expected outputs
included: proportion of leskhoze staff in pilot leskhozes reporting improved/increased capacities for
sustainable forest management; number of persons in project sites provided with access to assets as a result
of participating in the project activities, and the area of forest planted and under assisted regeneration through
project interventions The expected outcome was improved capacity of communities to improve SFEM and an
increase in the area where SLM practices are adopted. Anticipated long-term impacts included: harnessing
the potential of forest resources to improve livelihoods and income of rural communities, promote economic
development through SFEM that provides ecosystem values; goods; and services to the population through



                                                                                                    Page 9 of 23
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Integrated Forest Ecosystem Management (P151102)



improved management of natural resources, and generate local and environmental benefits including: carbon
sequestration; reduced land degradation; improved ecosystem functions; and resilience to climate change.

The achievement of the PDO was underpinned by the following two critical assumptions: 1. Incentive
structures for the participation of the private sector and communities are adequate; and 2. Local governments
at the leshkoz level would be willing to co-manage forest resources with local communities.

Overall, the activities stated in the ToC were linked to the intermediate outcomes and the outcomes in a
plausible causal chain. The critical assumptions were logical and realistic.

Outputs/Intermediate Results

The following achievements were reported in the ICR (Annex 1). Targets are included when available.

      10,285 persons in project sites were provided with access to assets and services as a result of
       participating in project interventions substantially achieving the target of 10,500. Direct female
       beneficiaries accounted for 33% of the 1,863 direct beneficiaries, which was below the original target
       of 60% and exceeding the revised target of 25%.
      57% of public in project areas were satisfied with the citizen engagement processes in planning and
       management of leskhozes lands, exceeding the target of 50%.
      98.5% of the surveyed leskhoze staff in pilot leskhozes reported improved/increased capacities for
       sustainable forest management. The survey included 65 employees from the 13 pilot leskhozes.

In addition, the ICR reported additional activities that were not reflected in the Results Framework:

      Public information sharing was carried out through: (i) a facebook page dedicated to the project
         (https://www.facebook.com/Integrated Forest Ecosystems Management Project). (ii) an official website
         (www.ecology.gov.kg) to provide reliable and up-to-date information on project activities and partners,
         and (iii) project reports posted on the website of the Ministry of Agriculture
         (https://agro.gov.kg/ru/forestry/)
        Community mobilization in the preparation of Integrated Natural Resources Management Plans
         (INRMPs): A “bottom-up” approach was applied to allow beneficiaries to plan their own activities,
         reflected in the INRMPs. The mobilization campaign reached 6,362 people, of which 1,983 were
         women (31%), through information seminars, round tables, and focus group discussions and needs
         assessment.
         Micro-projects: the project financed 10 micro-projects identified in the strategic investment plans for
         13 leskhozes. The micro-projects were implemented in 7 pilot leskhozes.
         Sub-projects: the project financed 89 sub-projects, which were implemented in 13 pilot leskhozes.
        Restoration of municipal degraded forests in six pilot municipalities based on the approved Municipal
         Forest Management Plans (MFMPs): fruit plantations were planted on 655 hectares, which is 106% of
         the planned 619 hectares (target exceeded). Special machinery and equipment were provided for
         each of the six pilot Local self-governments (LSGs) to install drip-irrigation systems, build fencing, and
         provide seedlings. The project supported the construction of a pipeline and irrigation tanks (4
         tanks). Works were completed on 4 reservoirs (700 cubic meters each) and a pipeline of 4.5 km was
         laid in Kyzyl-Tuu village in Jalal-Abad oblast. The facilities were put into operation.



                                                                                                    Page 10 of 23
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Integrated Forest Ecosystem Management (P151102)



Outcomes

1. Strengthening the capacity of communities. By project completion, sustainable land management
practices were adopted on174,849 ha of land which was below the original target of 616,000. (28%
achieved)). The ICR (Annex 1) explained that the original target area "included both forested areas,
grassland, and other types of land, not all which are suitable for investment activities. The revised target of
160,000 hectares was based on the areas within leskhozes and municipal forests that would benefit from the
specific SLM practices outlined in Integrated Natural Resources Management Plans (INRMP) and realized
through sub-project and micro-project investments." The achievements discussed below contributed to
achieving this element of the PDO:

      Sub- and micro-projects introduced SLM practices on 174,849 hectares of land exceeding the revised
       target of 160,000, or 18% of the area covered under INRMPs prepared (ICR, paragraph 47). In total,
       10,285 people (almost achieving the revised target of 10,500) benefited from access to assets and
       services as a result of participating in project interventions, which was expected to help relieve
       pressure on forest resources (ICR, paragraph 47). This included those who received equipment and
       planting materials and other assets, those who are benefiting from irrigation and infrastructure
       improvements, as well as those employed in project activities through 167 permanent and 1,092
       seasonal jobs (intermediate indicator #4 achieved).
      Local self-governments (LSGs) in six municipalities adjacent to leskhozes developed an effective
       model to use low-productivity lands to support the social needs of the community. By project
       completion, plantings on municipal land covered a total of 655 hectares, exceeding the target of 619
       hectares approved in the Municipal Forest Management Plans (MFMPs). Support for
       agroforestry practices was expected to provide environmental benefits of improved soil quality,
       increased vegetative cover, and reduced desertification while delivering economic benefits from better
       harvests.

2.Improve sustainable forest ecosystem management. The same as discussed under objective 1.

Summary of Efficacy Assessment. The project did not achieve its PDO outcome target pertaining to this
objective. Therefore, the efficacy with which this objective was achieved is rated Modest.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 2 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
To strengthen the capacity of communities to improve sustainable forest ecosystem management.

Revised Rationale
Theory of Change (ToC). The PDO was the same, but the target for PDO Outcome indicator 2 was reduced
from 616,000 ha to 160,000 ha. The same ToC applies.

Outputs/Intermediate Results


                                                                                                 Page 11 of 23
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               Integrated Forest Ecosystem Management (P151102)



                            Only results with revised targets are reported below, otherwise all what was mentioned above applies.

                                  10,285 persons in project sites were provided with access to assets and services as a result of
                                   participating in project interventions almost achieving the target of 10,500. Direct female beneficiaries
                                   accounted for 33% of the 1,863 direct beneficiaries, which exceeded the revised target of 25%.

                            Outcomes

                            1. Strengthening the capacity of communities. By project completion, sustainable land management
                            practices were adopted on174,849 ha of land which exceeded the revised target of 160,000 ha. The
                            achievements discussed below contributed to achieving this element of the PDO:

                                  Sub- and micro-projects introduced SLM practices on 174,849 hectares of land exceeding the revised
                                   target of 160,000, or 18% of the area covered under INRMPs prepared (ICR, paragraph 47). In total,
                                   10,285 people (almost achieving the revised target of 10,500) benefited from access to assets and
                                   services as a result of participating in project interventions, which was expected to [help relieve
                                   pressure on forest resources (ICR, paragraph 47). However, no evidence was reported in the ICR to
                                   demonstrate that pressure on forest resources was relieved. This included those who received
                                   equipment and planting materials and other assets, those who are benefiting from irrigation and
                                   infrastructure improvements, as well as those employed in project activities through 167 permanent
                                   and 1,092 seasonal jobs (intermediate indicator #4 achieved).
                                  Local self-governments (LSGs) in six municipalities adjacent to leskhozes developed an effective
                                   model to use low-productivity lands to support the social needs of the community. By project
                                   completion, plantings on municipal land covered a total of 655 hectares, exceeding the target of 619
                                   hectares approved in the Municipal Forest Management Plans (MFMPs). Support for agroforestry
                                   practices was expected to provide environmental benefits of improved soil quality, increased
                                   vegetative cover, and reduced desertification while delivering economic benefits from better harvests.

                            2.Improve sustainable forest ecosystem management. The same as discussed under objective 1.

                            Summary of Efficacy Assessment. The project exceeded its revised PDO outcome target pertaining to this
                            objective. The project introduced integrated natural resource management planning on over 970,000 hectares
                            exceeding the revised target of 864,700, equal to 39% of SFF lands, in 13 leskhozes and six
                            municipalities. Also, investments in sustainable land management practices were carried out covering
                            175,000 hectares exceeding the revised target of 160,000 ha to implement priority measures identified in
                            the (INRMPs) and aimed at improving forest management. Therefore, the efficacy with which this objective
                            was achieved is rated Substantial.



                            Revised Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY

                                                                                                                              Page 12 of 23
              Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
              Integrated Forest Ecosystem Management (P151102)




         Rationale
         Overall Efficacy is rated substantial with moderate shortcomings. The project met two of its three PDO
         outcome targets. While the project did demonstrate evidence of strengthened capacity, there was no PDO
         level outcome indicator to measure the strengthened institutional capacity aspect. The project introduced
         integrated natural resource management planning on over 970,000 hectares, equal to 39% of SFF lands, in
         13 leskhozes and six municipalities. Investments in sustainable land management practices were carried out
         covering 175,000 hectares to implement priority measures identified in the INRMPs and aimed at improving
         forest management. Also, the project contributed to strengthening capacity for improved forest management
         at the community level in terms of awareness raising, participation, and livelihood support. Finally, the project
         provided COVID-19 relief support to vulnerable project beneficiaries.



         Overall Efficacy Rating
         Substantial

 OBJR1_TBL




         OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
         Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
         Overall Efficacy is rated Substantial. The project met or exceeded its three PDO outcome targets. As noted
         above, while the project did demonstrate evidence of strengthened capacity, there was no PDO level
         outcome indicator to measure the strengthened institutional capacity aspect which was a core element of the
         PDO. The project introduced integrated natural resource management planning on over 970,000 hectares,
         equal to 39% of SFF lands, in 13 leskhozes and six municipalities. Investments in sustainable land
         management practices were carried out covering 175,000 hectares to implement priority measures identified
         in the INRMPs and aimed at improving forest management. Also, the project contributed to strengthening
         capacity for improved forest management at the community level in terms of awareness raising, participation,
         and livelihood support. Finally, the project provided COVID-19 relief support to vulnerable project
         beneficiaries.



         Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating
         Substantial



5. Efficiency
Economic and Financial Analysis (EFA)

ex ante

              At appraisal, a Cost-Benefit Analysis (CBA) was conducted for the overall project. The economic internal
               rate of return (EIRR) was estimated at 19.7% based on a 40-year horizon to account for the long-term
               benefits of the proposed interventions and a discount rate of 10%. The net present value of the project's
               net benefit stream, discounted at 10% was US$17.3 million in economic terms. However, the exact

                                                                                                            Page 13 of 23
         Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
         Integrated Forest Ecosystem Management (P151102)



       economic value was difficult to fully quantify as the specific activities by leskhoz were not known until the
       management plans were prepared.
      The Financial Internal Rate of Return (FIRR) was estimated for six indicative models: (i) silvicultural
       thinning of existing forests, (ii) PPP investments in orchards, (iii) PPP investments in fast growing
       fuelwood plantations, (iv) nut and/or fruit collection, (v) nut and/or fruit processing, and (vi) establishment
       of silvo-pastoral systems. The FIRR was estimated at 21.9% over the 15-year project period.
      Environmental benefits through the reduction of the GHG emissions. It was estimated that about an
       additional 0.1 tCO2-e/ha of GHG would be sequestered annually, amounting to approximately US$23.2
       million of additional economic benefit over a 40-year period that could be attributed to the project.
      Sensitivity analysis. Economic returns were tested against changes in benefits and costs. The EIRR was
       equally sensitive to changes in costs and in benefits. In absolute terms, these changes did not have a
       significant impact on the EIRR, and the economic viability of the project was still acceptable with a 20%
       decline in benefits or by a 20% increase in costs. A 1-year delay in project implementation would reduce
       the base EIRR to about 17.8%. The base EIRR would be reduced to 16.8% if no benefits deriving from
       the carbon sequestration would be taken into account, but it would still be well above the discount
       rate (10%).

ex post

      At completion, the CBA results indicated a net present value (NPV) of US$1.28 million and an EIRR of
         12% compared to 19.7% at appraisal. According to the ICR (paragraph 54) the ex post and ex
         ante results were "not fully comparable due to differences in the types of costs and benefits considered."
        A CBA of the investments under component 2 was carried out using a 40-year horizon and a discount
         rate of 10% for comparison. A scenario analysis was developed using a 20-year timeframe to account for
         the average lifespan of physical investments, such as fences.
        The analysis captured economic benefits: (i) derived by leskhozes related to increased income from
         forest activities due to technical assistance, improved seeds, and fertilizer and infrastructure
         improvements; and (ii) forest benefits due to reforestation/afforestation actions. However, additional
         production by forest tenants and community members and the benefits from the ecosystem services
         delivered by the project were not captured due to lack of information (ICR, paragraph 54).
        Environmental benefits through the reduction of the GHG emissions. A net carbon balance of 1.2 million
         tCO2-e of increased carbon sequestration was estimated. Similar to the appraisal model, it was
         estimated that 0.1 tCO2-e/ha of GHG would be sequestered annually over a 40-year period.
        Sensitivity analysis. The project’s NPV was still positive in a 20-year timeframe before the need to
         rehabilitate or replace physical investments arises. Applying a 6% discount rate improved the NPV to
         US$6.2 million under a 40-year timeframe and 2.7 million under a 20-year timeframe. However, under a
         40-year scenario without any carbon benefits, the NPV turns negative with a 5% economic rate of return
         (ERR).
        The project disbursed 91% of allocated resources. A cancellation of US$1.2 million in project savings
         was finalized prior to project closing in order to keep the funds in the country portfolio (ICR, paragraph
         56). The project disbursed 97.3% of GEF funds, of which US$900,000 from the GEF grant was
         reallocated towards pandemic support.

Implementation Efficiency. The project experienced a 17 month delay from approval to effectiveness. This
delay was mainly due to the extensive time needed to staff the PIU and to prepare the project's operational
manual (ICR, paragraphs 55 & 74). The project also experienced delays due to "inadequate capacity in the
administrative and technical line agencies, poor procurement documentation and contract management, and

                                                                                                        Page 14 of 23
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Integrated Forest Ecosystem Management (P151102)



lack of qualified technical staff within the PIU to review and supervise detailed technical designs, tendering of
procurement packages, and addressing on-the ground issues all (ICR, paragraph 55)." At the time of the MTR in
June 2019, disbursement was less than 10% (ICR, paragraph 83). The reduced efficiency necessitated a longer
implementation period, and the project closing date was extended by 12 months. Implementation efficiency was
also negatively impacted by political instability which resulted in the reorganization of the implementing agency.
There were also delays that resulted from the COVID-19 restrictions.

Summary of Efficiency Assessment. The ex-post EIRR of 12% was lower than the ex-ante estimate at 19.7%.
The implementation efficiency had shortcomings as discussed above. Therefore, overall efficiency is rated
Modest.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     100.00
 Appraisal                                                 19.70
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     0
 ICR Estimate                                               0
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Pre-Restructuring. Relevance of Objectives was rated Substantial. Overall Efficacy was rated Substantial with
moderate shortcomings. The project fell short of meeting one of the three outcome indicator targets. Efficiency
was rated Modest. The ex-post EIRR of 12% was lower than the ex-ante estimate at 19.7%, and there were
shortcomings in implementation efficiency.

Based on the assigned ratings, the overall outcome is rated Moderately Satisfactory.

Post Restructuring. Relevance of Objectives was rated Substantial. Overall Efficacy was rated
Substantial. The project met or exceeded its three PDO outcome targets. While the project did demonstrate
evidence of strengthened capacity, there was no PDO-level outcome indicator to measure the strengthened
institutional capacity aspect. Efficiency was rated Modest, as noted above. Based on the assigned ratings, the
overall outcome is rated Moderately Satisfactory.

Given the reduction in target for the PDO indicator related to the area under sustainable land management
practices, The outcome is assessed based on the following Split rating:



                                                                                                    Page 15 of 23
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Integrated Forest Ecosystem Management (P151102)



                                  Pre-Restructuring              Post Restructuring
Relevance of Objectives           Substantial
Efficacy                          Substantial                    Substantial
Efficiency                        Modest
Outcome Rating                    Moderately Satisfactory        Moderately Satisfactory
Numerical Value of Outcome
                                  4                              4
Rating
Disbursement (US$ million)        2.86                           7.82
Share of disbursement             0.27                           0.73
Weighted Value of Outcome
                                  1.08                           2.92
Rating
                                  1.08 + 2.92 = 4
Final Outcome Rating
                                  Moderately Satisfactory
a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The following risks may potentially impact the Development Outcome:

1. Government commitment risk. Government commitment to institutional reforms in the forest sector is
evident through the engagement, within the FS and more widely, to revise the Forest Code. Also, measures
have been approved towards greater decision-making power by leskhozes in their operation, e.g.,
reinvesting revenues. These are important to sustaining the outcomes of the strategic investments financed
by the project and to retaining staff and contribute to the confidence of leskhozes in being more self-reliant
(ICR, paragraph 112).

2. Institutional support risk. A more devolved and sustainable leskhoz management needs institutional
support. Since leskhozes are still constrained in their financial operations through existing regulations, further
national-level reform will be required to prepare a stronger legal foundation for more localized management
models to exist. The legal documents informed by the project and the outcomes of project investments can
serve as the basis for further reforms, which are supported by other development partners such as FAO and
GIZ (ICR, paragraph 113).

3. Technical risk. The project supported digital technologies that require sustained technical capacity,
human resources, and financing. The operationalization of the Forest Management Information System
(FMIS) and the National Forest Inventory (NFI) update are critical tools for sustainable forest management.
Going forward, it will be critical that the FMIS is updated with information on all State Forest Fund (SFF) land
and kept up to date by the leskhozes. Uniform standards remain to be developed so that leskhozes can
make regular changes to the database in the course of economic activity (ICR, paragraph 114).




                                                                                                      Page 16 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Integrated Forest Ecosystem Management (P151102)



8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
        Strategic relevance and approach. The project was strategically relevant and aligned with Bank
           strategies and Borrower priorities for the forestry sector (see section 3 for more details). The
           project supported the Government of the Kyrgyz Republic’s higher-level objectives to address
           food security and poverty reduction. The project was based on a solid diagnostic of the Kyrgyz
           Republic’s development challenges and supported the Bank’s engagement strategy in the region.
          Technical, financial, and economic aspects. The technical basis for the project's design was
           the Bank's Program on Forests (PROFOR) study: 'Forest development potential in Kyrgyzstan
           (2012)'. The project was designed as a framework project to provide a platform and resources to
           respond to the specific needs and requirements of the forestry reform process. The framework
           approach allowed for ongoing diagnostic of needs and gaps to optimize the project'. While the
           framework approach towards field-level investments helped target investments to needs on the
           ground, the process burdened procurement and impacted efficiency in the application. The project
           design aimed to improve SFEM by supporting institutional reforms and addressing institutional
           and financial capacity constraints at the Forest Service and within its subordinate entities
           (leskhoz).
          Poverty, gender, and social development aspects. The project activities were expected to
           reduce poverty levels among the rural poor living near forests or on the territory of the State
           Forest Fund. The design supported targeting of benefits to specifically include poor households
           without productive assets to ensure inclusion. While the project was not gender-tagged during
           preparation, it helped address gender inequality within the forestry sector. The design featured
           several aspects to support women, including requiring that women account for a minimum of 30%
           of project beneficiaries, supporting female-only focus group discussions as part of community
           consultations, and reporting on gender-disaggregated data.
          Environmental and fiduciary aspects. The project design included appropriate environmental
           and social risk assessments with adequate mitigation strategies. However, the procurement
           capacity contributed to implementation delays. The ICR (paragraph 105) reported "procurement
           challenges related to capacity constraints."
          Implementation arrangements. Implementation readiness was not adequate. The project
           experienced a significant lag from approval to effectiveness due to the extensive time needed to
           staff the PIU and to prepare the project's operational manual (ICR, paragraphs 55 & 74). Also, the
           large state apparatus included multiple layers of administrative units, resulting in
           complex implementation arrangements with a high risk of decisions being caught in bureaucratic
           bottlenecks (ICR, paragraph 69). Streamlining the investment selection process at the early
           stages of the project implementation could have helped avoid procurement delays in the first few
           years of the project (ICR, paragraph 72).
          Risk assessment. The overall risk rating was Substantial. Key risks included: (i) political
           instability; (ii) resistance to reform in the forestry sector, which the project was designed to
           address by example; and (iii) the limited experience and capacity of the Implementing Agency and
           at the leskhoz level. According to the ICR (paragraph 71), a Financial Management and
           Procurement Assessment was applied to identify training and capacity-building needs. Despite
           this, the risk related to capacity constraints might have been underestimated.




                                                                                                  Page 17 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Integrated Forest Ecosystem Management (P151102)



        M&E. M&E had some design weaknesses in the Results Framework due to the lack of outcome-
          oriented indicators to capture the strengthening of institutional capacity combined with the
          absence of annual targets for some indicators (see section 9a for details).

  Summary of QAE Assessment. The project was strategically relevant with a clear yet ambitious
  PDO. The project was designed as a framework project to provide a platform and resources to respond to
  the specific needs and requirements of the forestry reform process. The design reflected adequate
  environmental aspects, yet procurement was challenging, raising concerns on fiduciary aspects. Poverty,
  gender, and social development aspects were adequately addressed in the design. The risk assessment
  was thorough and included relevant mitigation measures. However, the risk related to capacity
  constraints might have been underestimated. Finally, there were some M&E design shortcomings.
  Therefore, QAE is rated Moderately Satisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
       The project experienced challenging implementation conditions, including political upheavals,
        government re-organizations, and a global pandemic (COVID-19) in the period between MTR and
        closing. The Bank conducted 15 implementation support missions over a five-and-a-half-year
        implementation period (ICR, paragraph 83). After the MTR, implementation benefited from a locally-
        based co-TTL and the mobilization of local technical consultants to support project supervision.
       At the time of the MTR in June 2019, the project had disbursed less than 10%. However, the project
        was still rated Moderately Satisfactory despite considerable implementation delays and the
        disbursement lag (ICR, paragraph 83). The ICR (paragraph 109) noted that despite the minimal
        disbursement three and a half years after approval and over two years following effectiveness, "the
        Bank team did not seize the opportunity to reflect poor progress towards the Development Outcome
        (DO) in the project ratings." This Review agrees with the ICR that the lack of candor in project rating
        and delays in bringing the shortcomings to management's attention may have hindered the project's
        progress and adeqauet resolution of issues early on.
       The project team considered restructuring the project following the MTR, but the lengthy ratification
        process required was discouraging. That said, following the MTR the Bank became more proactive
        in addressing implementation issues at all levels including: component management, safeguards,
        financial management, and procurement. To ensure close supervision, the Bank team maintained
        candid communication lines with the PIU and Bank management. The Bank team addressed gaps
        in specialist knowledge lacking in the PIU and steadily advanced implementation. This effort closed
        the disbursement gap (ICR, paragraph 110). However, the Bank team could also have addressed
        M&E weaknesses at an earlier implementation stage to capture project achievements better.

 Summary of Quality of Supervision Assessment. The pre-MTR phase saw supervision shortcomings.
 The post-MTR phase saw a more proactive supervision activity from the Bank to address various aspects
 that hindered the project's progress, and implementation was back on track. The Bank team also guided




                                                                                                    Page 18 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Integrated Forest Ecosystem Management (P151102)



 the project through a challenging political environment and the COVID-19 restrictions. Overall, Bank
 supervision is rated as Moderately Satisfactory.

 Based on the assigned ratings for QAE and Bank Supervision, the overall Bank Performance is rated
 Moderately Satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
      The PAD did not include a Theory of Change (ToC), which the Bank did not require at the time of
          appraisal. Nonetheless, the ICR included a ToC constructed based on the project activities, outputs,
          and outcomes described in the PAD. The ToC also included the underlying assumptions
          underpinning the achievement of the PDO. Overall, the ToC had clear links between the
          activities, outputs, intermediate, and project development outcomes.
         The PDO was measured through three PDO outcome indicators: (i) government institutions
          provided with capacity building to improve management of forest resources; (ii) land area where
          sustainable land management practices were adopted as a result of the project (ha – core
          indicator); and (iii) forest area brought under management plans (ha- core indicator). The indicators
          above were not comprehensive enough to measure the PDO. The ICR (paragraph 91) correctly
          pointed out that the first indicator was pitched at an output level rather than an outcome level, also
          the second and third indicators lacked yearly targets, and PDO indicator 3 was defined as a sub-
          indicator of PDO indicator 2.
         The RF included 14 intermediate results indicators (IRIs) to track the project's progress and
          measure achievements of different activities. The IRIs were measurable, and most were connected
          to the supported activities. However, some lacked annual targets, and several were confusing,
          particularly related to areas restored or re/afforested and beneficiaries (ICR, paragraph 91).
         The ICR (paragraph 92) noted that the RF was expected to be finetuned during the first year of the
          project since the activities under component 2 were yet to be known. However, this was delayed
          until the MTR (see below for more details).
         Overall, M&E design suffered from shortcomings related to PDO outcome indicators,
          comprehensiveness of indicators, and lack of annual targets.



b. M&E Implementation
       M&E activities were institutionally embedded in the PIU with support from relevant FS
          departments and leskhoz staff. The project's main data sources were the FS and its departments,

                                                                                                    Page 19 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Integrated Forest Ecosystem Management (P151102)



         leskhoz reports, and meeting minutes. The PIU maintained a comprehensive M&E system,
         regularly recording data on indicators, pilot leskhozes, beneficiaries, planted areas, crop survival
         rates, registration of purchased goods, and construction items (ICR, paragraph 96). Supervisory
         functions in the field to monitor and evaluate the implementation of project activities were jointly
         arranged with communities (ICR, paragraph 94).
        A final evaluation of project outcomes and beneficiaries’ satisfaction was completed and included
         field work to verify results and interviews with key project stakeholder groups (ICR, paragraph 98).
        Implementation suffered from inherent design weaknesses in the RF, which did not allow for
         proper tracking of intermediate indicators. Tracking of many intermediate indicators was delayed
         because tracking depended on the finalization and approval of INRMPs. Later, following the
         revision of indicators, parts of the RF reporting were dependent on the final beneficiary survey to
         assess progress toward intermediate targets. thereby reducing their potential to inform project
         management. Also, the RF revision did not address the core weakness related to the lack of PDO
         outcome indicators that could capture the strengthened capacity aspect.



c. M&E Utilization
       The ICR notes that the assessments of the project outputs benefited from the detailed record
         keeping in the PIU, which, combined with the final evaluation, according to the ICR (paragraph
         99), helped verify the results and their attribution to the project activities.
        While the FMIS and NFI were important building blocks to inform decisions on forest
         management, they were finalized too late to inform the project (ICR, paragraph 100). That said,
         the FMIS, if used and maintained properly was expected to be a critical tool for the long-term
         sustainability of M&E of Kyrgyz forest systems.

  Summary of M&E Quality Assessment. M&E design suffered from shortcomings. The ICR notes that
  field-level supervision and monitoring of project activities lacked adequate technical oversight. Also, the
  revision of the RF did not fully address the shortcomings. Therefore, the Quality of M&E is rated Modest.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
        The project was classified as an environmental Category B. It triggered five environmental safeguard
          policies: Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01), Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04), Forests (OP/BP
          4.36), Pest Management (OP4.09), and Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50), and one
          social safeguards policy: Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12).
         The project aimed to support the improvement of public and private forest management practices on
          the lands managed by the leskhozes, as well as supporting community-based natural resource
          management approaches. The environmental impact of the project was expected to be largely
          positive, and no major adverse environmental impacts are anticipated (PAD, paragraph 80). An


                                                                                                   Page 20 of 23
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Integrated Forest Ecosystem Management (P151102)



           Environment Management Framework (EMF) was prepared by the Recipient. Also, an Access
           Restriction Framework (ARF) was prepared at appraisal to mitigate site-specific impacts related to
           changes in access to forest, pasture or other lands. The applicability of OP 7.50 was reviewed, and
           a waiver for an exception on notifying riparian states was approved by the ECA Regional Vice
           President on June 11, 2015.

  Compliance with Environmental and Social Safeguards. According to the ICR (paragraph 100) "the
  project complied with applicable safeguards policies and completed planned mitigation activities."




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management (FM). FM mechanisms were adequate and acceptable to the Bank (ICR,
  paragraph 106). No management issues were raised in the external audits. At the project start, the
  exchange rate effective on August 31, 2015, was 1.40 USD/SDR; at closing, this was 1.28 USD/SDR
  effective September 30, 2022. This helps explain the final financial figures: from the original amount of
  US$16.11 million, US$14.68 was disbursed, and US$1.36 was cancelled, leaving a balance of
  approximately US$69,000 in exchange rate loss. FM was assessed satisfactory throughout the project
  implementation period (ICR, paragraph 106).

  Procurement. There were procurement delays after effectiveness. This stemmed from delays in preparing
  procurement packages related to Components 2 and 3. This contributed to significant implementation
  delay, and the procurement rating was downgraded to Moderately Satisfactory early on (ICR, paragraph
  104). Procurement processes were also negatively impacted by management changes at the SAEPF and
  the resignation of the PIU Director, which delayed the authorization of procurement procedures. In
  addition, the project experienced procurement challenges related to capacity constraints to define and
  review detailed estimation designs and conduct contract management (ICR, paragraph 105). The main
  issues for contract management were the reluctance of the PIU to enforce penalties as they applied
  according to the terms of individual contracts and the use of time-based contracts with reimbursement of
  actual expenditures for field-related work. The ICR (paragraph 106) noted that lump-sum contracts based
  on agreed deliverables would have prevented complications and motivated faster completion of
  activities. Procurement was assessed as Moderately Satisfactory throughout the project implementation
  period (ICR, paragraph 104).




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  .



d. Other
  .




                                                                                                  Page 21 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Integrated Forest Ecosystem Management (P151102)



11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
                                Moderately
Outcome                                               Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
                                Moderately
Bank Performance                                      Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                  Modest                Modest

Quality of ICR                  ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The following lessons are derived from the ICR with some adaptation of language:

1. Candid ratings on project progress during implementation may allow proactivity in
addressing key implementation issues at an early stage. The project faced considerable delays
and challenges, e.g., in procurement, which were affecting implementation progress in its first few
years. However, ratings remained Moderately Satisfactory. While downgrading ratings is a
significant decision with implications for both the project and the broader message from the Bank in
the country, a timely downgrade could have initiated corrective actions to be put in place. Noting that
downgrading is not always an easy decision, project management should be prepared to take a
calculated risk to downgrade project progress in similar circumstances.

2. Developing a forest management information system not only generates important
benefits for forestry operations and policy but also helps to improve forest ecosystem
management and governance. In the context of limited capacity and experience, the phased roll-
out of the Forest Management Information System (FMIS) allowed for a gradual introduction to new
software that was adopted by all 41 leskhozes, not just the pilots. With the measures taken by the
Forest Service (FS), the FMIS is already contributing to increased operational efficiency and the
supply of better information, thereby helping to improve forest ecosystem management and
governance. For the FMIS to be effective and serve as a strategic tool for economic growth with
wider benefits in terms of transparency and participation, it is important to be adequately resourced
and receive ongoing institutional support. Future operations can take note of the value of a phased
approach to information systems and the need to provide enabling institutional and financial
frameworks to ensure wider benefits.

3. While targeted institutional reforms are an effective and efficient use of resources, they
could also steer important yet complex policy and institutional reforms in the forest sector.
The project used a flexible, non-prescriptive approach to identifying strategic directions and
interventions, e.g., a sector functional analysis and a consultative Forest Code revision. These
activities were carried out with relatively small levels of financing but, nonetheless, are critical in
steering important yet complex policy and institutional reforms in the forest sector. Projects would
benefit from taking similar flexible approaches to identifying interventions that can have far-reaching
impacts.


                                                                                                    Page 22 of 23
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Integrated Forest Ecosystem Management (P151102)




13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

Quality of Evidence. The ICR provided adequate evidence based on the project's M&E system and the final
evaluation. The ICR was candid in highlighting the shortcomings in the M&E design and where it undermined
the assessment of the outcomes. The outcome discussion was well balanced between what the project
achieved on the ground and the achievement of outcome indicators.

Quality of Analysis. The ICR provided clear links to the extent possible between evidence and
findings and used the evidence base to serve the arguments under the different sections. The
ICR provided comprehensive coverage of project activities and candidly reported on shortcomings.

Lessons. Lessons reflected the project experience and were based on evidence and analysis.

Consistency with guidelines. The ICR used the available data to justify most of the assigned ratings. The ICR
did not report why a split rating was not applied even though the PDO outcome indicator targets were revised.

Summary of the Quality of ICR Assessment. The ICR used the available M&E data to the extent possible to
discuss the project achievements. The reason for not conducting a split evaluation despite the reduction in
targets was not clarified. Reporting on safeguard compliance was brief. Overall, the Quality of the ICR is rated
Substantial with minor shortcomings.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                   Page 23 of 23
