     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Myanmar National Electrification Project (P152936)



                                                                                   Report Number: ICRR0023543

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                   Project Name
 P152936                                      Myanmar National Electrification Project

 Country                                      Practice Area(Lead)
 Myanmar                                      Energy & Extractives


 L/C/TF Number(s)                             Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-57270,TF-A6531,TF-A8224                  30-Sep-2021                                       303,555,965.72

 Bank Approval Date                           Closing Date (Actual)
 16-Sep-2015                                  30-Sep-2021

                                              IBRD/IDA (USD)                                    Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            400,000,000.00                                    3,450,000.00

 Revised Commitment                             305,687,365.34                                      190,771.32

 Actual                                         303,567,197.96                                      190,771.32




 Prepared by                  Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator        Group
 Fernando Manibog             Vibecke Dixon                 Ramachandra Jammi             IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The project development objective (PDO) of the National Electrification Project (NEP) is “to help increase
   access to electricity in Myanmar.” (Financing Agreement dated November 3, 2015, Schedule 2, Page 5). The
   PDO formulation in the Project Appraisal Document (PAD) is exactly the same.

   The PDO was revised during the restructuring in August 2017 by adding “and to provide immediate and
   effective response in case of an eligible crisis or emergency.”


                                                                                                   Page 1 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Myanmar National Electrification Project (P152936)



   For the purposes of this ICR Review, the two objectives to be assessed are:

   Objective 1: To help increase access to electricity in Myanmar

   Objective 2: To provide immediate and effective response in case of an eligible crisis or emergency.

   Since the project’s ambition expanded while being funded by a re-allocation from an original project
   component (specifically, lower local community contributions), a split rating will not be conducted, in line with
   IEG guidelines. (See Dates below for an additional explanation.)



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  24-Aug-2017

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Component 1: Grid extension

   (Appraisal cost estimate: US$375 million, of which the IDA contribution of US$300 million was revised to
   US$286.245 during the 2017 restructuring. Actual cost: US$203.14 million)

   The component aimed to support Yangon Electricity Supply Corporation (YESC), Mandalay Electricity
   Supply Corporation (MESC) and Electricity Supply Enterprise (ESE) for distribution network extensions and
   connection of communities and households to the national power grid. The component included goods for:
   (i) the expansion of existing, and construction of new medium voltage (MV) substations; (ii) the construction
   of new MV lines, low voltage (LV) lines and MV/LV transformers; and (iii) household and community
   connections and public lighting.

   Component 2: Off-grid electrification

   (Appraisal cost estimate: US$172 million, of which the IDA contribution was US$80 million. Actual cost:
   US$169.37 million)

   The component was to provide support to: (i) deploy solar photovoltaic systems; (ii) develop mini-grids; (iii)
   provide community electricity connections (schools, health clinics and other community buildings); and (iv)
   install public street lights in targeted communities.

   Component 3: Technical assistance and Project management


                                                                                                      Page 2 of 16
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Myanmar National Electrification Project (P152936)



  (Appraisal cost estimate: US$20 million of IDA contribution. Actual cost: US$17 million)

  The component aimed to provide support to: (a) the Ministry of Electricity and Energy (MOEE) responsible
  for electric power and (b) the Ministry of Livestock, Fisheries, and Rural Development (MLFRD) to: (i)
  strengthen institutional capacity to implement the National Electrification Plan (NEP); (ii) improve the policy
  and regulatory framework related to electrification and renewable energy; (iii) develop an integrated
  framework for electrification planning, results monitoring and impact evaluation; (iv) secure technical advice
  and consulting services, including on standards, technology assessment and technical design, economic
  and financial analysis, environmental and social impact management, procurement and financial
  management; and (v) improve project management.

  Component 4: Contingent emergency response

  (Zero allocation at appraisal. At the 2017 restructuring: US$13.755 million of IDA contribution. Actual:
  US$12.06 million).

  This standby component was part of IDA’s support to an Immediate Response Mechanism (IRM) in
  Myanmar. The PDO amendment was approved by IDA Management in August 2017 to activate this
  component without delay. The IRM allowed reallocation of a portion of undisbursed balances of IDA-
  financed investment projects for recovery and reconstruction support in the event of an eligible emergency.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost. The total original project cost was estimated at US$570.5 million. The revised amount at
  restructuring was US$432.7 million. The actual project cost was US$384.6 million.

  Financing. The original IDA credit was US$400 million, of which US$303.4 was disbursed. A Trust Fund
  originally set at US$3 million disbursed US$196,771, while another Trust Fund grant of US$450,000 did not
  disburse.

  Borrower Contribution. The Borrower and local communities originally committed to contribute US$60
  million and US$107 million, respectively, for a total of US$167 million. The two sources actually disbursed
  significantly less, at US$45 million and US$36 million, respectively, for a total of US$81 million, or about half
  of the originally committed amounts.

  Dates. The project was approved on September 16, 2015, and became effective on December 9, 2015. A
  midterm review (MTR) was conducted on May 4, 2018.

  After the military takeover of February 1, 2021. The World Bank suspended all disbursements in line with
  OP 7.30 on Dealings with De Facto Governments. The project closed on September 30, 2021, the original
  closing date.

  The project was restructured twice. The first was in August 2017, to transfer funds from the project to the
  Immediate Response Mechanism (IRM) that was activated for emergency recovery of disaster-affected
  regions by the 2015 floods and landslides. (ICR, page 8). The transferred funds came from the community
  contribution for the installation of distribution systems. The Government requested a reduction from US$75
  million to US$35 million given the impact of the disaster, the reduced fiscal transfers from the national


                                                                                                     Page 3 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Myanmar National Electrification Project (P152936)



   government, and the lesser availability of local community contributions to the project. The Results
   Framework and disbursement allocations were adjusted accordingly, and the overall connection targets
   were reduced by around 8 percent.

   The second restructuring was in April 2020 to extend the timeline to submit audited financial reports from six
   months to nine months after the end of the Recipient’s fiscal year. This was done across the entire Bank
   portfolio in Myanmar.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country Context. Myanmar is the largest country in mainland Southeast Asia with over 2,800 miles of
coastline. Despite its potential as a trading hub and supplier of natural resources, Myanmar was one of the
least developed countries in Southeast Asia in 2014/15, facing conflicts, isolation, and ineffective policies.
Approximately 26 to 38 percent of the population lived in absolute poverty in 2010, with a majority in rural
areas dependent on agriculture. Since 2011, major political and economic reforms have improved civil
liberties and removed barriers to commerce and investments. The economy grew around 8.5 percent in
2014, but challenges remained in the weak financial sector, inadequate infrastructure, and low capacity to
manage external shocks. Before the 2021 coup, the government aimed to resolve ethnic conflicts and
scheduled parliamentary elections for late 2015. The goal then was to ensure inclusive transformation and
broad-based economic growth that involved the non-state sector and benefited the whole population while
focusing on the vulnerable and marginalized.

Sector Context. At the time of appraisal, Myanmar’s energy consumption was among the lowest in the
world. The average consumption of 160 kilowatt-hours (kWh) per year was twenty times less than the
world average. Around 70 percent of the population, and 84 percent of rural households, lacked grid
electricity access. Off-grid schemes were rare, costly, and unreliable. Modern fuels, such as liquefied
petroleum gas, were limited to urban areas. Traditional biomass fuels (wood and animal dung) accounted
for about two-thirds of energy consumption. Electricity shortages and supply disruptions were rampant,
resulting from over-reliance on hydro, investment delays, and accelerating demand. Thus, despite the
increase in gas-fired generation in 2014, the country continues to experience load shedding, blackouts, and
low reliability of electricity supply.

The fragmentation of the sector’s institutional and regulatory framework was especially evident in rural
electrification. The Ministry of Energy (MOE) oversaw national energy policy but sector development was
done by the Ministry of Electric Power (MOEP), within which the Myanmar Electric Power Enterprise
(MEPE) was responsible for gas-fired generation and the high-voltage power grid while acting as single
buyer and market operator. MOEP controlled three government-owned utilities for medium voltage (MV)
distribution: Yangon Electricity Supply Corporation (YESC) and Mandalay Electricity Supply Corporation
(MESC), for Myanmar’s two most populous and urbanized regions, and the Electricity Supply Enterprise
(ESE) for the rest of the country. Low voltage (LV) secondary distribution was open to the private sector. In
rural areas, the Department of Rural Development (DRD) in the Ministry of Livestock, Fisheries and Rural
Development (MLFRD) was responsible for off-grid electrification. In addition, each of the seven States and



                                                                                                     Page 4 of 16
                       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                       Myanmar National Electrification Project (P152936)



seven Regions had their own energy ministry. The Government was transferring part of the 2015-2016
Union electrification budget to State/Region ministries as a part of broader decentralization efforts.

The sector’s main challenge is to expand electricity reliable, affordable, and sustainable electricity access.
This required increasing efficient generation, reducing losses, corporatizing sector enterprises, and
reforming prices while protecting low-income consumers. To this end, the National Electrification Plan
(NEP) was endorsed in 2015 to develop, finance, and implement the electricity access scale-up program
with the target of universal access for 7.2 million households by 2030.

Bank Involvement. The World Bank Group (WBG) has supported projects for reliable energy supply, energy
access, renewable energy development, electricity tariff reform, renewable energy, and energy efficiency.
The NEP was the second Bank-supported energy project, following WBG support for the Myanmar Electric
Power Project (MEPP) in 2013. The WBG’s Joint Implementation Plan (JIP) supported public and private
efforts to increase electricity access and alleviate acute electricity shortages. The JIP’s first stage (2013-
2015) focused on preparing for national electrification by increasing gas-fired power generation capacity
and efficiency. Thus, the US$140 million IDA Credit for the MEPP included finance for the gas-fired power
plant in Thaton, Mon State. The International Finance Corporation (IFC) and Multilateral Investment
Guarantee Agency (MIGA) supported MOEP to conduct Myanmar’s first competitive bidding for an
Independent Power Producer, for a new 240 MW gas-fired plant in Myingyan, Mandalay Region. The WBG
also mobilized and maximized the benefit of collaboration with development partners in assisting
Myanmar’s energy sector.

Relevance of PDOs. The PDOs were consistent with the two Country Program Frameworks (CPFs)
corresponding to the entire project period from preparation to closure. The CPFs recognize the critical
importance of access to well-being, income generation, poverty reduction, and improving basic health,
education, security, finance, and communication services.

The project ‘s PDOs were highly relevant to Objective 1.1 of the Myanmar CPF for FY15-FY19, which
aimed to improve power supplies and electricity access. The PDOs remain highly relevant to the ongoing
CPF for FY20-FY23, despite the World Bank's temporary suspension of disbursements due to the military
takeover. The PDOs align directly with Objective 1.1 by expanding electricity access in rural areas and
Objective 2.3 by developing power infrastructure and promoting renewable energy. The revised PDO also
remains relevant to the current CPF for FY20-FY23, in support of Objective 3.2 to strengthen the resilience
of vulnerable communities against climate and natural disaster risks.

The energy authorities remain committed to achieving universal electricity access by 2030. The project
contributed directly to the NEP’s goals through grid extension, off-grid electrification, and capacity
building. Beyond project closure, the Ministry of Electricity and Energy has shown further efforts toward
NEP Phase II. Moreover, the IDA Immediate Response Mechanism was activated in June 2016 to enhance
the government's disaster response capacity.


Rating Relevance TBL




Rating
High


4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

                                                                                                          Page 5 of 16
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  Myanmar National Electrification Project (P152936)




EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               To help increase access to electricity in Myanmar.

               Rationale
               Theory of Change (TOC). Within Myanmar’s National Electrification Plan (NEP) framework, the project’s TOC
               (ICR, page 9) follows the established and well-known causal chain that characterizes grid and off-grid
               electrification projects. The TOC postulates that activities combining investments and capacity building in grid
               and off-grid electrification, as well as public- and private-led approaches, would contribute directly to
               achieving the first phase of the NEP. The hybrid, public-private approach for off-grid activities was intended to
               complement IFC’s efforts as part of an integrated WBG Joint Implementation Plan. (See Bank Involvement
               under Relevance of Objectives above.)

               The causal links in the TOC are logical, direct, and consistent with fairly standard upstream supply generation
               and downstream distribution investments in the electricity sector. The inputs and outputs are well-defined,
               adequate, and properly sequenced for achieving PDO 1. However, it should be clarified that despite the
               ICR's lack of documented results at outcome level, it is plausible that the achievements at output level will
               lead to achievement of the objective.

               There were three TOC shortcomings, however. First, the critical assumptions (i.e., affordability, proper
               maintenance, and adequacy of training) seem to have missed the larger and volatile political economy issues
               in Myanmar, which had historical precedents and, in the end, led to the suspension of disbursements.
               Second, the arrows simplistically moved from left to right independently for each component, whereas the
               technical assistance and project management activities permeated the two other components, as they should.
               This implies the need for more of a “spaghetti chart.” Third, the outcomes presented were in only terms of the
               “number of people”, thus missing the important, higher-level development outcomes that are presented in
               paragraph 100, Annex 4 (Efficiency Analysis), including improvements in lighting quality and quantity,
               pollution reduction, access to communication and refrigeration, and others.

                A detailed summary of the project’s outcome indicators, targets, and achievements is presented in Table 2,
               pages 16-17 of the ICR.

               Efficacy of Objective 1:

               Albeit mixed between grid and off-grid, the project successfully provided new or improved electricity services
               to nearly 4 million people overall, accounting for 69 percent of the project's revised outcome target of 5.7
               million people. The challenging off-grid component performed exceptionally well, reaching over 2.1 million
               people, equivalent to 92% of its target. The grid component performed less well, connecting 1.7 million out of
               the revised 3.2 million target, or 53 percent. Additionally, Bank data indicates that between 2016 and 2020,
               8.81 million people (1.8 million households) in Myanmar gained electricity access, with the project contributing
               approximately 44% of these connections. A significant and noteworthy achievement is that the project
               connected more than 25% of the households targeted by Myanmar's NEP, which aimed to connect 7.2 million
               households by 2030.



                                                                                                                  Page 6 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Myanmar National Electrification Project (P152936)



Community electricity connections (grid and off-grid) were almost completely achieved at 98 percent of the
targeted 21,400 connections. More than 5,000 grid, and 15,000 off-grid community facilities were electrified.
Off-grid connections totaled 15,807 community facilities compared to the original 11,400 targeted,
representing a 139 percent achievement.

The public lighting target was exceeded off-grid and almost achieved for grid connections, with 77,597
streetlights connected via the grid (69 percent of the 113,000 target) and 51,978 via off-grid solutions (274
percent of the 19,000 target).

The project resulted in significant institutional capacity-building outcomes. The grid component strengthened
procurement processes. IDA and government funding also helped to implement a new policy that reduced the
burden of connection costs on households, by covering low-voltage distribution lines, in-house wiring, and
meters. With improved procurement and the new connection policy in place, grid connections accelerated in
2020. The off-grid component strengthened the capacity of the Department of Rural Development (DRD) to
deploy mini-grid and off-grid systems. systems. With technical assistance, DRD built its capacity to
adequately evaluate proposals and conduct quality assurance checks. The project partnered with the private
sector to establish 53 Post Warranty Maintenance Service Centers that provide long-term after-sales services
for users of solar home systems, serving 5,299 project villages in 144 townships. The centers have provided
more than 10,500 repair services. After the military takeover, however, only 14 centers remain open. The
service centers have successfully provided more than 10,500 repair services. Finally, the project also built the
capacity of local private mini-grid developers, resulting in positive responses to a survey conducted by the
ICR team.

Overall, with around two-thirds of grid targets achieved and off-grid targets significantly exceeded, and given
the significant institutional capacity-building outcomes, the project’s efficacy in achieving Objective 1 is rated
Substantial with shortcomings associated with the grid connection activities.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To provide an immediate and effective response in case of an eligible crisis or emergency.

Rationale
Following the 2015 floods and landslides, the United Nations Office for Project Services (UNOPS) supported
the procurement and distribution of goods, which were completed in September 2018. Additionally, IRM
funding from five IDA projects totaled US$54 million, of which US$13.755 million came from the National
Electrification Project. The IRM funds were used for critical machinery and equipment, production inputs, and
other required goods. Emergency Operation Centers were established with improved resources including
speed boats, vehicles, and baily bridges used to support emergency response during the 2018 floods. IRM
funds also enabled the procurement of road repair machinery, water pumps, and weather forecasting and
meteorological equipment, which were used in more recvent disasters. The enhanced disaster risk



                                                                                                     Page 7 of 16
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Myanmar National Electrification Project (P152936)



                            management (DRM) capacity was an important contribution, particularly the increased collaboration of
                            Government officials at union, state, and regional levels.

                            The project’s efficacy in achieving Objective 2 is rated substantial.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The project’s efficacy ratings in achieving Objectives 1 and 2 are Substantial, with shortcomings related to the
                            partial achievement of around two-thirds of the targets for the grid components while off-grid component
                            targets were more than achieved, and Substantial, respectively. Overall, the project’s efficacy is rated
                            Substantial, with moderate shortcomings.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



   5. Efficiency
   Economic Analysis

   The ICR (Annex 4 on Efficiency) indicates that the calculation of the NPV and EIRR followed the same
   methodology and assumptions as was used in the PAD at appraisal using a 10 percent discount
   rate; calculations were also made using 6 percent in line with more recent Bank’s economic analysis
   guidelines. The latter figures are presented below. Both the PAD and ICR calculated the NPVs and EIRRs for
   the grid, mini-grid and off-grid components separately.

   For the grid component, which utilized the majority of the project’s funds, the EIRR is 23.4 percent. This
   excludes the benefits of better-quality lighting, the charging of mobile devices, and broader environmental
   benefits. For the mini-grid component, the EIRR is at a relatively low 11.3 percent, which is explained by a
   consumption rate that lagged behind the estimated demand (reaching at best about 66 percent of projections),
   and possible overdesign of the investments that undermined the component’s economic viability. The EIRR is a
   high 52.3 percent for the off-grid solar component, without including the benefits of solarizing public institutions
   and the extended life cycle of the off-grid products due to improved customer services. Except for the mini-grid
   component, these EIRRs compare well with the PAD estimates at 25.4 percent, 17 percent, and 62.2 percent,
   respectively.



                                                                                                                               Page 8 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Myanmar National Electrification Project (P152936)



Administrative and Implementation Efficiency

The project closed on the original September 2021 closing date, due to the military takeover of February 2021,
which led to the suspension of disbursements. There were measures taken, however, to address delays that
were encountered. For example, there were delays in the delivery of concrete poles and transformers. This was
to be addressed by hiring local manufacturers and installers to build the grid network. Several technical
workshops were also organized for private companies to improve the implementation efficiency and the quality
of the key parts of grid and mini-grid development, such as concrete poles and transformers. For the off-grid and
mini-grid components, the call for proposals procedure shifted from individual to batch review of individual
proposals, thus improving the efficiency of the proposal review process. The Government’s off-grid solar
tendering process was also streamlined to enhance the efficiency of deploying off-grid solar products


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      60.00
 Appraisal                                                  25.40
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      60.00
 ICR Estimate                                               23.40
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The relevance of the project’s objectives is high. The project’s efficacy in achieving the grid and off-grid
development objectives is substantial, with moderate shortcomings in the achievement of the grid
components. The project’s efficiency is rated substantial.

Based on these ratings, and taking into account the moderate shortcomings in efficacy, the overall project
outcome is rated moderately satisfactory.

The project’s ratings for development outcome (DO) and implementation progress (IP) were either Satisfactory
or Moderately Satisfactory throughout its implementation history.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory




                                                                                                       Page 9 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Myanmar National Electrification Project (P152936)



7. Risk to Development Outcome

The military takeover on February 1, 2021 prevented the completion of the final year of project
implementation. Given the unstable situation in the country, it is uncertain how the project's achievements
and activities can be sustained or how they will progress further. Still, the project's efforts in strengthening
institutions have laid a solid foundation for future Bank support to energy access in Myanmar, as evidenced
by the qualitative and quantitative results presented under the Efficacy assessment above.

The project implemented measures to mitigate risks to development outcomes, such as the establishment of
Post Warranty Maintenance Service Centers and capacity building for private sector energy service
providers. However, in light of the fragile situation in the country, there are remaining risks, including
potential challenges for authorities to continue investing in maintenance services, and for the private sector
to sustain their energy service businesses (mini grids and solar home systems).




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project provided strong support for the government's priorities and commitment to achieve universal
  electricity access by 2030. The technical design and activities were enhanced by thorough analytical
  work, including assistance to the government in developing the National Electrification Geospatial Plan
  and Investment Prospectus, as well as conducting Multi-Tier Framework (MTF) surveys. These efforts
  provided a solid technical foundation for Bank engagement and the Poverty and Social Impact Analysis
  (PSIA). Extensive consultations were held with national, regional, and local governments, the local and
  international private sectors, and multilateral and bilateral development partners. These consultations
  resulted in a strong government commitment to adopt the national electrification program (NEP) aiming
  for universal access by 2030. All multilateral and bilateral development partners aligned their resources
  with the shared objective outlined in the NEP.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 During implementation, the Bank team was led by almost the same co-Task Team Leaders (TTLs), thus
 ensuring stability. One of the TTLs who prepared the project remained in charge for the first two years of
 implementation, maintaining continuity. Specialist consultants who were involved in project preparation
 were also involved in implementation, contributing to this continuity. The Bank brought together a
 multidisciplinary team of experts, including financial management and procurement specialists, who closely
 collaborated with counterparts. The team promptly addressed the Government's requests and received
 support from the Bank's technical and fiduciary and safeguards teams, who made adjustments and



                                                                                                      Page 10 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Myanmar National Electrification Project (P152936)



 provided guidance to implementing agencies. The team adapted to the client's evolving needs and revised
 indicators accordingly.

 Regular technical missions and supervision missions were conducted approximately every six months to
 assess progress. The ISRs provided comprehensive information, and the supervision team offered clear
 recommendations and debriefings. The client's validation of the findings and recommendations was
 recorded in official aide-memoires. The Bank team also provided a Reimbursable Advisory Service (RAS)
 for the supervision and monitoring of a €30 million Italian Soft Loan to the Myanmar government for off-grid
 electrification. This included support in implementing environmental and social safeguards, ensuring
 adequacy of fiduciary agreements, and evaluating the project.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The design of the M&E framework was appropriate and effective. The PDO was clearly defined. Indicators
 were developed to monitor outcomes, such as the number of people and villages benefiting from new or
 improved electricity services. The selected indicators were directly relevant to monitoring project activities,
 and adequate for signaling and assessing PDO achievement. They were integrated into the government's
 M&E system to track the progress of universal access as outlined in the NEP. The MOEE and DRD
 reported results and progress semi-annually, which were verified by the Bank team during implementation
 support missions. For off-grid connections, data from private mini grid developers and off-grid solar
 companies provided evidence on the progress achieved. An independent verification agency validated the
 results for off-grid connections, including mini grids and standalone solar products. The data on main grid
 connections were corroborated by YESC, MESC and ESE. Moreover, a phone survey by a reputable local
 firm in 2022 quantified the project's impact.



b. M&E Implementation
  The efficiency of M&E implementation was enhanced by using recent technology such as remote sensing
  and geospatial data, complemented by field verification surveys. Consultants specialized in GIS and data
  collection helped both PMOs to increase their M&E capacity and provided additional support. They have
  enabled PMO staff to combine traditional project M&E methods with a real-time GIS monitoring
  platform. An innovative MIS has been developed to oversee the installation, verification, operation, and
  maintenance of solar PV systems, as well as payment authorization. Field staff, including installers, IVAs,
  and DRD union and township officers, have been trained to collect data using tablet-based applications.
  This data is then transmitted to the PMO's data center. A customer database has also been established,
  recording customer information, system details, GPS coordinates, supplier data, and maintenance

                                                                                                    Page 11 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Myanmar National Electrification Project (P152936)



  records. When a solar product is installed, the installer can scan the barcode, and the information is
  automatically sent to the server and updated on the monitoring dashboard. The M&E system also
  monitored women's satisfaction, participation in decision-making (e.g., light bulb placement), system
  maintenance, and minority representation among the project's beneficiaries.



c. M&E Utilization
  The M&E system provided valuable information that improved technical specifications, product design,
  and implementation plans for off-grid energy solutions. It also helped the government prioritize potential
  sites and villages for electrification. End-user feedback collected through the M&E system informed the
  government about the technical specifications and design of solar products and mini grids for public
  facilities such as schools, rural clinics, and public lighting. The Bank team and PMO used the indicators
  to monitor progress and make necessary adjustments to implementation plans. For example, when the
  M&E indicators identified delays in the grid component due to insufficient production capacity of local
  suppliers, the team was able to propose multiple solutions: (i) considering international suppliers; (ii)
  exploring alternative technologies like spun pole; (iii) reducing production time requirements while
  maintaining technical standards and extending the guarantee period in bids; and (iv) effectively
  communicating market growth potential and incentivizing suppliers to quickly increase production.



  M&E Quality Rating
  High

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Environmental. The project was assigned an Environmental Category B (Partial Assessment). The project's
   environmental risk rating was initially Substantial, based on the nationwide scope of the project and the
   inadequate capacity of implementation agencies in safeguard implementation, monitoring, and reporting.
   However, after the military takeover in February 2021, the rating was raised to High due to uncertainties
   surrounding environmental risk management, supervision, and monitoring during implementation. There
   were also concerns about the government's capacity and commitment to implementing environmental
   safeguards, as well as the Bank’s limited communication with the government and project beneficiaries.
   Despite these challenges, both PMOs demonstrated commitment and made strong efforts to fulfill the
   safeguard requirements. They regularly submitted progress reports that included sections on safeguard
   management, and provided frequent training sessions to township engineers, the community, and the
   contractors.

   Social. The project triggered three social safeguards policies: Environmental & Social Assessment OP/BP
   4.01, Indigenous People OP/BP 4.10, and Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12. The last Bank supervision
   mission in November 2020 confirmed that the project had a high social risk level and a moderately
   satisfactory performance rating. However, since the military takeover in February 2021, the Bank team has
   been unable to access on-the-ground information about social safeguards activities. The PMOs (Grid and
   Off-grid) have demonstrated their commitment to managing the project’s social risks. The MOEE PMO has
   utilized the Kobo Toolbox application to screen and monitor safeguards activities and has provided training

                                                                                                   Page 12 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Myanmar National Electrification Project (P152936)



   to field-level engineers and contractors. The DRD PMO's safeguards team has also exhibited strong
   commitment to managing social risks, particularly regarding ethnic inclusion, land ownership transformation,
   community health and safety, Grievance Redress Mechanism, and community consultations. Notably, the
   DRD safeguards team has effectively coordinated various stakeholder departments at both the Union and
   State/Regional government levels to advance the land ownership transformation process.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   During the last Bank mission of November 2020, the financial management (FM) performance was rated
   Moderately Satisfactory. The FM staff from both PMOs improved their skills and knowledge, particularly in
   preparing their project's annual work plans and budgets. Previously, these reports were submitted late, but
   during the 2020-2021 fiscal year, the PMOs submitted them on time. Payments to contractors and
   suppliers were handled correctly and efficiently. However, although MOEE agreed to conduct physical
   asset verifications once a year, no verifications took place throughout the project. The same applies to
   internal audits and inspections, as none were carried out for the project implementation activities.

   Procurement. Despite the initial implementation delay, the PMOs effectively managed procurement
   throughout the project by diligently overseeing contract management, maintaining effective communication
   with contractors and suppliers, and ensuring steady progress. These efforts persisted despite challenges
   posed by COVID-19. The November 2020 Bank mission rated procurement performance as satisfactory for
   both on-grid and off-grid components.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                    Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                      IEG
                                                                                    Disagreements/Comment
                                 Moderately
Outcome                                                   Moderately Satisfactory
                                 Satisfactory
Bank Performance                 Satisfactory             Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                   High                     High

Quality of ICR                   ---                      Substantial


12. Lessons


                                                                                                      Page 13 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Myanmar National Electrification Project (P152936)



The project’s implementation experience generated several lessons, which are summarized below:

The IDA Immediate Response Mechanism (IRM) deployment required capacity building for
the government and task team, and IRM procedures should be improved for future projects.
The GoM and task teams needed training and preparation support for IRM activation and
implementation, especially in procurement, safeguards, and fiduciary matters. World Bank
procedures limited the IRM to a specific disaster, thus hindering its use for broader disaster
prevention and preparedness. In fragile contexts like Myanmar, IDA should consider project-specific
Crisis and Emergency Risk Communication (CERC). Improving the procedures would enable more
flexible deployment of IRMs for enhanced disaster prevention and preparedness.

Making grid connection fees and internal wiring more affordable increased the adoption of
grid connection. Households and Village Electrification Committee (VECs) bear the costs of low-
voltage infrastructure and household connections. With IDA support, alleviating some of the burden
on VECs to secure their own financing could expand the main grid's reach into lower-income
communities. Connection costs remained a significant barrier for low-income households even in
electrified villages. Establishing mechanisms to support internal wiring and finance connection costs
over time (e.g., grid connection subsidy) accelerated the adoption of main grid electricity by lower-
income households and SMEs.

To ensure successful mini grid development at scale, a holistic approach is crucial, including
a suitable business model, enabling environment, planning, finance, Productive Use of
Energy (PUE), and government and developer capacity building. Under NEP, the private sector
selected sites for development, which proved attractive for private sector mini grid developers. The
project focused on creating an enabling environment and regulatory framework to attract private
investors. It emphasized the importance of productive uses of electricity for mini grid economic
viability. Future mini grid programs should explicitly support enabling environments and promote
financial viability. Moreover, strengthening local manufacturing capacity for key materials in grid
extension, such as electric poles and transformers, improved the sustainability of grid expansion and
reduced costs. International consultants and workshops helped local manufacturers learn global
standards and efficient operation modalities.

Combining public and private-led approaches involving grid, mini grid, and off-grid
technologies can effectively accelerate energy access in fragile countries. Myanmar's
experience shows that a hybrid approach requires well-defined scope, close coordination between
private and public entities, and coordination between different technologies. Leveraging all three
technologies and public sector-led approaches can target remote, less accessible unelectrified
villages in border or fragile states and areas with high poverty incidence and low electrification rates
where the private sector is less interested. Collaboration among the World Bank, IFC, and MIGA
enhances the success of energy projects. The Joint Implementation Plan facilitated comprehensive
electricity tariff reform and private sector involvement in power generation. Sharing information and
resources between the WB and IFC led to innovative off-grid solutions. MIGA's risk mitigation
increased sector attractiveness to foreign investors, contributing to universal electricity access in
Myanmar.

Close partnership and coordination among donors under the NEP are critical for achieving
scalable results. Partners supporting energy access in Myanmar include the Asian Development
Bank, Government of Italy, GIZ, KfW, AFD, JICA, and GEAPP. Design and implementation of future


                                                                                                     Page 14 of 16
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Myanmar National Electrification Project (P152936)



energy access projects should be coordinate among these partners. NEP played a pivotal role in
supporting this coordination, despite and limited resources.

More broadly, the project identified technical-level best practices and lessons learned that can
benefit the design of future energy access projects in Myanmar. These include early onboarding of
an independent verification agent, designing calls for proposals to balance speed and local private
sector growth, capacity building for participants and evaluators, updating tripartite agreements for
effective governance of mini grids, and improving modular mini grid designs. The testing of public
and private sector approaches for off-grid solar required coordination, public-private partnerships,
commitment to quality standards, and consideration of social inclusion aspects, which should be
carried forward into future projects.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The well-prepared ICR was clear, transparent, and strongly based on quantitative evidence without neglecting
qualitative aspects. It was drafted with a clear focus on achieving a high degree of accountability. It adhered
closely to the project’s theory of change (which had some minor weaknesses) and was therefore consistently
results-oriented. The ICR was also consistent with OPCS guidelines.

There were some shortcomings, however. It is too long at 36 pages for the main text, and repetitive in some
parts. It does not explain Moderately Satisfactory rating for outcome although it assigns ratings of High for
relevance and Substantial for both Efficacy and Efficiency (the implied reason is the mixed performance and
shortcomings in meeting grid connection targets). Rather, it applies what seems to be an incorrect method of
obtaining an average of the efficacy sub-ratings for the three components, which should be evaluated each on
their own merit.

While taking into account these shortcomings, the overall quality of the ICR is rated Substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                     Page 15 of 16
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
Myanmar National Electrification Project (P152936)




                                                                                  Page 16 of 16
