     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CARCIP-Nicaragua (P155235)



                                                                               Report Number: ICRR0023553

1. Project Data



 Project ID                               Project Name
 P155235                                  CARCIP-Nicaragua

 Country                                  Practice Area(Lead)
 Nicaragua                                Digital Development


 L/C/TF Number(s)                         Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-58950                                31-Jul-2022                                         20,100,000.00

 Bank Approval Date                       Closing Date (Actual)
 02-Aug-2016                              31-Jul-2022

                                          IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                         20,100,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                          20,100,000.00                                               0.00

 Actual                                      20,100,000.00                                               0.00




 Prepared by               Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Ranga Rajan               Avjeet Singh                 Avjeet Singh                   IEGSD (Unit 4)
 Krishnamani




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) as stated in the Financing Agreement (FA, Schedule 1, page 5)
   and in the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, page 7) is:

   " To increase access to regional broadband networks and to advance the development of the
   Information Technology / Information Technology-Enabled Services (IT/ITES) industry in Nicaragua
   and in the Caribbean region ".


                                                                                                Page 1 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CARCIP-Nicaragua (P155235)



   For this Implementation Completion Report Review (ICRR) the project objectives are taken to be:

   PDO 1. To increase access to regional broadband networks in Nicaragua.

   PDO 2. To advance the development of the IT/ITES industry in Nicaragua and in the Caribbean region.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   There were three components (FA, pages 5 - 6).

   1. Regional Connectivity Infrastructure. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$8.00 million. The actual
   cost was US$6.00 million. This component planned to expand the regional broadband network
   infrastructure including through deploying 225 kilometers (km) of fiber optic links and local wired and
   wireless networks.

   The activity associated with deploying fiber optic links was reduced to 115 km. At appraisal, the project
   expected to deploy 225 km of fiber optic link, which included an optic carrier link of 140 km in the northern
   Caribbean coast of Nicaragua. As the project became effective, the Government notified the Bank that
   building this fiber optic link was no longer necessary, as the National Electricity Transmission Company
   (ENATREL) was deploying it with funding from the Inter American Development Bank (IADB). Hence the
   project team modified the total to 115 km of fiber optic connecting the southeastern towns.

   2. T-Enabled Innovation. The estimated cost at appraisal and the actual cost was 12.10 million. This
   component had three sub-components.

   a. Enabling Environment. Activities in this subcomponent; Technical assistance (TA) and capacity building
   for; (i) participation of Nicaraguan Organizations in regional IT/ITES industry promotions; (ii) regional
   learning and knowledge exchange; (iii) operating an IT/ITES skill and certification program; and (iii) carrying
   out an analysis of different business models for IT/ITES certification.

   b. IT/ITES Skills Development and Certification Program. This subcomponent planned to support
   IT/ITES skills development and certification through learning courses.

   c. Information and Communication Technology (ICT) Innovation Ecosystem. This subcomponent
   planned to promote the nascent ICT innovation ecosystem through; (i) designing and implementing an
   industry-university collaboration platform; and (ii) promoting communities of entrepreneurs.

   3. Implementation Support. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$2.60 million. The actual cost was
   US$2.00 million. This component planned to support the Project Coordination Unit (PCU) on; (i)
   implementation, monitoring and evaluation (M&E) and conducting audits; (ii) designing and implementing



                                                                                                     Page 2 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CARCIP-Nicaragua (P155235)



   strategies and other dissemination tools to inform project stakeholders; (iii) carrying out impact evaluation
   surveys to evaluate project impacts and capacity building of relevant policy and regulatory institutions.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project cost. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$22.70 million. The actual cost was US$20.10 million.

   Financing. The project was financed by an International Development Association (IDA) Credit of
   US$21.10 million. The credit was fully disbursed.

   Recipient contribution. Recipient contribution of US$2.60 million was planned at appraisal. There was no
   recipient contribution during implementation.

   Dates. The project was approved on August 2, 2016, became effective on February 2, 2017, and closed as
   scheduled on July 31, 2022.

   Other changes. The Bank supported the following main changes through a Level 2 restructuring on May
   22, 2020.

         Added the National Electricity Transmission Company (ENATREL) as an implementing agency. The
          procurement process for deploying 115 of fiber optic infrastructure under a Build, Own, and Operate
          scheme was voided. Two tenders were received for this link. One tender from ENTREL was
          disqualified as it was a government entity. The second from a private operator was disqualified as
          the financial bid was nearly 300% higher than the estimated value of the contract. Hence, ENTREL
          was added as the implementing agency for the fiber optic link. The new arrangement stipulated that
          ENATREL was not authorized to receive or manage IDA funds. Once the fiber optic link was
          installed, ENAREL was responsible for the commercialization of services from the new telecom
          infrastructure.
         Amended the Financing Agreement to reflect the implementation arrangement changes.
         As discussed in section 2d, the activity associated with deploying fiber optic links was reduced from
          225 to 115 km.

   The following change was made in June 2021.

         The project reallocated US$941,895 from component two to component one activity of deploying
          connectivity infrastructure. With only a year remaining until closure and a lack of Government
          funding as planned for this activity, the project team decided to focus on deploying infrastructure,
          which was yielding larger coverage than expected. The reallocation of resources led to dropping the
          component two activities to link trainees from the training program to potential employment
          opportunities.




3. Relevance of Objectives



                                                                                                     Page 3 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CARCIP-Nicaragua (P155235)



Rationale
Regional context. Small size and susceptibility to natural hazards are common challenges faced by
Nicaragua and other Caribbean countries. Given these challenges, these countries were seeking to sustain
growth through greater regional integration. This project in Nicaragua was part of the Caribbean Regional
Communications Infrastructure Program (CARCIP) series of projects (SOPs) aimed at building regional
broadband networks and developing regional IT/ITES industries in the participating countries.

Country sector context. Before appraisal since 2002, Nicaragua had taken steps towards liberalizing the
Information and Communication Technology (ICT) sector. The Government privatized the Nicaraguan
Telecommunications Company (ENTEL- the state-owned provider of telecom services), established the
Nicaraguan Institute for Telecommunications (TELECOR) as the sector regulator, and awarded licenses to
two new private operators. Despite these reforms, Nicaragua's telecom market had limited competition,
resulting in low coverage and high prices. Nicaragua had one of the lowest broadband penetration rates in
the Latin America and the Caribbean (LAC) region, with only 2.5% of fixed broadband penetration and 1.4%
of mobile broadband penetration. Nicaragua lacked adequate coverage of backbone and last-mile
networks, with most of them concentrated in the country's western regions, connecting the main cities and
leaving the rural areas underserved. Some of the challenges faced by the ICT sector included (i) lack of
access to regional broadband networks(ii) limited skills of ICT specialists; and (iii) underdeveloped business
environment. Increasing access to regional broadband networks, reducing prices of fixed broadband
services in low-income areas and developing the IT/ITES industry was important to the Government's
strategy for the ICT sector.

Government strategy. The PDOs were relevant to Nicaragua's National Human Development Plans
(NHDPs) for 2012 - 2016 and 2017 - 2022. The plans specifically highlighted the need to integrate the
Caribbean coast better with the rest of the country, including through the expansion of basic
telecommunications infrastructure. The plans also included a pledge to expand broadband penetration in
rural areas.

Bank strategy. The PDO is well-aligned with the Bank strategy for Nicaragua. At appraisal, the second
pillar of the Country Partnership Strategy (CPF) for 2013 -2017 underscored the need for " Increasing
competitiveness and Productivity. " This project also operationalized the Bank's 2016 World Development
Report "Digital Dividends." This report focused on the critical role of the internet in promoting economic
development.

The PDOs are well-aligned with the Bank's current Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for 2018 - 2022.
The PDO 1 of this project, which aimed to improve telecommunications infrastructure, is aligned with the
CPF's objective three of improving rural connectivity. The PDO 2 of this project aimed at advancing the
development of an IT/ITES industry is aligned with CPF's Objective 1 of improving learning conditions and
employability. The PDOs are well-aligned with the following Bank reports: (1). The COVID-19
Response paper. This report called for leveraging the use of ICTs to recover from the pandemic; (2). The
framework for supporting Green, Resilience, and Inclusive Development (GRID) called for supporting
investments that expanded coverage of digital connectivity; and (3). Pillar number four of the Global Crisis
Response Framework (GCRF) that articulated the need for strengthening digital infrastructure.

Bank experience. The Bank had implemented the first phase of the CARCIP program in Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines, Saint Lucia, and Grenada. The design of this project was tailored to Nicaragua's specific
needs while prioritizing regional actions. The project activities had ICT infrastructure investments and


                                                                                                    Page 4 of 15
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      CARCIP-Nicaragua (P155235)



               institutional strengthening activities for addressing these challenges that were important in the country
               context: (i) increasing broadband connectivity in underserved areas and promoting competition in the sector
               for affordability considerations; (ii) implementing policies and programs to improve the country's ICT sector
               skills; and (iii) promoting regional cooperation. The theory of change showing the causal links between the
               project activities, outputs, and the intended outcomes was logical (discussed in section 3).

               Overall, given the strong alignment of the PDO with the Regional, Government, and Bank strategy for
               Nicaragua, as well as the appropriate level of ambition, the relevance of the PDO is rated as High.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective

                             PDO 1. To increase access to regional broadband networks in Nicaragua.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of change. The theory of change underlying the PDO was that outputs such as expanding the
                             regional broadband network infrastructure (including fiber optic lines and local wired and wireless networks)
                             and TA activities aimed at facilitating Nicaraguan Organizations to participate in regional IT/ITES industry
                             promotions and regional learning and knowledge, were likely to aid in realizing of increasing access to
                             regional broadband and the long-term outcome of improving Nicaragua's competitiveness. The causal links
                             between project activities, outputs, and outcomes were logical, and the intended outcomes were monitorable.
                             The results framework assumes the following: Private sector participation in deploying broadband
                             infrastructure and the Government financially contributes to deploying the fiber optic networks.

                             Outputs (ICR pages 8 - 9 and 29 - 30).

                                        85 new locations were connected to the telecom infrastructure, exceeding the target of 44 locations.
                                         157,337 people benefitted from the deployment of telecom infrastructure (target 100,000). 60% of the
                                         beneficiaries were women (target 40%).
                                        115 kilometers (km) of deployed fiber optic infrastructure were built per the revised target (original
                                         target 225 km). The deployed optic infrastructure connected to the Central American
                                         Telecommunications Network (REDCA) and the regional submarine cable on the southeast coast of
                                         Nicaragua.
                                        Although the project planned to install 32 Base Transceiver Stations (BTS), by project closure, the
                                         private operator deployed 25 BTS with Fourth Generation Mobile Technology (4G) that were installed
                                         in sites that enabled coverage in rural communities that were geographically isolated.

                                                                                                                                  Page 5 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   CARCIP-Nicaragua (P155235)




      According to the national data, between 2019 and 2020, more than 3.2 million of mobile internet
       connections were added. The market penetration of internet mobile subscribers increased from
       35.63% of the population in 2018 to 46.46% in the second quarter of 2022.
      The project aided in launching a pilot program that connected 14 health centers and five elementary
       schools with dedicated broadband connection and training staff on digital literacy.
      The project subsidized two PPPs under a scheme of Build, Own, and Operate that required the private
       operator to provide mobile broadband service in selected locations in consultation with the
       communities while allowing the operator to choose the technology that met the specifications of each
       location.
      The first deployment of broadband connectivity by July 2019 helped support poor communities during
       the first months of the COVID-19 pandemic. Approximately 46,926 people in the connected
       communities benefitted from broadband access during 2020.

Outcomes.

The outputs described above were expected to increase the percentage of the population with access to
regional broadband networks.

      19.3% of the population had access to regional broadband networks when the project closed,
       exceeding the target of 14%. The selected areas in the Caribbean coast of Nicaragua where the
       project deployed infrastructure had zero broadband penetration before this project, with connectivity
       previously provided via older generation technologies that delivered basic telephone and short
       message services, and in some areas with no connectivity.

Efficacy of this PDO is rated as substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective

PDO 2. To advance the development of the IT/ITES industry in Nicaragua and in the Caribbean region.

Rationale
Theory of change. The theory of change underlying the PDO was that TA activities aimed at developing
IT/ITES skill and certification program and implementing an industry-university collaboration platform would
likely help in advancing the development of IT/ITES industries in Nicaragua and the Caribbean region. These
outcomes were likely to contribute to the long-term development outcome of promoting regional integration.
The causal links between project activities, outputs, and outcomes were logical. The intended outcomes were
monitorable. The results framework assumes enough collaboration between the public and private sectors to
implement the IT/ITES training and certification program.




                                                                                                 Page 6 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   CARCIP-Nicaragua (P155235)



Outputs (pages 9 - 10 and pages 30 - 33).

      The strategy to foster the IT/ITES in Nicaragua and in the Caribbean Region was launched as
         targeted. Per the ICR, this strategy served as a roadmap for all investment attraction actions carried
         out within the program's network.
        The project aided in designing a training scheme using multiple educational vendors, including
         international suppliers that offered internationally recognized certifications in English and technical and
         soft skills related to IT/ITES.
        Under the project, the broadband operator conducted ICT literacy to seven communities, including two
         indigenous communities.
        Using a replicable Open Innovation Methodology, the project established a network of nine Open
         Innovation centers to generate activities from conception through implementation and developing
         user-friendly Open Innovation Toolkits.
        25 events were organized to promote the IT/ITES industry and attract foreign direct investment in
         Nicaragua and the Caribbean (target 22).
        Three CARSIP countries had access to IT/ITES training as targeted. 7,887 people were trained (target
         5,500): 97 of the people trained were from other CARCIP countries, slightly short of the target of 120:
         45.30% of women were trained (target 40%).
        88 collaboration agreements were signed between the university and the firms under the innovation
         Ecosystem (target 50). 32 solutions were created under the innovation Ecosystem (target 30). 320
         open innovation events were held (target 25).

The activity linking trainees from the training program to potential employment opportunities was dropped.

Outcomes.

The outputs described above were to lead to the following outcomes: (i) the percentage of trainees certified
under the skills and training program; (ii) the number of services or applications created by the ICT innovation
Ecosystem activities; and (iii) the percentage of companies that reported satisfaction with the IT/ITES skills
training and certification program.

      84% of the trainees were certified under the skills and training program (target 70%). Certifications in
       English accounted for 37% of all certifications; 35% of certifications were on soft skills and 27% on
       technical skills. A trainee survey conducted at the end of the project documented that the certified
       trainees had a labor insertion of 53.58% and a 19% salary increase due to the certification program.
      63 services were created as a result of the ICT innovation ecosystem activities (target eight). These
       services included robotic solutions, the design of prototypes and simulations, virtual reality platforms,
       web design and mobile applications, and software design, among others. The ICR provides no
       reasons as to why the target was significantly exceeded.
      Based on a satisfaction survey of three IT companies, only 40% of the companies reported
       satisfaction with the IT/ITES training and certification program, short of the target of 65%. The ICR
       notes that the satisfaction survey had the participation of three IT companies out of the fifty firms that
       were initially expected to participate, which led to a potentially unreliable result. The small number of
       participants in the survey was due to the private sector’s decision to reduce their participation in
       activities due to the 2018 political crisis.



                                                                                                      Page 7 of 15
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               CARCIP-Nicaragua (P155235)




                                  The ICR notes that the project could have likely contributed towards the long-term outcomes of the
                                   increase in IT related jobs and ICR services exports during the project period, though without specific
                                   data pointing to these changes at the national level it is difficult to presume this is a likely result of the
                                   project.

                            The outcome indicators to measure this objective were relatively intermediate results oriented, and there were
                            no indicators to measure the regional dimension of the objective. While the outcome indicator of services
                            created as a result of the ICT innovation ecosystem activities was exceeded, the indicator on the satisfaction
                            survey was partially achieved and unreliable due to the small sample size of three IT companies. Given the
                            lack of adequate evidence to measure the regional aspect of the PDO as well as the satisfaction survey
                            outcome indicator, the efficacy of this PDO is rated as Modest.



                            Rating
                            Modest


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            While the objective of increasing access to the regional broadband Network in Nicaragua was substantially
                            achieved, there were shortcomings in achieving and monitoring the second aspect of the PDO, especially the
                            regional dimension. Overall, the efficacy is rated as substantial with moderate shortcomings.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   Financial analysis. A financial analysis was carried out using the same conceptual model for component one
   and two activities. These activities accounted for 90% of the project cost. The project benefits were assumed to
   come from (i) revenue to the Government from the corporate tax and Universal Service Fund Tax, both paid by
   private operators in charge of operating the broadband and (ii) income tax paid by individuals who participated in
   the ICT training and certification. The project costs were related to debt service costs to cover the Bank loan.

   The Net Present Value (NPV) at an eight percent discount rate at project closure was US$7.1 million compared
   to the ex-ante NPV of US$3.75 million. The ex-post NPV was greater due to (i) larger revenues from component
   one activity due to the project's higher penetration rate from deploying wireless broadband infrastructure. This
   would enable the private operators to generate larger profits and lead to higher corporate tax revenues to the
   Government, and (ii) a higher number of participants in the ICT training and certification program would result in
   a higher number of employed individuals and thus higher tax revenues. The ex-post Internal Rate of Return
   (IRR) of the connectivity infrastructure was 81%, far exceeding the ex-ante IRR of 19%. The actual and

                                                                                                                                    Page 8 of 15
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       CARCIP-Nicaragua (P155235)



expected returns differed due to the lower capital expenditure (CAPEX) and larger revenues from a greater
broadband penetration than expected at appraisal.

A qualitative analysis suggested that the project would yield higher economic returns than the financial benefits.
This was because the project would generate positive externalities including an overall improvement in the
economic prosperity of the population that received broadband services for the first time in remote communities
with high levels of poverty and social and economic exclusion, including two indigenous communities. The
project's improvements in the supply of skilled labor were also expected to bring positive externalities, as
estimates showed that for every person employed in the ICT sector, at least three new indirect jobs would be
created in the economy. Finally, the universities acquired new methodologies (such as open innovation) that
could be used after the project.

Operational and administrative issues during implementation. Borrower contribution that was planned at
appraisal did not materialize. This led to reallocating some portion of the Bank financing for infrastructure
investments. As a result, some TA activities were dropped from the project scope. There were some setbacks to
the collaboration between the public and ICT private sector in the wake of Nicaragua's socio-political crisis of
2018. Despite these factors which were beyond the project's control, most planned activities were completed,
with no extension of the project closing date.

Overall efficiency is rated as substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                 Rate Available?            Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     90.00
 Appraisal                                                 19.00
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     90.00
 ICR Estimate                                              81.00
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The relevance of the PDO to the Government strategy, the regional strategy, and the Bank strategy for
Nicaragua is rated as High. Overall efficacy is rated as substantial with moderate shortcomings since there were
shortcomings in achieving the second aspect of the PDO, including the lack of adequate monitoring of the
regional aspect of the PDO. Efficiency is rated as substantial.

Given the shortcomings in the achievement of the PDO, the overall outcome is rated as Moderately Satisfactory.


                                                                                                     Page 9 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      CARCIP-Nicaragua (P155235)




a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Government commitment. There is a low risk to the sustainability of development outcomes. The ICR (para
57) observed that reliable broadband connectivity and improved skilled labor remain critical to Nicaragua and
the Caribbean region and align with their aspirations of a vibrant digital economy. The ICR notes that after
the deployment of infrastructure, private operators have the incentives to continue operating broadband
access. The actions taken to improve skilled labor through innovation centers will likely continue for at least
three years after project closure as per the agreements signed by TELCOR and the
universities. Furthermore, the innovation kits and the methodologies in the participating countries are likely to
be used by the universities.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The Bank prepared this project based on the experiences from the previous Bank-financed regional and
  national ICT projects (CARSIP First Phase. Central African Backbone Project, Bangladesh Leveraging
  ICT Growth, Employment and Governance Project, and the Pacific Regional Connectivity Program). Key
  lessons incorporated in the design included (i) improving the policy and regulatory environment for
  facilitating PPP and (ii) tailoring the project design to the country context. The project design also ensured
  flexibility to adapt to changes during implementation, which proved to be crucial for the successful
  implementation of this project.

  The implementation arrangements made at the appraisal were appropriate. A Project Coordination Unit
  (PCU) created within the telecommunications and postal services regulator (TELECOR) was in charge of
  the day-to-day management of the project. TELECOR was a well-established entity with a solid,
  experienced Finance and Administrative team with experience implementing previous Bank-financed
  projects (PAD, page 43). The arrangements made at appraisal for safeguards and fiduciary compliance
  were appropriate (discussed in Section 10).

  The design addressed potential risks, given that the ICT sector was new in Nicaragua before the
  interventions. The mitigation measures were appropriate, as the risks identified at appraisal did not
  undermine the project's performance. The arrangements made at appraisal for safeguards and fiduciary
  compliance were appropriate (discussed in Section 10).

  There were minor shortcomings. Despite coordinating with the Inter American Development Bank (IDB),
  the Bank was unaware of the Government's decision to use IDB financing for deploying the link in the
  northern Caribbean coast of Nicaragua. This led to a reduction in project scope (discussed in section 2).


                                                                                                     Page 10 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CARCIP-Nicaragua (P155235)



  Also, the results framework could have been strengthened to monitor the regional aspect of the PDO
  adequately.

  Overall, the Bank performance at Quality at Entry is rated as satisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Eleven Implementation Status and Results Reports were filed over the project lifetime, implying twice a
 year Bank supervision. The ICR (para 55) notes that the implementation support missions included an
 adequate mix of specialists, including ICT, social development and environmental, M&E, and procurement
 specialists. The project team restructured the project to adjust activities to changing circumstances. For
 instance, recognizing the difficulty of mobilizing the private sector for the fiber optic rollout, the supervision
 team restructured the project to accommodate an additional implementing agency. Likewise, the team
 reduced the project scope once it was aware that the Government was financing an activity with IDB
 financing. The Bank conducted a Mid-Term Review (MTR) in August 2020 to identify gaps and take
 corrective measures. The ICR provides little information on the continuity of leadership during
 implementation.

 Overall, the quality of supervision is rated as satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The key outcome indicators were appropriate for monitoring project performance (discussed in section
 four). TELCOR was responsible for monitoring project performance through data to be provided by telecom
 operators on an annual basis. A survey financed under the project was to be conducted to measure the
 satisfaction of ICT companies with the project activity of skills development and certification.

 There was one shortcoming with the M&E framework. The indicators devised in the results framework
 focused only on benefits generated in Nicaragua. The M&E was limited to the country level, as there were
 no indicators reflecting the regional nature of the project.



                                                                                                        Page 11 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CARCIP-Nicaragua (P155235)




b. M&E Implementation
  The ICR (para 47) observed that most data relating to the results framework indicators was collected and
  analyzed adequately. After the change in scope for the deployment of fiber optic infrastructure, the team
  adjusted the number of km of fiber optic from 255 km to 115 km to reflect the new output-level scope of
  component one activity. There was one shortcoming. The project received less data than expected
  relating to the PDO 2 indicator that aimed to measure the ICT companies' satisfaction rate with regard to
  the training and certification program. This was partly due to the socio-political crisis in Nicaragua.



c. M&E Utilization
  The M&E data was utilized to periodically assess the project process. Quarterly reports were held and a
  satisfaction survey was conducted as planned. The data was used during the Mid-Term Review (MTR)
  to identify gaps and taking corrective actions.

  Overall M&E is rated as substantial with some shortcomings.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as a Category B (Partial Assessment) project under the World Bank safeguard
   policies: Five safeguard policies were triggered at appraisal: (i) Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01);
   (ii) Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04); (iii) Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11); (iv) Indigenous Peoples
   (OP/BP 4.11) and (v) Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12). (PAD, pages vii and viii).

   Environmental Assessment, Natural Habitats and Physical Cultural Resources. These safeguards
   were triggered given the potential environmental impact of activities relating to building infrastructure
   (construction of fiber optic and transmission towers). For example, the construction of fiber optic could affect
   the environment, and during excavation affect physical, cultural, or archeological sites, or cut across
   national parks and protected areas. The adverse impacts were, however expected to be minor and
   reversible. Since the specific locations of sub-projects were not known at appraisal, an Environmental and
   Social Management Framework (ESMF) was prepared and publicly disclosed at appraisal to address the
   potential impacts (PAD, page 61). The ICR (para 50) noted that the ESMF was implemented at a high
   standard and followed the World Bank policies.

   Indigenous Peoples and Involuntary Resettlement. The PAD (page 61) observed that the indigenous
   people safeguard people was triggered due to the presence of indigenous peoples in project areas. The
   construction of communication towers and optical fibers could potentially affect the right of way, requiring
   people to move physically. Since specific locations were not known at appraisal, an Indigenous Peoples

                                                                                                    Page 12 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CARCIP-Nicaragua (P155235)



   Planning Framework (IPPF) and Resettlement Policy Framework (RPP) were prepared and publicly
   disclosed at appraisal (PAD, page 31). The ICR (page 50) noted that the project complied with these
   safeguards. The Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) was implemented in accordance with the ESMF.
   No complaints were received during implementation.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management. The Bank conducted a financial management assessment of TELCOR at
   appraisal. TELCOR had a Finance and Administrative team with experience in implementing Bank-
   financed projects. The assessment concluded that TELCOR's financial management arrangements were
   adequate, and the financial risk was rated moderate (PAD, page 44). The ICR (para 51) noted no financial
   management issues during implementation. The project hired an External Auditor to conduct audits. All
   audits were unqualified.

   Procurement. The Bank conducted a procurement assessment of TELCOR at appraisal. This assessment
   concluded that the procurement risk was moderate. The ICR (para 51) noted no procurement issues during
   implementation.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   Although unintended at appraisal, the IT/ITES certification program identified that since some indigenous
   communities did not have access to IT/ITES knowledge due to the language barrier, the program was
   tailored to their respective languages. This benefitted people from five ethnic groups.



d. Other
   Not applicable.



11. Ratings
                                                                               Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                    IEG
                                                                               Disagreements/Comment
                                                                               There were moderate
                                                                               shortcomings in the
Outcome                        Satisfactory          Moderately Satisfactory
                                                                               achievement of the second
                                                                               objective.
Bank Performance               Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                 Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                 ---                   Substantial

                                                                                                 Page 13 of 15
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       CARCIP-Nicaragua (P155235)




12. Lessons

The ICR draws the following three main lessons from the experience of implementing this project,
with some adaptation of language.

1. A long-term engagement may be required for projects with a regional dimension. While this
project showed progress on the ground after six years of implementation, the IT/ITES sector
continued to face challenges in Nicaragua. While a regional approach can benefit small states, these
engagements may require ongoing technical assistance, technical and implementation capacity
building, and funding to continue operations for an extended length of time, particularly in countries
with limited implementation capacities.

2. A flexible approach to training courses, vendors, and schemes may increase the potential
for success. The approach followed in this project for implementing the Training and Certification
Program increased the coverage and impact. This was partly due to the mix of providers, local and
international.

3. Further research by the Bank can help in measuring the progress of the IT/ITES sector in
the digital economy. This project faced challenges when measuring the progress of the IT/ITES
sector due to the absence of IT/ITES data at the country level. The opted alternative, to measure the
satisfaction rate expressed by the ICT companies, left out the opinion of online freelancers and
program graduates. Further Bank research could help develop different indicators for these types of
activities.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is clear, candid, and well-written. The theory of change articulated in the text clearly articulates the
causal links between the project activities, outputs, and the intended outcomes. The evidence and analysis
provided in the text are adequate for assessing project performance. The ICR draws reasonably good lessons
from the experience of implementing this project. One minor shortcoming of the ICR is that the ICR Annex 3 on
project cost by components is incomplete. Overall, the quality of the ICR is rated as Substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                   Page 14 of 15
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
CARCIP-Nicaragua (P155235)




                                                                  Page 15 of 15
