     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DR Integrated Social Protect & Prom MST (P147213)



                                                                                   Report Number: ICRR0023439

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P147213                                     DR Integrated Social Protect & Prom MST

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Dominican Republic                          Social Protection & Jobs


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                 Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-84790                                 30-Mar-2019                                            74,389,353.93

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 12-Mar-2015                                20-Sep-2022

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                       Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                             75,000,000.00                                                0.00

 Revised Commitment                              74,389,353.93                                                0.00

 Actual                                          74,389,353.93                                                0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator           Group
 Judyth L. Twigg             Salim J. Habayeb             Eduardo Fernandez                IEGHC (Unit 2)
                                                          Maldonado




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Loan Agreement (p. 5), the project's objectives were "to improve access of the Borrower's
   poor citizens to an integrated package of social protection and promotion opportunities, including, in
   particular, human capital, enhanced employability, and housing improvements in Selected Provinces." The
   Project Appraisal Document (PAD, p. 5) contained the same objectives. The PAD (p. 5) specified that, in the
   context of this project, "promotion" referred broadly to a set of services that contribute to increasing the human
   capital of the poor and their livelihood opportunities.


                                                                                                     Page 1 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DR Integrated Social Protect & Prom MST (P147213)



   The "Selected Provinces" covered 14 of the country's 32 provinces, chosen based on their having the highest
   share of their populations categorized as extremely poor and/or the highest absolute numbers of households
   in extreme poverty.

   Some outcome targets were revised at a 2018 restructuring, reflecting a shift from covering only the extreme
   poor to coverage of both the moderately poor and extreme poor. The overall scope of the project remained
   the same. A split rating is not warranted for this assessment.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project contained three components:

   1. Integrated area-based social protection and pro-poor service delivery (appraisal: US$47.7 million;
   actual: US$42.7 million). PROSOLI (Progresando con Solidaridad) is a conditional cash transfer (CCT)
   program that includes a food security element tied to compliance with health conditions, and elements tied
   to education conditions covering basic education students (Incentivo a la Asistencia Escolar, ILAE) and
   middle and secondary education students (Bono Estudiantil Estudiando Progreso, BEEP). Building on
   PROSOLI, this component was to support three activities:

   Bridging CCT coverage gaps for eligible extremely poor PROSOLI households would, using an output-
   based disbursement approach, incentivize the Social Cabinet, through PROSOLI, to implement key
   operating processes (enrollment, updating of household information, delivery of CCT payment cards,
   registration of children and households, database validation, and data entry) to increase PROSOLI's
   coverage of eligible extremely poor households, with a view to smoothing their consumption levels and
   increasing their use of education and health services. Similar process improvements were to promote the
   incorporation of eligible extremely poor households under PROSOLI into the subsidized health insurance
   program Seguro Nacional de Salud (SENASA).

   Increase access of extremely poor CCT users to housing improvements would complement the CCT
   contribution to human capital improvements through financing of minor housing improvements for extremely
   poor CCT users.

   Increase access of eligible CCT users to productive opportunities was aimed at increasing the employability
   of young women and men (ages 18-29) in extremely poor and moderately poor PROSOLI households
   through the carrying out of technical, vocational, and life skills training courses and provision of
   apprenticeships, and the carrying out of periodic diagnostics of employers' training needs and training for
   eligible training providers.

   At a 2018 restructuring, this component was expanded to include the moderate poor in addition to the
   extreme poor, to reflect both challenges the project was experiencing reaching the extreme poor and efforts
   of the Social Cabinet to close gaps for the moderate poor given their high vulnerability to shocks. In

                                                                                                  Page 2 of 19
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  DR Integrated Social Protect & Prom MST (P147213)



addition, entrepreneurship courses were added to the interventions for PROSOLI youth, to reflect the needs
of local labor markets. It is noteworthy that, with the addition of the moderate poor as beneficiaries, this
restructuring significantly lowered the expected numbers of previously uncovered extreme poor to be newly
enrolled in health and education programs (reflected in intermediate outcome indicators for numbers of
enrolled beneficiary households).

2. Strengthening of the PROSOLI CCT program and support to targeted households (appraisal:
US$8.9 million; actual US$9.82 million). This component was to strengthen PROSOLI's operational
processes and its capacity to effectively link targeted households to newly available opportunities and
services in selected provinces through three main activities:

Strengthening of the PROSOLI CCT program's field-based coordination, operational processes, and
assistance to households would consolidate the decentralized operating structure of PROSOLI; strengthen
the capacity of Municipal Coordination Committees and the CCT Regional Inter-institutional Technical
Committees to coordinate and solve problems; and strengthen direct assistance, coaching, and follow-up
with households.

Improving users' orientation and feedback mechanisms would expand the number of one-stop service
points and strengthen their role, and finance the extension of Community Report Cards (CRCs) to the 14
prioritized provinces and the automation of their processes.

Strengthening inter-connectivity of information management systems would fund technical assistance and
technological infrastructure to strengthen inter-connectivity between information management systems of
the major providers under the project (PROSOLI, the Social Subsidies Administration Unit, the Single
Beneficiary Selection System [Sistema Único de Beneficiarios,SIUBEN], SENASA, and the National
Institute for Professional Technical Training).

At the 2018 restructuring, activities were added to this component to enhance focus on virtual one-stop
service offices. At a March 2022 restructuring, additional activities were added to cover updates of
PROSOLI beneficiary information and modernization of the CCT program in line with priorities of the new
government that had taken office in 2020.

3. Enhancing equity and results orientation (appraisal: US$16.95 million; actual US$22.3 million). This
component was to complement targeted interventions at the territorial level with institutional strengthening
at the national policy level to sustain progress in the building blocks of the social protection system. It was to
focus on four main activities:

Strengthening SIUBEN's targeting instrument would update the SIUBEN database through a Third Socio-
Economic Survey and strengthen SIUBEN as an information provider for social policy decision making.

Enhancing results orientation would support the design of a process evaluation and impact evaluation for
the territorial integrated social protection strategy, a series of activities to strengthen evidence-based policy
making within the Social Cabinet, and activities to introduce more results-oriented planning, budgeting, and
execution of social spending within the whole Cabinet.

Promoting innovation and policy development would support a flexible set of technical assistance and
capacity building activities to inform social protection debates and reform in the country.



                                                                                                    Page 3 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DR Integrated Social Protect & Prom MST (P147213)



   Support to project coordination and implementation would strengthen the technical-administrative areas of
   the project's implementation unit, the Unidad Técnica de Projectos (UTP), and finance the financial audit,
   information technology equipment, training, and operating expenses.

   At the 2018 restructuring, activities were added to generate evidence on prevention of gender-based
   violence. At the 2022 restructuring, additional activities were added to incorporate data from COVID-19
   response program beneficiaries, and to support the development and validation of a strategy to transform
   SIUBEN into a national social registry.




e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   The project was to be financed by a US$75 million loan from the International Bank for Reconstruction and
   Development. Its budget at appraisal included US$1.27 million in unallocated funds and a US$0.1875
   million front-end fee. Actual costs were US$74.4 million, including US$0.18 million for the front-end fee.

   The project was approved on March 12, 2015 and became effective on October 28, 2015. Its mid-term
   review was held in March 2018. It underwent three restructurings:

         August 30, 2018: Revision of one outcome indicator and two intermediate results indicators (and
          baselines and targets) to reflect the incorporation of the moderate poor as beneficiaries; revision of
          components as outlined above; reallocation of funds; and extension of the closing date.
         August 12, 2020: Extension of the closing date.
         March 15, 2022: Revision of components as outlined above; reallocation of funds; and extension of
          the closing date.

   The project closed on September 20, 2022, 3.5 years later than its original closing date.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The objectives were highly relevant to country context and to government strategy. At appraisal,
extreme poverty in the Dominican Republic (DR) was high (9.5 percent) in comparison with the Latin
America and Caribbean Region average of 4.3 percent. In addition, there were high income disparities in
terms of human capital and employment outcomes. Only 41 percent of children ages 3-5 years in the
poorest quintile attended pre-primary school, compared with 62 percent in the richest; and only 48 percent
of poor adolescents ages 14-18 years attended secondary school, compared with 62 percent of the
wealthiest. The poor were more heavily represented in the informal sector, with 75 percent of employed
individuals in the poorest quintile working in the informal sector, compared to 46 percent in the richest.

To address these inequities, the DR had established social protection systems in the decade preceding the
project. The government, through its Social Cabinet (the institutional entity that coordinates and executes

                                                                                                    Page 4 of 19
                       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                       DR Integrated Social Protect & Prom MST (P147213)



social protection programs), reformed the CCT program in 2008, renaming it PROSOLI (Progresando con
Solidaridad) and making it truly conditional by linking transfers with fulfillment and verification of health and
education responsibilities. Both World Bank and Inter-American Development Bank (IADB) assessments
linked the PROSOLI system to poverty reduction and improved health and education outcomes. The
government also institutionalized a transparent targeting system, the SIUBEN, to classify households into
poverty levels based on geographic and household data. SIUBEN is used to target the CCT program,
SENASA, and fuel and electricity subsidies.

Just prior to the project, the President of the DR had declared a goal of lifting 400,000 households out of
extreme poverty and reducing overall poverty. To achieve this goal, several challenges had to be
addressed: (i) improving PROSOLI coverage of extremely poor households, focusing on households in the
country's 14 poorest provinces who lacked documentation or whose coverage was negatively affected by
financing gaps or lack of special attention required to capture hard-to-reach households; (ii) tailoring of
PROSOLI service provision to the different needs of households experiencing moderate versus extreme
poverty; (iii) focusing on unmet housing needs, with 27 of households in project provinces suffering from
overcrowding and 28.8 percent living in structures with dirt floors; (iv) developing an integrated area-based
service delivery approach for PROSOLI that would respond more effectively to regional disparities, focusing
on provinces with the highest levels of poverty and deficiencies in basic service provision; (v) adjusting both
the supply and demand sides of the CCT program, strengthening operations processes, increasing the
capacity of regional CCT structures, and increasing users' involvement and feedback loops, to facilitate
implementation of the integrated area-based service delivery strategy; and (vi) consolidating ongoing
advances in targeting and efficiency of pro-poor social spending, with a focus on results-oriented
management, in particular through updating the SIUBEN database. The government incorporated these
approaches into its 2014 Progresandos Unidos strategy to reduce extreme poverty, which included an area-
based service provision initiative in the 14 poorest provinces connecting extremely poor CCT users to an
additional package of productive activities and housing improvements.

The project's objectives were also highly relevant to World Bank strategy at the time of project
appraisal and at closing. The Country Partnership Strategy at appraisal (FY2015-19) contained a
strategic results area on strengthening social service delivery, with an outcome to improve social protection
coverage of, and support to, extremely poor households in high poverty provinces. The 2018 Performance
and Learning Review for this CPS consolidated its results areas into three pillars, one of which was
improving service delivery for the poor, with objectives to increase social protection coverage and increase
access to basic service delivery in the poorest communities. Elections in the DR in 2020 delayed the
development of the next Bank strategy. The current Country Partnership Framework (FY2022-26) supports
a high-level outcome on improved access to quality public service delivery, with an objective on enhanced
coverage and quality of health and safety nets. It highlights a revamping of PROSOLI in 2021 that
enhances linkage of CCT beneficiaries to economic inclusion opportunities.

The project was appropriately situated in a context of longer-term Bank engagement in social
assistance and youth employment in the DR, which had, since 2009, included a development policy
financing series to overhaul the CCT program; a social protection investment project that provided
documentation for the extreme poor, updated the second SIUBEN census in 2011-12, and piloted CCT
CRCs; and a youth development project that promoted good practices for youth training.


Rating Relevance TBL




Rating

                                                                                                         Page 5 of 19
                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                      DR Integrated Social Protect & Prom MST (P147213)



               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                OBJECTIVE 1
                Objective
                Improve access of the Borrower's poor citizens to an integrated package of social protection and promotion
                opportunities that enhance human capital in Selected Provinces

                Rationale
                The project's overarching theory of change, applicable to all its objectives, held that rehabilitating and
                equipping CCT one-stop service points would lead to strengthening of those points; strengthening inter-
                connectivity between information management systems of CCT providers would lead to improved data
                exchange; conducting of a survey of update SIUBEN data and revising the SIUBEN targeting instrument
                would lead to updating of information in SIUBEN 3 and improvement in the targeting mechanism; the
                implementation of CRCs and carrying out of evaluations would lead to availability of improved information on
                program implementation and effectiveness; and development of modules for integrated M&E and training of
                Social Cabinet staff would lead to improved staff capacity to apply M&E instruments. Taken together, these
                changes would lead to improved PROSOLI CCT processes, contributing to improved access of the poor to
                social protection and promotion opportunities that would enhance their human capital (health and education
                services), employability, and housing.

                In addition to these activities, training of PROSOLI staff on enrollment and referrals, and incentivizing their
                implementation of improved operating processes, would lead to an increase in the number of households
                accessing CCT cash transfers, and in the number of CCT members accessing ILAE, BEEP, and SENASA.
                These changes, in turn, would increase utilization of health and education services, enhancing human capital
                in the project provinces. This theory of change assumed continued political support for the CCT program. It
                also rested on assumptions about capacity to reach the extreme poor that turned out to be invalid, requiring
                adjustments of the target population to include the moderately poor in order to reach coverage targets.



                Outputs applicable across the entire project

                86.29 percent of PROSOLI field staff were trained on the new integrated territorial intervention strategy in
                project provinces, exceeding the target of 85 percent. This represented 1,294 field staff.

                A technological platform for information exchange between SIUBEN and other public institutions was
                developed and implemented, meeting the target.

                Four modules of an Integrated Monitoring and Evaluation System (SIME) were developed and made
                functional, meeting the target. These SIME modules are now used to prepare sectoral reports and annual



                                                                                                                   Page 6 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   DR Integrated Social Protect & Prom MST (P147213)



sector planning documents. Nine Social Cabinet entities were trained on and applied instruments to assess
the performance of priority social protection programs, meeting the target.

A customer relations management system was developed and made functional, meeting the target. 39 one-
stop service points (including those on virtual platforms) were equipped and made functional in project
provinces, meeting the revised target of 39 but not the original target of 70 service points. Four community
report card cycles were implemented in project provinces, meeting the target of four cycles.



Outputs and intermediate outcomes specific to human capital development

The percentage of household members categorized as extremely poor or moderately poor who were
identified and incorporated by PROSOLI into the ILAE (basic education) program in project provinces
increased from 88 percent in 2014 to 99.59 percent in 2022, exceeding the original target of 83 percent and
the revised target of 98 percent. This represented incorporation of 144,651 children (63,304 extremely poor
and 81,347 moderately poor), exceeding the original target of 71,909 total children and the revised target of
129,671 children (47,214 extremely poor and 82,457 moderately poor). However, the original target for
incorporation of extremely poor children (71,909, as the original project covered only the extremely poor) was
not met, nor was the revised target for moderately poor children.

The percentage of household members categorized as extremely poor or moderately poor who were
identified and incorporated into the BEEP (middle and secondary education) program in project provinces
increased from 90 percent in 2014 to 100.42 percent in 2022, exceeding the original target of 86 percent and
the revised target of 95 percent. This represented incorporation of 128,018 children (27,614 extremely poor
and 100,404 moderately poor), exceeding the original target of 33,623 total children and the revised target of
63,917 children (17,434 extremely poor and 46,683 moderately poor). However, the original target for
incorporation of extremely poor children (33,623, as the original project covered only the extremely poor) was
not met. The overachievement overall (doubling the target) is explained by a restructuring of the education
system in 2019, when two grade levels were moved from basic to middle and secondary education,
increasing the pool of children eligible for BEEP.

The percentage of household members categorized as extremely poor or moderately poor who were newly
incorporated by SENASA reached 101 percent, exceeding the original target of 60 percent and the revised
target of 100 percent. This represented incorporation of 151,533 household members, not meeting the
original target of 229,900 extremely poor household members, but exceeding the revised target of 150,000
(97,768 extremely poor and 52,232 moderately poor).

The ICR (p. 28) noted that updated information in SIUBEN 3 (collected through 2018) was not used by the
CCT, such that households who exceeded the eligibility threshold and should have been exited from the
program were included. The Borrower's ICR (ICR, p. 67) noted that "in 2022, SIUBEN 3 remains 'unused,"
although it was mostly built in 2018," a situation described as "incomprehensible and inadequate." Neither the
normative and institutional framework of the targeting mechanism nor the project itself required social
programs to use updated targeting data. According to the Borrower's ICR (p. 67), this is one of the reasons
the project lacked mechanisms to prioritize or pay greater proportional attention to households and people
living in extreme poverty.



                                                                                                 Page 7 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   DR Integrated Social Protect & Prom MST (P147213)




Outcomes

The percentage of extremely and moderately poor households who are incorporated in CCT PROSOLI in the
project provinces increased from 90 percent in 2014 to 101.5 percent in 2022, exceeding the original target of
100 percent and the revised target (which incorporated moderately poor households) of 99.9 percent.
140,660 households (66,480 extreme poor and 74,180 moderately poor) were enrolled, exceeding the original
target of 60,669 extremely poor households and the revised target of 124,231 extremely poor and moderately
poor households (59,731 extreme poor and 64,500 moderately poor).

SIUBEN 3 registered 2.1 million households. Of these households, 1.1 million (61 percent) could be precisely
matched with households that were contained in SIUBEN 2, meeting the target that 60 percent of SIUBEN 2
households have their socio-economic situation updated based on SIUBEN 3 socio-economic categorization.

There were 1.97 million direct project beneficiaries, exceeding the original target of 1.34 million and the
revised target of 1.93 million direct beneficiaries. Of these, 50.85 percent were women, falling slightly short of
the target of 52 percent.

Although no information was presented in the ICR on actual fulfillment of health and education co-
responsibilities, the project team later provided additional findings from the project's impact evaluation. The
evaluation provides some evidence of increased use of education services among PROSOLI households
when compared to non-PROSOLI households. On use of education services, that evaluation notes that
children in PROSOLI participant households were four percentage points more likely to attend primary
schools and six percentage points more likely to attend secondary school than non-PROSOLI-households.
Youth ages 13-18 in moderately poor PROSOLI participant households were eleven percentage points more
likely to attend school than those in non-PROSOLI households.

However, the evidence is mixed with regard to health services. The evaluation noted that women in
PROSOLI-participant households reported having had Pap smears 3.9 months more recently than women in
non-PROSOLI households. The report also stated that PROSOLI participation had a positive effect on women
receiving mammograms, that PROSOLI enrollment led to higher levels of preventive health visits for children
under five and women for participants compared with non-participants, and that extremely poor PROSOLI
participants had a higher probability of having taken their children (3-6 years old) recently for a preventive
health visit, but importantly, no exact data were provided in the impact evaluation to support these findings.
The evaluation also found that PROSOLI participation had no effect on prenatal care or prostate exams.
According to the evaluation (Nota de Politicas, p. 7), only 33.9 percent of surveyed individuals with children
reported being asked to provide proof of meeting a health co-responsibility for their children.

Furthermore, the results from the impact evaluation were solely representative of urban areas (footnote 2 in
the Nota de Politicas stated that the clusters selected for evaluation were situated in urban areas and did not
fully represent the entire population). Finally, the Nota de Politicas stated that many of the reported positive
outcomes in the impact evaluation were only observed among those who received cash transfers along with
mentoring or monitoring from a volunteer or social workers, an observation that is not reflected in project
documents (including the ICR), but which suggests that cash transfers alone were not particularly effective
with respect to conditionalities (health or education).



                                                                                                    Page 8 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   DR Integrated Social Protect & Prom MST (P147213)



Although the project met or exceeded its targets for covering previously unenrolled poor beneficiaries in CCT
programs with health and education co-responsibilities, the ICR raised important questions about the
adequacy of the targeting mechanism used. The ICR did not address whether health and education service
delivery capacity was expanded to accommodate the increased demand that would have resulted from
increased enrollment in CCT programs, an issue that could have been particularly problematic for the
extreme poor, given the ICR's more general observations about limited service availability in the areas where
the extreme poor live. Furthermore, the incorporation of the moderately poor at project restructuring
(undertaken due to a policy change at the national level) reduced focus on the extreme poor, with challenges
in reaching the extreme poor including "somewhat cumbersome enrollment procedures and limited pro-active
outreach" (ICR, p. 16) and the limitations of the targeting mechanism. Overall, due to some evidence on
access to promotion activities that enhance human capital as a result of enrollment in CCT programs with
regard to education services, but significantly less convincing evidence on health services, and additional
questions about service delivery capacity and targeting, achievement of this objective is rated modest.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Improve access of the Borrower's poor citizens to an integrated package of social protection and promotion
opportunities that enhance employability in Selected Provinces

Rationale
The theory of change for this objective, in addition to the general interventions outlined under the first
objective, held that carrying out of labor market diagnostics, contracting of training courses, design of self-
employment support, and provision of training stipends would lead to completion by participants in training,
internships, self-employment support activities, and job search workshops. The completion of these trainings
and other activities would then lead to enhanced employability of participants. Other than provision of training
stipends, the theory of change did not address demand-side interventions that would encourage potential
beneficiaries to enroll in these courses and trainings. It also rested on the unsound assumption that wage
employment would be available in poor rural areas.



Outputs and intermediate outcomes

A package of vocational training course, including internships, was offered. During implementation, as it was
recognized that wage employment opportunities were limited in some of the project areas, support for self-
employment (entrepreneurship) courses was added, though the ICR (p. 23) noted that these new courses
covered only training and not other elements of a complete entrepreneurship package (coaching and access
to financing).

88 percent of participants from PROSOLI households who began a vocational training cycle finished the
cycle, exceeding the target of 60 percent. This represented 30,756 finishers of 34,942 who participated in at
least one part of the training cycle. These numbers of beneficiaries of vocational training exceeded the

                                                                                                   Page 9 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   DR Integrated Social Protect & Prom MST (P147213)



revised target of 30,000 beneficiaries of training, but not the original target of 40,000. The ICR (p. 17)
explained that the target was decreased due to implementation delays.

71 percent of vocational training participants were women, exceeding the target of 50 percent.



Outcomes

The objective was framed in terms of access to opportunities that would enhance employability, rather than
increased employment itself. The ICR reported on the impact evaluation's findings suggesting positive
impacts of the project on employability, including higher salaries and scores on hard skills tests, and more
intensive job search and readiness. The specific results of that impact evaluation were not provided in the
ICR, but the project team later provided additional data: those who received training under the project scored
higher than a control group on hard skills tests (math, reading, and technical skills); had higher-quality
curricula vitae, job search intensity, and confidence in obtaining a job in the short run; and received higher
salaries in the month preceding the interview. Moreover, these results persisted and, in some cases,
improved over time, suggesting sustainability of improved employability results in the medium-term.

Employment outcomes, which were at a higher level than the stated objective, were not observed. The
employment rate of PROSOLI participants who received vocational training through the project was not
statistically different from the employment rate of a control group, not meeting the target of a 10 percent
benefit for the treatment group. For this reason, the ICR (p. 16) noted that the objective was "partially
achieved." The ICR (p. 17) offered an explanation for the employment results (p. 17): "these findings suggest
that the trained youth were more selective in accepting employment [affecting the employment rate] but once
working earned a higher salary."

There were some design shortcomings with this objective. The assumption that wage employment would be
readily available in impoverished rural areas was flawed. When this shortcoming was identified during
implementation, the project introduced self-employment courses, but these courses alone proved to be
insufficient, as they were not accompanied by a comprehensive entrepreneurship package that included
coaching and access to financing. Nonetheless, the impact evaluation demonstrated a project-supported
increase in access to opportunities that enhanced employability. Achievement of this objective is therefore
rated substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
Improve access of the Borrower's poor citizens to an integrated package of social protection and promotion
opportunities that improve housing in Selected Provinces

Rationale


                                                                                                    Page 10 of 19
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                DR Integrated Social Protect & Prom MST (P147213)



                            The theory of change for this objective held that contracting floor replacements would lead to the installation
                            of new cement floors in the houses of the extreme poor, leading to improve housing for the
                            included beneficiaries. The theory of change did not address demand-side interventions that would
                            encourage potential beneficiaries to seek access to housing improvements.



                            Outputs and intermediate outcomes

                            A program to improve housing by replacing dirt floors with cement floors in extremely poor households was
                            delivered. According to the impact evaluation, 80 percent of households receiving floor replacement reported
                            an improvement in living conditions, meeting the target. Although this indicator on reported improved living
                            conditions was included in the project's results framework as an intermediate outcome, it actually represents
                            a longer-term outcome beyond the scope of the project's objectives.



                            Outcomes

                            84.7 percent of extremely poor PROSOLI users in project provinces had dirt floors replaced by cement floors,
                            surpassing the target of 70 percent. This represented replacement of floors for 9,072 households, exceeding
                            the target of 7,500 households and demonstrating access to improved housing.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            There was some evidence on access to promotion activities that enhance human capital as a result of
                            enrollment in CCT programs with regard to education services, but significantly less convincing evidence on
                            health services, and there were additional questions about service delivery capacity and targeting. Data from
                            the project's impact evaluation, provided by the project team, demonstrated a project-supported increase in
                            access to opportunities that enhance employability. The project substantially improved access of extremely
                            and moderately poor households in the 14 project provinces to opportunities to improve housing, as
                            evidenced by data on access to housing services. With the human capital objective rated modest and the
                            other two objectives rated substantial, overall efficacy is rated substantial.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial


                                                                                                                              Page 11 of 19
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       DR Integrated Social Protect & Prom MST (P147213)




 5. Efficiency
The efficiency analysis at appraisal (PAD, Annex 6, pp. 57-62) listed expected benefits from the project,
including improved household consumption; increased school enrollment, attendance, and completion; improved
health prevention through access to and use of health services; improved nutrition; and improved access to
skills enhancement opportunities that facilitate productive inclusion in the labor market. It noted, however, that a
full-fledged economic analysis was not possible due to limitations in quantifying many of these benefits in
monetary terms. Instead, it extrapolated from international and domestic evidence on the expected impacts and
cost-effectiveness of CCTs, housing, youth skills training, and user feedback mechanisms to indirectly assess
the costs and benefits of making the PROSOLI program more effective and efficient through a subset of the
activities supported under the project's first component. Informally (and without showing the explicit methodology
or calculations), it found an economic rate of return (ERR) for the project of 22 percent, with a net present value
of US$16 million, based on economic benefits from an increase in productivity and earnings due to additional
years of schooling and an increase in the primary and secondary education completion rate, and a 12 percent
discount rate. These findings assumed baseline salaries equivalent to the average wages of young workers with
primary education in the lowest four income deciles, and an increase in the total years of completed schooling of
one full year due to the project, and 12 and 15 annual cohorts needed before full benefits accrue linked to
primary and secondary education impacts, respectively. Sensitivity analysis indicated that this ERR was robust
to a project impact of just 0.4 years of completed schooling and pre-project hourly wages of less than one-third
of minimum wage.

The ICR's economic analysis updated that of the PAD, using the same assumptions and methodology but
expanding it to include the project's entire first component (about 57 percent of actual project costs). It found
an NPV of US$53.17 million. This result was robust to a range of assumptions and sensitivity checks, including
variance of the discount rate to 3 percent and 15 percent. Breaking down the benefits by subcomponent, the
closure of CCT coverage gaps and provision of youth training opportunities showed positive economic results,
but the return from replacement of floors was negative, at least in the short term. Over time, according to the
ICR (p. 19), it is likely that the new floors will yield positive net benefits once health and other longer-term effects
(such as reduced school and work absenteeism) materialize.

There were significant implementation inefficiencies. Delays totaling 3.5 years stemmed from insufficiently
defined activities and investments at appraisal, government administration transitions, staff turnover in the
project implementation units, and lengthy procurements. Overall, the project was not ready to launch at
approval, with significant preparatory work and capacity development having to take place over its initial two
years (see Section 8a). Although many of the initial challenges were addressed at the 2018 restructuring,
coordination challenges remained across the project's lifetime, limiting the extent to which the CCT program
developed a truly institutionally integrated approach with harmonized operational processes (ICR, p. 22). The
COVID-19 pandemic temporarily halted some project activities (floor replacements, training, impact evaluation
surveys) and prompted the revamping of some youth training to virtual platforms.

Furthermore, the project's interventions did not represent the least-cost approach:

      SIUBEN III data were not fully used. The SIUBEN III update is described in the Borrower's ICR (ICR, p.
       67, para. 32) as a "highly complex and costly task," observing that it is "incomprehensible and
       inadequate" that the project incorporated households based on SIUBEN 2 through 2020. Significant
       resources were expended on developing an instrument/data that were not fully used.
      The interventions were not fully pro-poor, with the incorporation of the moderately poor as a target group.

                                                                                                         Page 12 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      DR Integrated Social Protect & Prom MST (P147213)



      The interventions used a "too extensive" territorial approach to reaching the extreme poor (Borrower's
       ICR, pp. 67-68, para. 34), which stretched resources over a vast geographic area, "did not consider the
       difference in geographic contexts," and "did not have interventions or adjustments in operations of
       services for densely populated urban areas vs. rural areas with high population dispersion."
      Implementation was overly complex, encompassing a wide range of actors without taking into account
       the learning curve for new activities, further exacerbating inadequate preparation and insufficient risk
       mitigation (ICR, pp. 21-22, para. 42).

Given the opportunity costs associated with extended initial delays and, more importantly, significant
implementation inefficiencies across the project's lifetime, project efficiency is rated modest.




Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     2.72
 Appraisal                                                 22.00
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     0
 ICR Estimate                                               0
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The project's objectives were highly relevant to country context, Bank strategy, and government strategy, and
they were appropriately situated within the Bank's ongoing engagement program in the country. There was
some evidence on access to promotion activities that enhance human capital as a result of enrollment in CCT
programs with regard to education services, but significantly less convincing evidence on health services, and
there were additional questions about service delivery capacity and targeting. Achievement of the human capital
objective is therefore rated modest. Data from the project's impact evaluation, provided by the project team,
demonstrated a project-supported increase in access to opportunities that enhance employability. The project
substantially improved access of extremely and moderately poor households in the 14 project provinces to
opportunities to improve housing, as evidenced by data on access to housing services. Project efficiency is
rated modest, despite analysis demonstrating positive economic benefits, because of significant implementation
inefficiencies. These ratings indicate that there were moderate shortcomings in the project's preparation,
implementation, and achievement, producing an overall Outcome rating of Moderately Satisfactory.




                                                                                                    Page 13 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      DR Integrated Social Protect & Prom MST (P147213)



a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Government commitment to continued strengthening of the social protection system is strong. In 2021, the
newly elected administration carried out an institutional reform of the system to reduce fragmentation and
improve coordination between various social programs, including the main cash transfer scheme. The new
system entails a larger set of transfers comprising CCT based on fulfilling co-responsibilities in education and
health, unconditional cash transfers for emergency response, economic inclusion services, and various
support services for households and individuals. Efforts to close coverage gaps continue, with a further
expansion planned for 2023 that prioritizes closing of coverage gaps for the extreme poor. The government
is transforming SIUBEN from a social registry to an Integrated Social Protection Information System
(SIUBEN+) and expanding its coverage; the project supported the design and validation of the strategy to
support this transformation. The Board approved a follow-on project in May 2023, the Integrated Social
Protection Inclusion and Resilience project (P179440, US$100 million, 2023-2028), with objectives to
increase the efficiency of integrated social protection services and to promote economic inclusion and
access to shock-responsive assistance, including climate shocks, for the poor and extreme poor. However,
some ongoing risk is posed by the project's reliance (especially in the UTP) on consultants who "might not
continue in the operational structure of the Social Cabinet" (ICR, p. 68).




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  Project design learned key lessons from other multi-sector lending operations in the DR, including the
  need for strong government ownership and community participation; the need to align the strategic
  interests of the social sector ministries and the ministries of economy and finance; the value of
  demonstration effects, where the success of innovations piloted in one area can facilitate scale-up in
  others, even in conditions of political volatility; and the need to take a selective approach to service
  improvement activities, given the relatively poor performance of public works in the country (hence, the
  focus on a single type of housing improvement rather than a full-range housing program). The project
  also built on experience in Colombia, Chile, Brazil, and the Philippines with supporting the development
  of a multi-service delivery platform for extremely poor households using a targeted social protection
  program as an entry point.

  Risk assessment at appraisal (PAD, Annex 4, pp. 50-53) identified substantial risk overall, with specific
  substantial risks including: (i) capacity, with the UTP challenged by managing four ongoing loans from
  IADB in addition to this project, and some weaknesses demonstrated in a procurement assessment; (ii)
  design, with the incorporation of housing and vocational training activities potentially creating supervision
  and oversight challenges for the Social Cabinet; and (iii) delivery monitoring and sustainability,
  with PROSOLI's M&E capacity a source of concern as the scope of the project extended beyond
  traditional human capital CCT areas, and upcoming elections in 2016 held the potential for changes in
  policy direction. Mitigation measures covered inclusion of a project subcomponent on strengthening of

                                                                                                     Page 14 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DR Integrated Social Protect & Prom MST (P147213)



  the UTP; collaboration of PROSOLI teams with counterparts in other sectors to reinforce implementation
  of the integrated Progresando Unidos strategy; project investments in M&E; and the involvement of
  grass-roots stakeholders to create and sustain political pressure for continuity.

  However, there were significant shortcomings, including the inadequacy of some of the proposed risk
  mitigation strategies. Project design was complex and ambitious, requiring the Social Cabinet to
  undertake new activities involving a wide range of actors (private contractors, non-governmental
  organizations, and training providers, among others). In this context, the relatively short planned project
  duration and the expectation that some activities would start at scale during the project's first year did not
  adequately take into account required learning curves or standard delays prior to project effectiveness in
  the DR related to congressional approval. The project activities on SIUBEN strategy, instruments, and
  systems improvement (including interoperability) were under-designed, requiring extensive discussions
  after project approval. Project design overlooked the normative and institutional framework, funding
  SIUBEN 3 without a normative framework in place mandating its use, leading eventually to collected data
  being unused. There were also shortcomings in M&E design (see Section 9a). The theory of change for
  the second objective rested on an untenable assumption that wage employment was available in
  impoverished rural areas. Most importantly, project design did not adequately anticipate or prepare for
  challenges with reaching the poorest people in the poorest provinces, including identifying the most
  appropriate interventions and finding qualified local service providers. The risk of insufficient capacity to
  implement housing improvements and training activities was correctly identified at appraisal, but
  mitigation measures were insufficient to prevent significant delays in the completion of bidding processes
  in these areas. The UTP was not ready for the planned initial implementation pace of the training and
  housing improvement activities. The number and diversity of activities overall presented implementation
  and coordination challenges for which the project was unprepared. As a result, "many activities ended up
  operating as independent actions rather than contributing to an integrated approach and better
  operational processes for the CCT program" (ICR, p. 22). Subsequently, no process evaluation was
  conducted to review implementation of the integrated approach or recommend improvements. In this
  environment, the expected improved interoperability of the agencies involved in PROSOLI
  implementation and monitoring was limited narrowly to information technology; broader, more
  fundamental institutional coordination improvements were limited.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Bank supervision met expectations for implementation support visits and reporting, though reporting was
 "sometimes overly optimistic" about the speed of disbursements, delays caused by the transition to new
 governments, and other issues (ICR, pp. 23 and 27). Project activities began 18 months after Board
 approval due to delays in congressional approval of the project and the transition to a new administration
 that took office in August 2016. After the first restructuring in 2018, during which the Bank team and project
 staff took into account lessons learned during the initial delay, implementation accelerated. Required
 preparatory work (diagnostic labor market studies, preparation of bidding documents, training for non-
 governmental organizations bidding on floor replacement, contracting for SIUBEN 3, and others) was
 completed. The UTP developed capacity to implement multiple concurrent activities. Bidding processes
 were reorganized to consider geographic factors and the presence of local market providers. The project

                                                                                                     Page 15 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DR Integrated Social Protect & Prom MST (P147213)



 introduced support for self-employment to the training activities, given the low levels of salaried jobs in
 many areas, though these new activities were not comprehensive, lacking some key elements of a
 comprehensive entrepreneurship package (coaching and access to financing). Some additional delays
 recurred at various points during the life of the project due to UTP staffing issues, particularly with another
 change in administration in 2020, but in general implementation progressed more smoothly. While the task
 team leader (TTL) for the project changed, the handover was relatively seamless as the new TTL had been
 a team member. Appropriate expertise was mobilized across multiple areas of project implementation
 (housing, training, targeting, information system interoperability). There were occasional delays in
 payments to training providers and survey field workers, but these were resolved by 2020-2021 with
 contracting of additional support staff. The Bank team mobilized additional resources to strengthen the
 social protection system's shock adaptiveness with the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic and to support
 two impact evaluations.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The project's design embodied a clear theory of change, with outputs related to both overall social
 protection system strengthening and specific actions improving access for the poor to the three service
 areas covered in the project's objectives. Indicators were clearly defined, with data sources, baselines, and
 targets specified. However, the results framework lacked indicators on actual fulfillment of health and
 education co-responsibilities under the first objective, and on whether health and education service delivery
 capacity were expanded to accommodate increased demand. Furthermore, the formulation of some
 indicators as percentages made it difficult to understand the baseline and gauge the level of achievement,
 particularly when the project was restructured to include the moderate poor in addition to the extreme poor.

 UTP was responsible for centralizing the monitoring of the project's intermediate results and outcomes,
 with close liaison and support from the Social Cabinet's Unit for Monitoring and Evaluation. On the basis of
 data collected from individual agencies, UTP was to prepare and publish semi-annual progress reports.
 UTP was also to conduct surveys to track the employment status and income level of program graduates
 after completion of the PROSOLI Youth Employment Program. Comprehensive impact evaluations
 were planned.



b. M&E Implementation
  Overall, UTP prepared high-quality implementation reports semi-annually, as planned, and it benefited
  from consistent leadership by an M&E coordinator who remained the same over the life of the project.
  The project's M&E system generated adequate data of sufficient quality to assess project achievement.

                                                                                                    Page 16 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DR Integrated Social Protect & Prom MST (P147213)



  However, there were moderate shortcomings. The mid-term review was postponed several times and
  ultimately did not take place until March 2018, even though it had been clear since late 2016 that project
  disbursements and achievement of interim targets was off track (ICR, p. 27). Monitoring was challenged
  by the fact that the various information systems related to the project did not automatically generate data
  on project indicators, requiring UTP to assemble and integrate data reported independently by various
  line units whose staff experienced turnover and who had different interpretations of data collection
  methods and results. There were occasional variations in the CCT coverage data that came from the
  PROSOLI program versus the independent verification agent, with the latter generally following a more
  methodologically sound approach with better quality control. In additional to regular progress reports, the
  project implemented tracer and satisfaction surveys for youth training. Two impact evaluations were
  conducted, but they were not designed until the mid-term review in 2018, and the COVID-19 pandemic
  restricted data collection. As a result, their results were not available until near the project's closing date.
  The planned evaluation of the "integrated" approach to service delivery was not conducted.



c. M&E Utilization
  M&E data on performance and results progress were used to inform project management and decision
  making. Analysis of M&E data led to incorporation of the moderately poor as project beneficiaries at the
  2018 restructuring, and to the addition of entrepreneurship training to the originally planned technical
  training. Results from the impact evaluations were available too late to provide input for project or policy
  adjustments during the project's lifetime, but they have been used in preparation of follow-on operations.
  M&E findings were communicated to stakeholders through bi-annual discussions. In addition, the project
  supported the development of an Observatory of Social Policies through which bulletins were published
  three times a year containing new research and reports on results, and under whose auspices
  discussion fora were held on many aspects of social policy.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was rated environmental assessment category "C." No safeguard policies were triggered.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial management (FM): The Bank carried out an FM assessment of the Social Cabinet/UTP at
   appraisal, finding that there was adequate capacity to carry out FM tasks under the project. FM ratings
   were satisfactory across the project's lifetime. Audit reports were timely and unqualified.

   Procurement: An assessment of the UTP's procurement capacity was conducted in May 2014. Although
   its capacity was found to be adequate, it was decided to hire an additional Procurement Specialist.

                                                                                                        Page 17 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DR Integrated Social Protect & Prom MST (P147213)



   Procurement ratings were satisfactory across the project's lifetime with one exception, when the June 2018
   Implementation Status and Results Report (ISR) rated procurement moderately satisfactory because of
   delays in launching bidding processes for youth training. The rating was restored to fully satisfactory at the
   December 2018 ISR.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   The ICR (p. 21) reported that the updating and strengthening of SIUBEN under the project helped the
   government identify households in need during the COVID-19 pandemic, attenuating the impact of the
   pandemic on the poor. In addition, the monitoring and redress mechanisms developed under the project for
   PROSOLI field operations were adapted to the emergency response.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                      IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
                                                                                 Modest achievement of the
                                                                                 human capital objective and
Outcome                         Satisfactory          Moderately Satisfactory
                                                                                 significant implementation
                                                                                 inefficiencies.
                                Moderately
Bank Performance                                      Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                  Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                  ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR (pp. 28-29) presented insightful lessons, some of which are summarized here:

Successful design of projects prioritizing the extreme poor will take into account their
particular circumstances of poverty. In this case, the challenges of reaching and serving the
extreme poor, including lack of documentation and scarcity of salaried employment, were not fully
considered in project design. Furthermore, the project's approach did not consider differences in the
geographic context of the poor; it lacked specific interventions or adjustments in operations or
services for densely populated urban areas versus rural areas with high population dispersion.

Interoperability efforts cover individual institutions with their own norms and laws that may
not be compatible. In this case, the project's focus on integration of databases and information
technology missed the need also to harmonize regulations, data sharing protocols, and actual use of


                                                                                                    Page 18 of 19
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       DR Integrated Social Protect & Prom MST (P147213)



integrated information. "Integration" is intrinsically a management and coordination challenge that
needs to be supported through specific mechanisms, arrangements, and measurement tools.




13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR was clear, candid, and well written. It carefully cited data sources. It thoroughly interrogated the
appropriateness of the results indicators, pointing out issues with their design and situation along the project's
results chain. Its monitoring and evaluation assessment was particularly strong, covering all elements stipulated
in the ICR Guidelines in its assessment of M&E implementation and utilization. Its lessons were well derived
from project experience and should prove useful to design and implementation of other social protection
projects in the country and the region. However, there were shortcomings with the adequacy of data provided in
the ICR to assess project achievement, as the project team was able to provide significant additional relevant
information from the impact evaluation.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                    Page 19 of 19
