     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Angola Statistics Project (P157671)



                                                                                       Report Number: ICRR0023564

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                    Project Name
 P157671                                       Angola Statistics Project

 Country                                       Practice Area(Lead)
 Angola                                        Poverty and Equity


 L/C/TF Number(s)                              Closing Date (Original)                  Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-86690                                    30-Nov-2021                                             60,055,595.80

 Bank Approval Date                            Closing Date (Actual)
 07-Dec-2016                                   31-Aug-2022

                                               IBRD/IDA (USD)                                        Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                               62,000,000.00                                                  0.00

 Revised Commitment                                62,000,000.00                                                  0.00

 Actual                                            60,066,206.57                                                  0.00




 Prepared by                   Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator            Group
 Judyth L. Twigg               Vandana Chandra               Jennifer L. Keller                IEGEC (Unit 1)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Loan Agreement (p. 6) and the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, p. ii), the project's
   objective was "to strengthen the capacity of the National Institute for Statistics (INE) to fill data gaps, improve
   statistical production, and enhance statistical dissemination practices." This Review unpacks that statement to
   assess achievement of two objectives:

           Strengthen the capacity of the National Institute for Statistics to fill data gaps and improve statistical
            production

                                                                                                         Page 1 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Angola Statistics Project (P157671)



          Strengthen the capacity of the National Institute for Statistics to enhance statistical dissemination
           practices

   As there is no meaningful difference in the results chain for filling data gaps and improving statistical
   production, those two elements of the objective statement are assessed as a single objective.

   Some outcome targets were made less ambitious at a November 2021 restructuring, ultimately affecting the
   assessment of achievement of objectives. A split rating methodology is therefore performed. At the
   restructuring, US$49.11 million, or 82 percent of Bank funds, had been disbursed.




b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  15-Nov-2021

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   The project contained three components. The November 2021 restructuring took place due to severe delays
   in the preparation of some activities and because the project budget proved to be insufficient to support the
   original work plan. As a result, some planned activities were not carried out, some were implemented late,
   and funds were reallocated accordingly, as noted below. Some outcome targets were adjusted downward.

   1. Institutional Reform and Capacity (appraisal: US$3.5 million; actual: US$7.2 million). INE is the
   main official provider of statistics in Angola, supported by regional statistics offices as well as departments
   in line ministries. It is the managerial agency of the National Council of Statistics, which is in charge of
   producing the national accounts, along with other economic, social, and demographic statistics. This
   component aimed to improve INE's functional organization and political autonomy, its information and
   communication technology (ICT) and statistical infrastructure, and its human capacity. Planned activities
   included an institutional assessment to provide the foundation for institutional reform; provision of a platform
   for coordination among government institutions and development partners working on statistical
   activities; an upgrade of ICT infrastructure to ensure efficient workflows for data processing, analysis,
   archiving, and dissemination; development of standards, concepts, and definitions to ensure comparability
   of country statistics, through a review of the national statistical compendium; and training for INE's
   workforce, including on-the-job training with shadow assignments, workshops, short-term courses, and
   twinning arrangements.

   2. Data Production and Dissemination (appraisal: US$56.3 million; actual: US$49.9 million). This
   component aimed to close the most important data gaps in Angola's statistical landscape by creating a

                                                                                                       Page 2 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Angola Statistics Project (P157671)



   modern statistical infrastructure, including for agricultural production and welfare, based on a sequence of
   surveys. Activities included building technical capacity and supporting data collection to improve the quality
   of national accounts; support for improving and maintaining a business registry, a business survey to
   recalibrate the production price index, an informal sector survey, and compilation of export and import price
   indexes; setting up a welfare monitoring infrastructure by establishing a flexible, continuous survey system
   including two major household budget surveys; the introduction of a continuous quarterly labor force survey;
   support for an agricultural production monitoring system to produce high-quality data to allow analysis and
   formulation of evidence-based policies and programs for the agricultural sector, including an agricultural
   census; development of data access and information policies, including advocacy for statistics to strengthen
   user demand; and production of relevant policy notes on poverty and food security, using newly available
   data.

   At the 2021 restructuring, a second Survey on Expenditure, Income and Employment in Angola
   (IDREA) was cancelled, as were planned fishing, agricultural, and horticulture surveys intended to
   complement the Agricultural, Livestock, and Fisheries Census (RAPP). Funds were reallocated to the first
   and third components. With the COVID-19 pandemic, two new activities were added: (i) phone-based
   surveys to monitor the impact of the pandemic on households and firms, and (ii) a communications
   campaign to raise awareness of the importance of responding to INE's surveys.

   3. Project Management (appraisal: US$2 million; actual: US$2.9 million). This component was to
   support project planning and management through the provision of technical advisory services, training,
   operation costs, and the acquisition of goods, together with support for a dedicated Project Implementation
   Unit (PIU) and specialists in financial management, procurement, ICT, human resources, and monitoring
   and evaluation (M&E).



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   The project was financed by a US$62 million Investment Policy Financing loan from the International Bank
   for Reconstruction and Development, with no expected financing from the Borrower. Costs at appraisal
   included a US$0.155 million front-end fee. US$60.1 million was disbursed. The project team confirmed that
   US$1.9 million was not spent due to some cost savings during the project's last year, and because some
   planned project activities were not implemented (as noted above).

   The project was approved in December 2016 and became effective in May 2017. Its mid-term review took
   place in December 2019. Its original closing date of November 30, 2021, was extended by nine months at a
   restructuring on November 15, 2021. That restructuring was due to implementation delays and cost
   overruns across all three components. It entailed cancellation of some project activities, reallocation of
   funds across components, and a reduction of some output and outcome targets. The project closed on
   August 31, 2022.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale


                                                                                                    Page 3 of 15
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Angola Statistics Project (P157671)



               The project was well aligned with Angola's development needs. The 2018 Systematic Country
               Diagnostic identified lack of data in several key areas -- fundamental macroeconomic and microeconomic
               indicators, as well as sector-specific data for agriculture, urbanization, water, and entrepreneurship -- as a
               key constraint for evidence-based decision making. INE's limited capacity to provide official statistics was
               reflected in its low Statistical Capacity Index (SCI) score of 47.8 (out of 100) in 2015, compared to an
               average of 59.9 for Sub-Saharan Africa. National accounts had to rely on outdated data and estimates. The
               last agricultural census dated back to the early 1970s, and lack of reliable and up-to-date data was a major
               constraint for policy makers and investors. Implementation of a population census, improvement of the
               national statistical system, and implementation of key surveys on welfare and agriculture were considered
               key to improving management of the public sector (PAD, p. 2). Overall, existing published economic and
               sectoral statistics were insufficient for assessing the performance of the economy.

               The project's objectives were also well aligned with government and World Bank strategy, from
               project appraisal through completion. The government's National Development Plan 2013-17 identified
               the improvement of official statistics as a national policy objective, with particular focus on
               implementation of a population census, improvement of the national statistics system, and implementation
               of key surveys in welfare and agriculture. Strong statistical capacity is critical for assessing sector programs
               and policies under the successive National Development Plans (2018-2022 and 2023-2027). The National
               Strategy for the Development of Statistics (2015-2025) defines three main strategic directions:
               strengthening the legal, organizational, operational, and coordination framework of the national statistical
               system; developing the necessary technical capacity to improve the quality of official statistics; and
               providing an adequate response to user needs.

               The Bank's Country Partnership Strategy at appraisal (CPS, 2014-2016) cited an "urgent need" to
               strengthen the national statistical system, envisioning potential reimbursable advisory services in the area
               of statistics compilation (national accounts, prices, and a census of firms), and including INE in a list of
               institutions for possible coverage under Results Area 3, Human Capacity and Institutions Building. It also
               identified lack of access to basic statistical information as a direct risk to CPS implementation, with an
               Annex specifically dedicated to discussion of statistical issues. That CPS was extended to the end of FY19
               at its 2018 Performance and Learning Review.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Strengthen the capacity of the National Institute for Statistics to fill data gaps and improve statistical
                             production (original outcome targets)

                             Rationale

                                                                                                                                   Page 4 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Angola Statistics Project (P157671)



The theory of change for this objective held that conducting an institutional assessment of INE, establishing a
platform for statistical coordination, upgrading ICT infrastructure, reviewing the national statistical
compendium to update definitions and standards, and providing training for the INE workforce would lead to
improved statistical coordination, greater knowledge and performance of INE staff, better processing and
analysis of data, and improved data dissemination. These outputs in turn were expected to contribute to
achievement of the objective to strengthen INE's capacity to fill data gaps. The theory of change for this
objective also held that training for the INE workforce, developing methodological improvements, and setting
up a welfare monitoring infrastructure and agricultural production monitoring system would lead to improved
national accounts and increases in the number and quality of macroeconomic, survey, and census data
products. These outputs would, in turn, contribute to achievement of the objective to improve statistical
production.



Outputs

Institutional reforms were implemented to improve INE's functional organization and political autonomy,
improve its ICT and statistical infrastructure, and enhance its human capacity. The project financed an
institutional and organizational assessment of INE that produced 16 actionable recommendations. Four of
these recommendations were completely implemented under the project, and another ten were in progress at
project closure. Infrastructure upgrades included computer equipment (tablets, software), electricity and
internet access, establishment of a call center, and upgrades to the data center. Two large contracts of ICT
equipment upgraded infrastructure and addressed server downtime issues caused by power surges and
overheating in the data center; however, one of the contracts (installation services) was completed too late to
be covered under the project and was instead covered by national funds. INE staff received on-the-job
training and direct hands-on implementation support from Bank staff and international consultants, with focus
on national accounts, survey solutions, data documentation, data preparation, data programming, and
business statistics.

375 staff improved skills and knowledge (measured by test results), not achieving either the original target of
750 staff or the revised target of 600 staff.

The IDREA 2018/2019, the first household survey since 2008, has established a baseline for poverty
estimates and generated a poverty report and poverty line methodology. Other surveys supported by the
project, including the RAPP, Firm Census, and Labor Force Survey, have played a role in providing accurate
thematic and sector-specific data in areas where little to none existed before the project.



Outcomes

According to the ICR, the SCI score (comprising methodology, data sources, and periodicity and timeliness)
rose from 42.2 in 2017 to 63.3 in 2022, exceeding the target of 60. The ICR (p. 35) explains that, during
project implementation, the SCI score was falling because some elements of the indicator that were not
influenced by the project were underperforming. In addition, the SCI indicator was replaced by the Statistical
Performance Indicator in 2020 and was no longer updated. The task team therefore prepared an adjusted
methodology to estimate the project's influence on the score. This methodology froze the initial values for all
elements of the SCI that were not directly related to project activities and counted changes only in elements

                                                                                                   Page 5 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Angola Statistics Project (P157671)



that were directly affected by the project. For 2021 and 2022 updates after the SCI was no longer calculated,
the task team collected its own information. The team shared with IEG the methodology and data used for the
2021/2022 update, which were clear and based on reasonable assumptions and processes. Gains were
concentrated in: (i) methodology: import and export price indices and industrial price index; (ii) data sources:
agricultural census and poverty survey; (iii) periodicity: gender equality and income poverty.

The national accounts system was improved as targeted along five dimensions: (i) coverage of the informal
sector used information from a newly implemented quarterly labor force survey; (ii) an updated and published
description of sources and methods was achieved through inclusion of a methodological section in each
quarterly GDP publication; (iii) an updated consumer price index basket was published in early 2021; (iv) INE
prepared and published updated export and import price indices; and (v) INE developed a methodology for
estimation of quarterly GDP in both current and constant prices, finalized in August 2022.

Eight agriculture, welfare, employment, and business surveys or censuses were carried out, falling short
of the original target of twelve surveys. The planned informal sector survey, second IDREA survey, and RAPP
complementary surveys were dropped due to cost overruns on other activities (see Section 5). The project
team later explained that there were also technical reasons that the target was not reached. The IDREA was
delayed to take advantage of an updated sampling frame following the new population census, and the
agricultural surveys used the agricultural census as the sampling frame. The delays were therefore, in part,
due to deliberate decisions to support product quality.

With outcome targets met for the SCI score and improvement of national accounts, but undershooting the
target for survey products, achievement of the objective under the original outcome targets is rated
Substantial, but marginally so.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
Strengthen the capacity of the National Institute for Statistics to fill data gaps and improve statistical
production (revised outcome targets)

Revised Rationale
At the November 2021 restructuring, the target for implementation of agriculture, welfare, employment, and
business surveys or censuses was reduced from twelve to eight surveys. That target was met.

With all outcome targets met, achievement of the objective under the revised outcome targets is rated
Substantial.



Revised Rating
Substantial


                                                                                                      Page 6 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Angola Statistics Project (P157671)




OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Strengthen the capacity of the National Institute for Statistics to enhance statistical dissemination practices
(original outcome target)

Rationale
The theory of change for this objective held that development of data, access, and information policies would
lead to increases in the range of statistical reports available online, published quarterly GDP statistics, and
the number of survey and census micro-datasets available online. These outputs would, in turn, contribute to
achievement of the objective of enhanced statistical dissemination practices.



Outputs

The number of survey and census micro-datasets available online increased from 9 in 2016 to 18 in 2022, not
reaching the original target of 21 but exceeding the revised target of 17.

11 statistical reports funded by the project were made available online, disaggregated by availability of
gendered statistics, exceeding the target of 6 reports. These included analytical reports on youth and
childhood, gender, employment, construction, agriculture, and economic growth.



Outcomes

The annual number of INE downloads of statistical materials and micro-datasets increased from 73,220 in
2016 to 114,605 in 2022, falling short of the original target of 150,000.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 2 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
Strengthen the capacity of the National Institute for Statistics to enhance statistical dissemination practices
(revised outcome target)

Revised Rationale
The target for annual number of INE downloads of statistical materials and micro-datasets was reduced at the
November 2021 restructuring to 110,000 as a consequence of the reduction in number of statistical
operations to be produced. This revised target was exceeded by project achievement of 114,605 downloads
in 2022. The ICR does not report on a communication strategy or methods of distribution of surveys and
reports other than online publication.


                                                                                                    Page 7 of 15
                                 Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                 Angola Statistics Project (P157671)




                              Revised Rating
                              Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Overall efficacy under the original outcome targets was substantial, though with caveats, given barely
                            substantial achievement of the first objective and modest achievement of the second objective under the
                            original targets.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial

                  OBJR1_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
                            Overall efficacy under the revised outcome targets was substantial, given substantial achievement of both
                            objectives under the revised targets.



                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   The PAD did not conduct a formal economic analysis. Instead, it justified the project by arguing that improved
   monitoring of macroeconomic indicators would lead to more timely and evidence-based public policies (an
   ambitious assumption), that the dependence of INE on technical assistance from external consultants would be
   reduced by building internal capacity, and that the Bank's power to convene stakeholders (including other
   donors), funding capacity, and knowledge base uniquely situated it to support the project (PAD, pp. 13-14). The
   ICR (p. 12) stated that "an efficiency ratio could not be estimated," but added that higher user demand would
   help secure sustainable government funding for INE after project closure (p. 6); the ICR does not report on
   whether that funding materialized.

   There were some elements of implementation that contributed to operational efficiency. Project-supported
   improvements in statistical production processes included use of mobile devices for data collection, enhanced
   fieldwork logistics, improved monitoring of data collection, and overall better organization and management
   processes. However, there were significant operational inefficiencies. Excessively high operational costs and

                                                                                                                            Page 8 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Angola Statistics Project (P157671)



underperformance in some fiduciary management processes (including incurring ineligible expenses) caused
inefficiencies. These factors contributed to a lower than expected rate of disbursement, a high unit cost of data
collection, and delays in the implementation of planned activities (ICR, p. 13; see also Section 10b). Inadequate
annual and day-to-day planning, particularly in the project's early years, led to challenges and delays; this
included not accounting for the rainy season and the likelihood that vehicles would get stuck during field work,
leading to unplanned purchases of shovels, ropes, and rain gear. "In addition, the PIU did not consolidate an
operational items dataset, including unit prices, until the last year of the project. As a result, since there was a
lack of identification of operational costs, including their unit cost, some costs were excessive, for example, the
cost associated with food and coffee breaks during training sessions" (ICR, p. 13). Overall, "poor planning and
high spending on per diems, trainings, and meals were significant factors increasing the cost of data production"
(ICR, p. 16)

Delays in implementing key activities due to COVID-19 restrictions and leadership turnover in INE in 2021,
including the delivery of large ICT contracts and the agricultural and economic census, required a nine-month
extension of the project. The PIU's reliance on expensive international consultants (due to lack of capacity in
Angola) and higher than anticipated costs for ICT produced cost overruns for the project's first and third
components, requiring a reallocation of funds and cancellation of key activities under the second component
(second IDREA household survey and a set of agricultural surveys to complement the RAPP), impacting
achievement of outcomes. The project's initial review of the national statistics laws and rulings ran behind
schedule because a call for consultants did not generate qualified candidates. The final part of one large ICT
contract (installation services) was completed too late to be covered under the project and was instead covered
by national funds; INE confirmed that installation of new equipment was ongoing as of April 2023.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      0
 Appraisal                                                   0
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      0
 ICR Estimate                                                0
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Under the original outcome targets, relevance was high, efficacy was substantial (with caveats), and efficiency
was modest, producing an outcome rating of Moderately Satisfactory.




                                                                                                       Page 9 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Angola Statistics Project (P157671)



Under the revised outcome targets, relevance was high, efficacy was substantial, and efficiency was modest,
producing an outcome rating of Moderately Satisfactory.

Overall outcome is therefore rated Moderately Satisfactory, reflecting moderate shortcomings in the project's
preparation, implementation, and achievement.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The ICR states that the overall risk to achieved outcomes is low, based on the project having spurred
increased data consumption and generated greater demand from a broad range of stakeholders for more
and better data across sectors, strengthened INE's capacity for generating better data, and supported INE in
increasing the sustainability of statistical production. It cites improved coordination with data producers such
as line ministries and provincial offices to promote better data quality and accuracy, as well as improved data
collection modalities and quality control mechanisms. A follow-on project, Angola Strengthening Statistical
Capacity (2023-2027, US$60 million), has objectives similar to this project but "takes a stronger focus on
increased efficiency and building local capacity" (ICR, p. 20). The ICR does not provide information on the
reliability and sustainability of funding moving forward.

The ICR (pp. 20-21) states that institutional capacity risks have been successfully mitigated through the
Bank's strengthening of financial and procurement systems and monitoring mechanisms. At the end of the
project, the Bank began working with INE to adopt a new statistical operations costing tool, "Statsbudget," to
ensure the inclusion of items needed for data collection in annual plans and survey budgets. The follow-on
project includes activities to modernize INE's internal organization and build human capacity (Strengthening
Statistical Capacity Project, Project Appraisal Document, pp. 15-16). Given the magnitude of the capacity
challenges experienced across this project's lifetime, however, it is likely that institutional capacity risks will
continue to threaten achieved outcomes to some degree.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  Project design was derived from careful study of the needs of INE and other statistics producers and
  users, consultations with relevant stakeholders, and international best practices. The PAD did not cite
  lessons learned from previous projects that may have informed project preparation. Overall project
  design was similar to that of other statistical capacity building projects financed by the Bank over the
  preceding decade. However, the reliance on approaches and design features from other projects may
  have hindered consideration of Angola's unique capacity constraints. Implementation arrangements and
  an Implementation Support Plan were specified in detail at appraisal (PAD, pp. 28-42). The risk
  assessment at appraisal found substantial fiduciary and institutional capacity risks due to INE's limited
  experience in the management of Bank-financed projects. This risk was to have been mitigated by

                                                                                                        Page 10 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Angola Statistics Project (P157671)



  inclusion of a project management component to ensure the provision of adequate funds to strengthen
  and sustain INE's capacity, and through the early recruitment of a qualified and experienced financial
  management specialist and procurement specialist. However, the first financial specialist performed
  poorly, it took a long time to find a replacement after his contract was not renewed, and the procurement
  specialist was not on board for the first two years or last 1.5 years of the project (see Section 10b). In
  general, although risks were well identified, mitigation measures did not fully account for the lack of
  qualified, available consultants and staff in the Angolan and international market.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The Bank team supervised the project through regular support missions, with appropriate documentation
 filed. According to the ICR (p. 19), the 2019 mid-term review provided a detailed account of progress on
 the project's results framework, but that review should have produced action on implementation delays and
 cost overruns more promptly than was the case. The ICR reports that remedial actions began in
 September 2021, when the team implemented weekly meetings with the director of INE, the PIU, and
 representatives from the Ministry of Finance and Ministry of Economy and Planning, and biweekly
 procurement meetings with the PIU, task team leader, and Bank procurement team. At an unspecified later
 point, the team added on-the-ground implementation support: an extended term consultant to work directly
 with the PIU and technical teams to support project implementation, and a short-term consultant focused
 on providing operational support. The ICR does not specifically note whether project restructuring
 addressed the issues cited above (Section 8a) with procurement staffing and broader staffing challenges.
 The project was restructured in November 2021, two full years after the mid-term review should have made
 it clear that implementation challenges were affecting achievement of intended outcomes.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 An annual work program and annual report were to monitor and report on project progress, with the PIU
 required to submit the annual report to the director general of INE and the Bank within 60 days of the end
 of a project year. The PIU was to provide additional updates on the status of activities and indicators as
 requested. The monitoring plan recognized limitations in INE's and the PIU's capacity, envisaging at least
 two support missions per year complemented by remote support on demand, harnessing a range of Bank


                                                                                                  Page 11 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Angola Statistics Project (P157671)



 technical, operational, and fiduciary expertise. However, the planned M&E specialist was not hired for the
 PIU at the beginning of the project due to lack of qualified candidates (ICR, p. 16).

 The project's overall logic was clear and straightforward. Outcome indicators were selected for their
 objectivity, measurability, and simplicity. The SCI is an accepted international standard to measure
 statistical capacity, though it included elements that fell outside the project's scope. Baselines and targets
 were clear and measurable.



b. M&E Implementation
  The project remained without an M&E specialist for the lifetime of the project. As a result, routine M&E
  tasks were implemented by other M&E staff, particularly the PIU coordinator. This presented a significant
  burden on the time of PIU staff. The ICR does not describe opportunities for M&E training to be provided
  during the life of the project.

  Late in the project period, a misreporting of the number of trainings of INE staff conducted was identified
  and corrected, and it was discovered that the PIU had not been implementing regular learning
  assessments for staff undergoing project-financed training. Retroactive assessment and new standards
  were implemented during the project's final months to correct this error, and documentation was prepared
  for all approved trainings.



c. M&E Utilization
  The ICR (p. 17) notes that annual reports, annual work plans, and some monthly performance reports
  prepared by the PIU -- not always in a timely manner -- provided "a general snapshot" of implementation
  status and progress toward achievement of objectives. The Bank's Implementation Status and Results
  Reports were based on these inputs from the PIU. The ICR provides no information on the use of M&E
  data analysis to inform the course of project implementation or policy, or on communication of M&E
  findings to stakeholders.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was rated Environmental Assessment category C. No safeguard policies were triggered.
   Although the PAD (p. 16) stated that "communities and individuals who believe that they are adversely
   affected by a Bank-support project may submit complaints to existing project-level grievance redress
   mechanisms or the Bank's Grievance Redress Service," the ICR (p. 18) notes that "the administration of the
   RAPP and other large surveys could have benefited from the implementation of a grievance redress
   mechanism to address any social risks arising from the project's interactions with households or agricultural
   businesses." Complaints typically arose from interviewers/enumerators on routine issues such as non-

                                                                                                     Page 12 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Angola Statistics Project (P157671)



   payment or delayed payment. A grievance redress mechanism is being implemented as part of the follow-
   on project.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial management: INE had overall responsibility for project implementation, with its PIU carrying
   fiduciary responsibility. Two INE finance staff were to be trained to implement required financial
   management arrangements, supported by a project-hired financial management specialist. However, after
   the initially hired specialist did not perform well, his contract was not renewed, and no replacement was
   hired until 2019. According to the ICR (p. 18), "despite efforts to build capacity in the PIU, the project faced
   continued implementation challenges." There were weaknesses in the internal control system and non-
   compliance with key internal control procedures. The 2017 audit report found ineligible expenses; there
   were delays in appointing an internal auditor and in refunding the ineligible funds to the Bank; and
   implementation of a financial management action plan created to resolve challenges lagged behind
   schedule. The pandemic presented additional challenges to financial management training at the provincial
   level by limiting the ability to conduct site visits and in-person trainings. The situation improved by the latter
   part of the project period, with a new financial management specialist and internal auditor on board.
   However, although quarterly financial reports started to be of acceptable quality, they still did not include
   annual budget information, which made it difficult to identify deviations from approved budgets, including
   cost overruns.

   Procurement: INE's limited experience with the Bank's procurement requirements was intended to be
   mitigated through substantial project procurement support, including the hiring of dedicated procurement
   staff for the PIU. However, because of unavailability of qualified candidates, there was no procurement
   specialist in the PIU for the project's first two years and last 1.5 years of implementation, and even when
   there was a dedicated specialist on board, COVID-19 restrictions meant that he could provide only remote
   support. The Bank team compensated by rolling out a series of trainings to improve the skills of INE staff
   working as procurement assistants. Although all project procurement contracts were eventually completed
   within established guidelines, implementation of procurement plans was slow, and especially early on, lack
   of due diligence and guidance for contract processes contributed to ineligible expenditures.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None reported.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                    Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                     IEG
                                                                                    Disagreements/Comment

                                                                                                       Page 13 of 15
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Angola Statistics Project (P157671)



                                   Moderately
Outcome                                                 Moderately Satisfactory
                                   Satisfactory
                                                                                  Inadequate mitigation of
                                                                                  implementation capacity risks
Bank Performance                   Satisfactory         Moderately Satisfactory   and lack of timely action to
                                                                                  address those risks and
                                                                                  restructure the project.
Quality of M&E                     Modest               Modest

Quality of ICR                     ---                  Modest


12. Lessons

The ICR (pp. 21-23) offers a range of insightful lessons covering staffing needs for project
implementation, management of project stakeholders, improving fiduciary performance in a low-
capacity context, improving project monitoring and evaluation, and improving outcomes for statistical
capacity-building projects. Key specific lessons include:

        Even with additional support from Bank specialists, implementation of a project without
         qualified specialists in fiduciary performance and monitoring & evaluation can have
         significant negative impacts on a project's success. Achievement of outcomes requires a
         dedicated and motivated Project Implementation Unit staffed with a project coordinator and
         specialists in fiduciary and M&E. The hiring of staff with critical expertise may be considered
         as a condition for project effectiveness or significant disbursement.
        Adequate planning and budget monitoring tools are required to keep adequate track of
         operational and unit costs. In this case, cost overruns had adverse impacts on project
         timelines and results. While external audits can provide important ex ante lessons to
         underpin changes at a future time, timely real-time tracking can serve as a dynamic
         dashboard to make immediate course corrections and save project costs.

IEG offers the following additional lesson:

        Country context and country experience are important factors in project design, especially in
         situations where survey field work is anticipated.




13. Assessment Recommended?

  No




                                                                                                     Page 14 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Angola Statistics Project (P157671)



14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is concise and well written. Its lessons are detailed and insightful, and should prove useful for design
of other projects in similar contexts. However, the ICR's data and analysis are inadequate to assess the
project's achievement. Insufficient information is provided to determine how the ICR arrived at its calculation of
the overall statistical capacity index; the project team provided that information later to IEG. Its description of
the project's theory of change and of project activities does not provide robust information on the implemented
activities that would have been expected to lead to reported outcomes. Furthermore, the ICR disregards the
lowering of two key outcome targets at the November 2021 restructuring and the implication for the
methodology to arrive at an overall outcome rating.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Modest




                                                                                                      Page 15 of 15
