     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Hubei Jingzhou Historic Town Conserv. (P148523)



                                                                                    Report Number: ICRR0023603

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                   Project Name
 P148523                                      Hubei Jingzhou Historic Town Conserv.

 Country                                      Practice Area(Lead)
 China                                        Urban, Resilience and Land


 L/C/TF Number(s)                             Closing Date (Original)                   Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-85740                                   30-Jun-2021                                          65,776,812.83

 Bank Approval Date                           Closing Date (Actual)
 19-Jan-2016                                  31-Dec-2022

                                              IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            100,000,000.00                                                0.00

 Revised Commitment                               65,776,812.83                                               0.00

 Actual                                           65,776,812.83                                               0.00




 Prepared by                   Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator           Group
 Katharina Ferl                Avjeet Singh                 Avjeet Singh                     IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Project Appraisal Document (PAD) (p.iii) and the Financing Agreement of April 26, 2016 (p.
   5) the objective of the project was “to conserve cultural heritage and improve water quality and tourism
   services in selected areas in Jingzhou Municipality”.

   The objective will be parsed into three objectives for the purpose of this review:

          i. To conserve cultural heritage in selected areas in Jingzhou Municipality

                                                                                                     Page 1 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Hubei Jingzhou Historic Town Conserv. (P148523)



         ii. To improve water quality in selected areas in Jingzhou Municipality
        iii. To improve tourism services in selected areas in Jingzhou Municipality



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project included four components:

   Component A: Cultural Heritage Conservation and Tourism Services Improvement (IBRD appraisal
   estimate US$45.58 million, actual US$29.07 million): This component included six sub-components:

   Sub-component A1: This sub-component was to finance the carrying out of conservation and restoration
   activities over selected segments of Jingzhou’s Historic City Wall, including the construction of a retaining
   wall, landscaping, and vegetation improvements.

   During the 2020 restructuring the activities to renovate a wall-top footpath and outer walkway loop between
   the city wall and moat were added.

   Sub-component A2: This sub-component was to finance the carrying out of conservation activities in the
   Kaiyuan Taoism Temple including improvements to basic infrastructure, and preservation and restoration of
   cultural heritage assets.

   Sub-component A3: This sub-component was to finance the upgrading of the Jingzhou Museum, including
   comprehensive rehabilitation of the treasure halls, redesign of the exhibition schemes, and procurement of
   protective display equipment.

   During the 2020 restructuring the activities to construct a new exhibition center, rehabilitation of the tourist
   service center, and associated security system improvements, landscaping, and interpretation systems and
   services were added.

   Sub-component A4: This sub-component was to finance piloting interventions for the conservation and
   regeneration of selected historical buildings along Dongti and Nanmen streets in Jingzhou’s historic town,
   and converting a vacant lot into a tourism services facility.

   Sub-component A5: This sub-component was to finance support to the Xiongjiazhong Archaeological Park,
   including the construction of an exhibition center, display buildings and archaeological park management
   facilities, as well as installation of lighting and interpretation in the exhibition halls.

   Sub-component A6: This sub-component was to finance the construction of a tourist information center
   alongside Jingzhou’s Historic Town, creating and improving green areas, and the development of tourist
   signage and tour navigation systems in selected areas.



                                                                                                      Page 2 of 16
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  Hubei Jingzhou Historic Town Conserv. (P148523)



Component B: Water Environment Improvement (IBRD appraisal estimate US$37.08 million, actual
US$24.73 million): This component included four sub-components:

Sub-component B1: This sub-component was to finance the dredging of the moat and lakes within and
immediately around Jingzhou’s Historic Town.

Sub-component B2: This sub-component financed the infrastructure improvements of Jingzhou’s Historic
Town internal drainage and sewer network.

Sub-component B3: This sub-component was to finance the creation of wetlands along Jingzhou’s Historic
Town moat and lakes.

Sub-component B4: This sub-component financed activities to enhance Jingzhou’s Historic Town water
bodies.

When the project was restructured in August 2020, a new sub-component was added:

Sub-component B5: This sub-component was to finance the rehabilitation of the North Lake, including the
construction of associated interceptor sewers along the lake and the construction of an ecology
embankment and landscaping infrastructure in the park within the North Lake.

Component C: Transport Improvement (IBRD appraisal estimate US$13.14 million, actual US$10.26
million): This component included four sub-components:

Sub-component C1: This sub-component was to finance the improvement of urban roads, including
rehabilitating Jingzhou’s Historic Town inner ring road and optimizing key road junctions.

Sub-component C2: This sub-component financed activities to improve non-motorized transportation
(NMT), including establishing color-paved bicycle lanes and rehabilitating protected road spaces, pedestrian
crossings, and facilities to enhance pedestrian safety.

Sub-component C3: This sub-component was to finance the improvement of public transportation through
upgrading the mini-bus tourism system, establishment of new tourism bus lines, improvement of bus stops,
and procurement of new hybrid buses.

Sub-component C4: This sub-component was to finance the installation and upgrade of signage systems,
including the provision of static and variable message signs at key locations in Jingzhou’s Historic Town
and the provision of real-time parking guidance signage.

Component D: Assistance to Project Management and Capacity Building (IBRD appraisal estimate
US$3.95 million, actual US$1.49 million): This component included three sub-components:

Sub-component D1: This sub-component was to finance the provision of support for project management,
monitoring, and supervision and independent monitoring of environmental and social safeguards, including
the provision of office equipment and supplies.

Sub-component D2: This sub-component was to finance capacity building activities, including training,
organization of workshops, and study tours for relevant staff and key stakeholders.


                                                                                               Page 3 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Hubei Jingzhou Historic Town Conserv. (P148523)



   Sub-component D3: This sub-component was to finance the provision of technical assistance, including the
   realization of studies on the conservation and restoration of historic sites and neighborhoods, as well as on
   traffic management for Jingzhou’s Historic Town.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project cost: The project was estimated to cost US$170.5 million. Actual cost was US$111.6 million.

   Financing: The project was financed by an IBRD loan for US$100.0 million (of which US$65.7 million was
   disbursed) and financing by the Borrower for US$70.5 million (actual financing of US$45.8 million). The
   actual financing was lower than the planned financing due to i) high cost estimates for civil work contracts
   during project preparation; ii) cost savings as a result of competitive bidding; iii) depreciation of the Chinese
   Yuan against the dollar; iv) a decision of Jignzhou Municipality to finance several Bank-funded activities
   such as the rehabilitation of historic residential houses and some water quality investments; and v) cost
   savings resulting from adjustments made to the project design.

   Borrower Contribution: The Borrower was to contribute US$70.5 million. The actual contribution was
   US$45.8 million.

   Dates: The project was approved on January 19, 2016. The project became effective on July 25, 2016, and
   closed on December 31, 2022.

   On August 2, 2020, the project was restructured (level 2 ) to i) revise components 1 and 2 to add activities
   to scale up the conservation of cultural heritage, improvement of water quality, and improvement of tourism
   services; ii) reduce counterpart funding and reallocate between disbursement categories; iii) revise the
   Results Framework to modify a unit of measurement and increase the targets for two intermediate outcome
   indicators; iv) extend the loan closing date from June 30, 2021 to December 31, 2022 to accommodate the
   introduction of the new activities stated above and v) reallocate between disbursement categories.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country and sector context. According to the PAD (p. 1), China’s economic growth and rising living
standards increased the public’s awareness and appreciation of cultural heritage assets, leading to an
expansion of the cultural tourism sector. Cultural heritage was seen not only to be an essential element of
national history and pride, but also as an asset for local economic and social development. Historic cities in
China have been facing multiple challenges in leveraging heritage assets, including i) conserving heritage
assets under technical and financial constraints, ii) upgrading dilapidated infrastructure in a densely
populated urban context, iii) modernizing without completely losing each city’s distinctive features and
indigenous culture, and iv) developing the tourism sector in a sustainable manner that stimulates job
creation and local economic development.


                                                                                                       Page 4 of 16
                       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                       Hubei Jingzhou Historic Town Conserv. (P148523)



Jingzhou Municipality, located in south-central Hubei Province, was endowed with rich cultural heritage
assets and was the center of Jing-Chu culture. In Jingzhou Historic Town (JHT) and the area around it,
there were three heritage sites listed at the national level (ancient City Wall, Kaiyuan Temple, and
Xuanmiao Temple), eight provincial and municipal registered heritage sites, as well as more than 70
identified historic buildings and other relics.

However, a lack of funds and limited asset management capacity resulted in a piecemeal approach to the
restoration of the ancient city wall, its moat, and other heritage sites within the historic town, as well as a
delayed implementation of a fully equipped Xiongjiazhong Archaeological Park. Furthermore, rapid
economic development and poor enforcement of planning and environmental regulations put pressure on
conserving heritage assets. In addition, the city moat and other water bodies were now heavily polluted due
to the discharge of raw sewage, non-point source pollutants, and urban drainage runoff.

According to the PAD (p. 2), at the time of appraisal, Jingzhou was among the top 10 tourist destinations in
Hubei Province. Tourism was also considered one of the pillar industries for local economic development in
Jingzhou. However, the tourism sector of Jingzhou was underdeveloped, signaled by the limited
contribution of tourism to local economic development. A survey showed that the majority of the tourists
stayed for a short period due to a lack of variety in tourism products, the limited attraction of cultural
heritage assets, inadequate urban environment (not in harmony with the characteristics of the cultural
heritage, poor water environment, and sanitation), and lack of tourism services.

Alignment with the Government Strategy. The project supported the government’s 14th Five-Year Plan
(FYP) (2021-2025), emphasizing the importance of enriching culture and tourism services. Also, the project
was in line with the Hubei government’s 14th FYP (2021-2025), which focuses on ecological protection and
green development. Furthermore, the project was in line with Jingzhou’s 14th FYP (2021-2025) and its
objectives to i) establish the Jingzhou historic old town as a tourist center for Jing-Cu culture and a famous
tourist destination in China by 2025 and ii) improve the ecological environment of Jingzhou by managing
air, water, and soil pollution effectively.

Alignment with the World Bank Strategy. The project’s objectives were aligned with the Bank’s most
recent Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for China (FY20-25), especially with objective 2.2, “reducing
air, soil, water, and marine plastic pollution, by improving the moat water quality in JHT through dredging
moat sludge and installing sewage interceptors,” and objective 2.5 “promoting low carbon transport and
cities by improvement of public transport, bicycle lanes, and urban roads.”

The project's objective was pitched at an appropriate level to address a development problem.

Overall, the relevance of the objective is rated as High.


Rating Relevance TBL




Rating
High


4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)



                                                                                                       Page 5 of 16
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  Hubei Jingzhou Historic Town Conserv. (P148523)


EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               To conserve cultural heritage in selected areas in Jingzhou municipality

               Rationale
               Theory of change: The project’s theory of change states that project inputs/activities such as carrying out
               conservation and restoration activities over selected segments of Jingzhou’s historic city wall and in the
               Kaiyuan Taoism Temple, upgrading of the Jingzhou Museum, carrying out piloting interventions for the
               conservation and regeneration of selected historical buildings along Dongti and Nanmen streets in Jingzhou’s
               historic town, providing support to the Xiongjiazhong Archaeological Park in terms of constructing an
               exhibition center, display buildings and archaeological park management facilities, and constructing a tourist
               information center alongside Jingzhou’s historic town were to result in several outputs. These outputs were to
               include selected segments of Jingzhou’s historic city wall, and the Kaiyuan Taoism Temple being conserved
               and restored, pilot interventions for the conservation and regeneration of selected historical buildings along
               Dongti and Nanmen being carried out, support to the Xiongjiazhong Archaeological Park being provided as
               well as a tourist information center in Jingzhou’s historic town being constructed. These outputs were to result
               in the outcome of enhanced conservation of cultural heritage in selected areas in Jingzhou municipality.

               Outputs:

                     11.28 kilometers of the city wall were restored, achieving the target of 11.28 kilometers.
                     The project did not achieve the target of 6,800 square meters of heritage display space being
                      upgraded or created since the activity was not implemented. The ICR (para. 53) stated that due to
                      changes in the JHT’s preservation and tourism plan in October 2021, the display space was in a
                      different location with larger floor areas than planned under the project. Since these changes were
                      only made one year before project closure, there was insufficient time to implement this activity.

               Outcomes:

                     Five cultural heritage sites were conserved/rehabilitated, achieving the target of five sites. These sites
                      included: i) the city wall (including the construction of a retaining wall, improvements of landscaping
                      and vegetation, and restoration of the wall-top footpath); ii) Kaiyuan Taoism temple (including the
                      rehabilitation of its stone tablets); iii) Jingzhou Museum’s Treasure Pavilion (including conservation of
                      the Treasure Pavilion with a comprehensive rehabilitation of its reassure halls, redesign of its
                      exhibition schemes, installation of display protective equipment, and landscaping improvements); iv)
                      Xiongjiazhong Archaeological Park (including the upgrading of the park’s 10,000 square meters
                      exhibition, hall, construction of 5,205 square meter exhibition center, for 106 unearthed cultural, relics,
                      improvement of infrastructure and landscape, and installation of management and monitoring
                      systems); v) 11 selected historic buildings along Dongti Street and Nanmen Street.

               The project achieved all output and outcome targets under this objective except for upgrading or creating
               heritage display space. Therefore, the achievement of this objective is rated Substantial, with moderate
               shortcomings.




                                                                                                                   Page 6 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Hubei Jingzhou Historic Town Conserv. (P148523)




Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To improve water quality in selected areas in Jingzhou municipality

Rationale
Theory of change: The project’s theory of change states that project inputs/activities such as dredging of the
moat and lakes, carrying out infrastructure improvements of Jingzhou’s historic town internal drainage and
sewer network, creating wetlands, as well as enhancing Jingzhou’s Historic Town water bodies were to result
in several outputs. These outputs included moat and lakes being dredged, infrastructure improvements of
Jingzhou’s historic town internal drainage and sewer network, and Jingzhou’s Historic Town water bodies
being enhanced. These outputs were to result in the outcome of improved water quality in selected areas in
Jingzhou municipality.

Outputs:

        8,480 meters of wastewater interceptors were constructed inside and outside the moat, exceeding the
         original target of 7,080 meters and the revised target of 8,463 meters.
        341,000 cubic meters of the moat and lakes with safe storage/disposal of the dredged materials were
         dredged, achieving the target of 341,000 cubic meters.

Outcomes:

        Moat water met Class IV for Biochemical Oxygen Demand (BOD) (<6mg/l) for at least 10 of the 12
         monthly samples per year, achieving the target of Class IV being met. The ICR noted that the
         Jingzhou Bureau of Environment and Ecology attested that the moat’s water quality improved from
         Class V to Class IV at closing.

The project achieved all output and outcome targets under this objective. Therefore, the achievement of this
objective is rated High.



Rating
High


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
To improve tourism services in selected areas in Jingzhou municipality

Rationale
Theory of change: The project’s theory of change stated that project inputs/activities such as improving
urban roads and public transport, carrying out activities aimed at improving non-motorized transportation


                                                                                                 Page 7 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Hubei Jingzhou Historic Town Conserv. (P148523)



(NMT), and installing and upgrading signage systems were to result in several outputs. These outputs
included urban roads, public transport and NMT being improved, and signage systems being installed and
upgraded. These outputs, in addition to the outputs under the previous objectives, were to result in the
outcome of improved tourism services in selected areas in Jingzhou municipality.

Outputs:

      10.2 kilometers of non-rural roads were rehabilitated, achieving the target of 10.2 kilometers.
      12 pedestrian crossings were upgraded, achieving the target of 12 pedestrian crossings being
       upgraded.
      28 bus stops were upgraded, achieving the target of 28 bus stops.

Outcomes:

The satisfaction of tourists on tourism services in Jingzhou Historic Town (JHT) increased from 70 percent in
2015 to 92.9 percent in 2022, exceeding the target of 85 percent. According to the Bank team (September 19,
2023), for the last round of tourist satisfaction surveys conducted in October 2022, 690 valid questionnaires
were received from tourists. The result reflects tourists’ satisfaction with the improved museum displays, the
usefulness of the tourist information center, and improved transportation, signage, and site access.

Even though there was no indicator target regarding the increase in the number of tourists, per footnote 19,
the total number of tourists benefiting from the project over the years is estimated at 409,500. The increase in
tourists over the years was mixed – it was high during the initial years of project implementation but then
significantly dropped in 2022 due to frequent lockdowns under strict COVID control measures and then
widespread infection in winter 2022, which paralyzed the tourism industry. The fifth site was completed at the
end of 2022; therefore, it is not yet contributing to additional beneficiaries by project closing. The ICR noted
that in the absence of external shocks, the number of tourists is likely to increase in the near future.

The project measured the achievement of additional indicators, that were not related to one objective
specifically as well as measured the project’s assistance to project management and capacity building.

      The project benefitted 750,000 beneficiaries, exceeding the original target of 600,000 and the revised
       target of 682,000 beneficiaries. Of those beneficiaries, 50 percent were women, achieving the target
       of 50 percent.
      80 percent of the participants rated training/study tours as good or excellent, achieving the target of 80
       percent.
      3,836 participants were involved in consultation activities during project implementation, exceeding the
       original target of 2,000 and the revised target of 3,000. Of those participants, 1,7979 participants were
       female, exceeding the original target of 1,000 participants and the revised target of 1,500 participants.

The project achieved all output and outcome targets under this objective. Even though it was not an outcome
indicator, there was a decline in tourists in 2022 mainly due to the pandemic. The ICR notes that in the
absence of external shocks, the number of tourists is likely to increase in the near future. The achievement of
this objective is rated as Substantial.




                                                                                                   Page 8 of 16
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               Hubei Jingzhou Historic Town Conserv. (P148523)




                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The achievement of the first and third objective was Substantial while the achievement of the second
                            objective was High. Overall, the project’s efficacy was Substantial.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



   5. Efficiency
   Economic efficiency:

   Both, the PAD and the ICR, conducted a traditional economic analysis. The PAD (p. 11) conducted cost-benefit
   analyses for investments in the historical town and at the Xiongjiazhong Archaeological Park, due to their
   separate location. The analyses were based on a quantification of direct use benefits to visitors and local
   residents. Other benefits were not included due to limitations on data.

   Based on historic trends and the carrying capacity of tourist destinations in the project area, conservative
   assumptions were made to forecast the number of tourists visiting the project areas up to 2020 and the
   contribution of project investments to the growth of tourists. The analysis further assumed the number of tourists
   in project areas would remain the same from 2020 to the end of the evaluation period. The analyses only
   attempted to quantify the direct use benefits for tourists and local residents.

   The analyses applied a discount rate of 8 percent. According to the PAD (p. 11) for investments in the historic
   town, the economic internal rate of return (EIRR) was 14.30 percent, and the Net Present Value (NPV) was
   CNY516.7 million at appraisal. For investments in the Xiongjiazhong Archaeological Park the EIRR was 12.65
   percent. The EIRR for the entire project was 14.05 percent.

   The ICR (p. 19) conducted a benefit-cost analysis based on similar assumptions as during appraisal. The
   hypothetical on-site costs of visitors including admission fees, accommodation, food, etc. were replaced by
   actual data. The analyses calculated an overall EIRR of 14.55 percent lower than that in JHT and slightly higher
   than the EIRR in Xiongjiazhong Archaeological Park at appraisal, a NPV of CNY289 million (equal to US$42.5
   million), and a benefit-cost ratio of 1.40. The ICR notes that this is due to the lower number of tourists due to the
   COVID-19 pandemic.



                                                                                                                            Page 9 of 16
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Hubei Jingzhou Historic Town Conserv. (P148523)



Operational efficiency:

The project was able to implement original and additional activities, except for the heritage display space, while
only utilizing 65 percent of project financing. The project was estimated to cost US$170.5 million. Actual cost
was US$111.6 million The project was able to make substantial savings for several reasons: i) successful
biddings, and having costs overpriced at appraisal; ii) adjustments to project design including repurposing of an
existing building as the new tourism information center instead of constructing a new building; iii) the borrower
taking on the financing of several investments, as well as (iv) overestimation of costs of works.

Management costs were 1.89 percent of the total project cost, higher than estimated at appraisal (1.25 percent).
The project’s closing date had to be extended once by a total of 18 months due to prolonged permitting
processes of civil works involving heritage, which resulted in cultural relics and heritage related rehabilitation
and conservation activities in Xiongjiazhong Archeological Park, Jingzhou museum as well as the dredging of
moat and lakes being delayed.

Overall, the project’s efficiency rating is Substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                 Rate Available?            Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      0
 Appraisal                                                 14.05
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      0
 ICR Estimate                                              14.55
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The relevance of the objectives was High. Efficacy was Substantial, and Efficiency was Substantial. Therefore,
the overall outcome rating is Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome


                                                                                                     Page 10 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Hubei Jingzhou Historic Town Conserv. (P148523)



According to the ICR (para. 69), the government remains committed to protecting cultural heritage and
developing tourism as formulated in the new historic town preservation and tourism promotion plan for the
JHT. Furthermore, the government assigned the responsibility for the operation & maintenance (O&M) of
relevant facilities and heritage assets to several agencies, which developed O&M plans and were given
adequate annual O&M budgets. The Bureau of Transportation Management and the Municipal Public
Transportation Corporation have adequate budgets to maintain the transport investments. However, tourism
facilities such as tourist information center museums, natural parks, etc., might face sustainability issues due
to low revenue sources from low-priced ticket sales and insufficient marketing and branding initiatives.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  According to the ICR (para. 49), the project was built on lessons learned from the Bank’s long-term
  experience in cultural heritage conservation and urban development in China and previous Bank projects
  in other countries in this area. These lessons included: i) designing an integrated, simple approach
  (preserving cultural and heritage sites along with environmental and tourist services improvements); ii)
  locating the PMO within a politically supported agency with strong coordinating and convening power;
  and iii) paying significant attention to the monitoring and evaluation system.

  According to the PAD (p.10), the Bank team identified several risks as Substantial, such as complex
  technical design due to the project’s integrated approach, limited institutional capacity for implementation
  and sustainability, and negative environmental and social impacts. The Bank team identified mitigation
  measures such as reducing the number of initially envisioned investments to simplify the design and
  provide training on Bank policies, procedures, and safeguards. According to the ICR (para. 66), risks and
  mitigation measures were appropriately identified. However, the Bank did not identify the risk of lengthy
  permitting processes for civil works involving heritage, which resulted in construction delays.

  Furthermore, the ICR (para. 66) stated that the Bank team had an adequate mix of experts. Project
  preparation took 22 months, within the average preparation time for complex projects in China.

  The project’s Results Framework was adequate (see section 9a for more details).

  According to the ICR (para. 71), during project design, the borrower followed government price standards
  to estimate the costs of planned civil works, which were considerably higher (30 to 40 percent) than the
  contracts’ eventual costs following competitive bidding processes. Additional activities were added during
  project restructuring to utilize more of the available financing.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision

                                                                                                     Page 11 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Hubei Jingzhou Historic Town Conserv. (P148523)



 According to the ICR (para. 67), the Bank team conducted 15 supervision missions and several short
 technical missions throughout the seven-year project implementation. The project benefitted from a low
 turnover of Bank team members, with one of the Task Team Leaders (TTLs) staying on the project
 throughout its implementation. The ICR (para. 67) stated that the Bank’s aide memoires were sufficiently
 candid in assessing implementation progress and included time-bound action plans to address
 implementation bottlenecks. The restructuring effectively facilitated the use of available loan proceeds to
 scale the project’s impact while providing the borrower more time to achieve the scaled-up outcomes.
 Furthermore, the Bank team provided training and held workshops to build capacity throughout project
 implementation.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The project's objectives were specific, and clearly defined, and the project’s theory of change and how key
 activities/inputs were to lead to the intended outcomes was sound and reflected in the Results Framework.
 The selected indicators encompassed key outcomes of the PDO statement, and the intermediate
 outcome indicators were adequate to capture the contribution of the project’s components towards
 achieving the objectives. The selected indicators were sufficiently specific and measurable, and all had a
 target. The project could have also benefitted from including an indicator of the number of tourists in
 addition to the satisfaction rate as part of the results framework.

 According to the PAD (p. 9), the Project Management Office (PMO), with inputs from the Project
 Implementing Agencies (PIAs), was to be responsible for data collection and reporting on progress and
 results.




b. M&E Implementation
  According to the ICR (para. 55) during the first year of project implementation, a baseline socio-economic
  evaluation survey to define baselines for the urban poor population, employment in tourism, and other
  socioeconomic factors as well as a baseline tourist satisfaction survey were conducted. The ICR (para.
  56) stated that consultants were hired to support the PMO and PIAs to collect, consolidate, and report
  data in semi-annual reports, as well as at mid-term and at completion. The tourist satisfaction and
  beneficiary socio-economic evaluation surveys were conducted on an annual basis. Furthermore, semi-
  annual progress reports, the mid-term and the completion report were submitted to the Bank in a timely
  manner and were of adequate quality. The project also hired a third party to monitor the implementation

                                                                                                   Page 12 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Hubei Jingzhou Historic Town Conserv. (P148523)



  of the project’s Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) and Resettlement Action Plan
  (RAP), which also were of adequate quality and submitted to the Bank on time.



c. M&E Utilization
  According to the ICR (para. 57), the PMO and PIAs used the M&E data to track implementation progress
  towards achieving the project’s objective and identify potential risks and implementation, such as slow
  disbursement between 2016 and 2018, delays in permitting and construction works, and safeguard
  issues. Also, the Bank team used M&E data to identify the need to restructure the project in 2020. As a
  result of identifying these bottlenecks, the Bank team requested the PMO to follow a time bound action
  plan for streamlining the government approvals and addressing the disbursement lags.



  M&E Quality Rating
  High

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as category B and triggered the Bank’s safeguard policies OP/BP 4.01
   (Environmental Assessment), OP/BP 4.11 (Physical Cultural Resources), and OP/BP 4.04 (Natural
   Habitats). According to the ICR (para 59), the project prepared an Environmental Assessment, including an
   Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) and an Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP). The
   EIA included a chapter on Physical Cultural Resources and defined impacts on the city moat and
   lakes within and around JHT. The ESMP included mitigation measures to minimize risks to encountered
   heritage resources and any risks to physical cultural resources.

   According to the ICR (para 60), a preliminary assessment of 2021 found that the landfill’s area groundwater
   was exposed to leakage of ammoniacal nitrogen from the landfill due to the poor quality construction of its
   lining system. A third party prepared a plan with measures to correct this issue. A new site assessment was
   conducted, which confirmed the safety of the site and nearby area, complying with the Bank’s safeguard
   policy.

   The project also triggered the Bank’s social safeguard policy OP/BP 4.12 (Involuntary Resettlement). The
   project developed a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) and a Resettlement Policy Framework, which outlined
   mitigation measures. According to the ICR (para. 61), independent monitoring teams carried out external
   monitoring of resettlement activities, including annual social impact assessments and tourist satisfaction
   surveys. The teams submitted 12 external monitoring reports confirming the project's compliance with
   OP/BP 4.12. The ICR (para. 61) further stated that affected households received adequate compensation
   from Jingzhou Municipality to ensure that their living standards were restored as necessary.

   According to the Bank team (September 19, 2023), the overall safeguard rating was Satisfactory when the
   project closed.




                                                                                                Page 13 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Hubei Jingzhou Historic Town Conserv. (P148523)



   According to the ICR (para. 62), the project developed a grievance redress mechanism that received
   complaints around designs of civil works and resettlement housing, which were all fully addressed.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management:

   According to the ICR (p. 65), the project complied with the Bank’s legal covenants, and financial
   management activities were in line with the Bank’s requirements. Accounting and financial reporting
   complied with the government’s regulations and fulfilled the requirements specified in the loan agreement.
   The project had an adequate financial management system for accurate and timely information on using
   loan proceeds. The project did not encounter any significant financial management related issues, and
   when some shortcomings were identified, such as weak contract management, they were promptly
   addressed by the Bank team.

   The external auditor’s opinions were unqualified and submitted in a timely manner. The FM rating at
   project closing was Moderately Satisfactory.

   Procurement:

   According to the ICR (para. 63), the project’s procurement of works, goods, and consultant services
   complied with the legal agreement, the Bank’s procurement policy, and procedural requirements. In total,
   28 contracts were successfully procured and implemented with Bank financing. The construction of a
   heritage display space was cancelled since the government changed the preservation plan of the JHT. The
   procurement rating at project closing was Satisfactory.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   NA



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                     IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                        Satisfactory            Satisfactory

Bank Performance               Satisfactory            Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                 High                    High

                                                                                                   Page 14 of 16
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Hubei Jingzhou Historic Town Conserv. (P148523)



 Quality of ICR                   ---                    Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR (p. 29) included lessons learned which were adapted by IEG:

        Integrating cultural heritage conservation with tourism development and urban
         regeneration activities can broaden the project’s impact. In this project, activities to
         improve the environment of heritage sites and the city’s services for visiting tourists
         benefitted residents regarding their living environment.
        Infrastructure projects in China might benefit from considering the potential for
         overpricing when following government price standards. In this project, the borrower
         followed government price standards to estimate the cost of planned civil works, which were
         approximately 30 to 40 percent higher than the contract’s actual costs. This resulted in the
         project being restructured and introducing additional activities in line with the project’s
         objective.
        Ensuring the approval of cultural conservation plans during project preparation can
         avoid delays during implementation. In this project, even though most of the sites’
         conservation plans had already been prepared and were approved when the project was
         appraised, their final approval took much longer than expected and resulted in
         implementation delays.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provided an adequate overview of project preparation and implementation. It was concise, internally
consistent, and sufficiently outcome-driven. Also, the ICR included an appropriate Economic analysis. The ICR
lacked details of the satisfaction survey regarding the number of people surveyed and the trend over time,
which was a key outcome indicator. Also, there were minor inconsistencies in the EIRR at appraisal, as stated
in the ICR, for the investments in the historic town and the Xiongjiazhong Archaeological Park compared to the
PAD (p. 11).

Overall, the quality of the ICR is rated Substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                    Page 15 of 16
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
Hubei Jingzhou Historic Town Conserv. (P148523)




                                                                               Page 16 of 16
