     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PACIFIC RESILIENCE PROGRAM - PIFS (P155542)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0023533

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P155542                                    PACIFIC RESILIENCE PROGRAM - PIFS

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Pacific Islands                            Urban, Resilience and Land


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-D0750,TF-A0887                         30-Nov-2020                                           2,151,017.89

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 19-Jun-2015                                31-Oct-2022

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            2,220,000.00                                       900,000.00

 Revised Commitment                             2,220,000.00                                       900,000.00

 Actual                                         2,151,172.47                                       877,261.04




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Cynthia Nunez-Ollero       Vibecke Dixon                 Avjeet Singh                   IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Financing Agreement (FA, p 5) and the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, paragraph 18) the
   Project Development Objective (PDO) of this Pacific Resilience Project under the Pacific Island Forum
   Secretariat (PIFS) Pacific Resilience Program (PREP) was "to strengthen early warning, resilient investments
   and financial protection of the Participating Countries."

   PREP was a multi-phased program to strengthen the resilience of Pacific Island Countries (PICs) to natural
   hazards and the impact of climate change. This project (PREP-PIFS) was the first of the SOPs and consisted

                                                                                                  Page 1 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PACIFIC RESILIENCE PROGRAM - PIFS (P155542)



   of activities to strengthen PIFS’ capacity to promote the financial protection of participating countries in
   responding to natural disasters and climate change.

   The project PDO replicated the PDO of the larger PREP. Even though this project (PREP-PIFS) PDO
   included outcomes that were not supported by activities financed under the project, the PAD (pages 74-77)
   indicated that this project would address primarily Outcome 3 (Strengthened Financial Protection), while
   contributing to other outcomes indirectly through its high-level coordinating role.

   This review will assess project performance against the third objective, which was to be addressed by the
   project i.e., "to strengthen financial protection of the participating countries".



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   This project was to finance two components with a region wide focus implemented by the Pacific Island
   Forum Secretariat (PIFS) under the larger Pacific Resilience Program (PREP). This project was the first of
   the SOPs and consisted of activities to strengthen PIFS' capacity to promote the financial protection of
   participating countries in responding to natural disasters and climate change.

   1: Disaster Risk Financing: (US$0.75 million at appraisal, US$0.81 million actual). This component was to
   finance a position within PIFS, finance an annual regional workshop for the next three years
   where ministers from the participating Pacific Island countries (PICs) were invited. These workshops were
   to focus on Disaster Risk Financing Instruments (DRFIs). This component was also to finance studies to
   develop a medium- and long-term framework for a mutual insurance fund for disaster risk financing, assess
   participating countries’ capacity, and help them prepare to access global climate funds. The 2020
   restructuring dropped the development of a mutual insurance fund. The recruitment of a Regional Risk
   Finance/Insurance Specialist to develop the mutual insurance fund concept was unsuccessful following two
   failed negotiations with eligible candidates (ICR, paragraphs 26 (a) and 74). Also, multiple new financial
   instruments became available beginning in 2016, with the Pacific Catastrophe Insurance Company (PCRC)
   offering pooled catastrophe insurance. The Asian Development Bank produced the Regional Contingent
   Financing Risk Pool. The World Bank offered IDA countries in 2017 the Catastrophe Deferred Drawdown
   Option (CAT-DDO) and adopted Contingency Emergency Response Components (CERCs) in its
   investment projects. The workshops to be financed were refocused to provide demand-based knowledge
   and capacity building products to assist PICs decide on options that meet their needs.

   2: Project and Program Management: (US$1.47 million at appraisal, US$1.34 million actual) This
   component was to finance activities to strengthen the capacity of PIFS to coordinate the program at the
   regional level, conduct high level coordination of climate and disaster resilient development projects and
   initiatives in the participating PICs. The project was to finance a PIFS Regional Coordination Unit (RCU),

                                                                                                       Page 2 of 16
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    PACIFIC RESILIENCE PROGRAM - PIFS (P155542)



  hire a coordinator, part-time accountant, junior officer, a Disaster Risk Finance Insurance (DRFI), and other
  short-term experts. This component was to finance its operating costs, audits, and the costs of the PREP
  Mid Term Review (MTR). The RCU was to provide overall program coordination, report on the activities of
  the Regional Steering Committee (RSC), monitor the performance of the participating countries and the
  region, consult with stakeholders on PREP issues, and provide information on PREP achievements. The
  RCU was expected to serve as the Pacific Regional Coordinator for the Pilot Program for Climate
  Resilience after the Asian Development Bank ended its two-year financing commitment. The RCU was also
  to serve as Secretariat to the Pacific Resilience Partnership (PRP) to help implement the Framework for
  Resilient Development in the Pacific (FRDP) and was to become the regional and strategic coordination hub
  for all climate and disaster resilient development in the PICs and territories.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost: The original total project cost was a grant of US$2.2 million. The grant disbursed US$2.2
  million at closing.

  Financing: The International Development Association (IDA) and the Global Environment Facility Special
  Climate Change Fund (GEF-SCCF) financed this grant.

  Borrower Contribution: None in the ICR Data Sheet, but Annex 3 noted an estimated contribution of
  US$0.32 million in cash, equivalent to the waived PIFS management fees and in-kind equivalent to office
  cost allocations.

  Dates: The project was approved on June 19, 2015, and became effective on November 19, 2015. The Mid
  Term Review (MTR) was conducted on December 3, 2018. The project was to close on November 30,
  2020, but was extended by 23 months and closed on October 31, 2022. A level 2 restructuring on June 20,
  2020, introduced changes to the results framework by revising the description of the components and the
  PDO outcome indicator, target values, and replacing output indicators. The restructuring also revised the
  institutional implementation arrangements by naming the Regional Coordinator as Project
  Manager, renaming the Regional Steering Committee (RSC) to the Regional Advisory Committee
  (RAC), dropping the support to the Pacific Resilience Partnership (PRP) and the Pilot Program for Climate
  Resilience (PPCR), and extending the closing date.

  Split Rating: A split rating of the outcome will not be undertaken. Based on the clarifications provided by
  the team, even though the project scope and related indicators were revised, it was to accommodate the
  shift in the priorities among the PICs and did not entail reducing the ambition of the project. The original
  design intended to develop a mutual insurance fund for natural disasters. Since project approval, there has
  been a significant shift among PICs on the focus of Disaster risk financing instruments (DRFI). After
  assessing the different financing options, while some countries continue to participate in a regional
  parametric insurance program (PCRAFI), most PICs have chosen to focus on contingency finance that can
  respond quickly to major events, including the government’s contingency funds and external contingency
  funds such as the World Bank’s Cat DDO or its ADB equivalent product CDF (Contingency Disaster
  Financing). Per the team, such products were found to be better suited to the fiscal conditions and risk
  financing needs of PICs. The project will only be assessed based on the revised scope and PDO
  indicators.




                                                                                                  Page 3 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PACIFIC RESILIENCE PROGRAM - PIFS (P155542)




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Context: The Pacific Resilience Program (PREP) was launched in 2016 as a series of projects (SOPs) to
strengthen the resilience of Pacific Island Countries (PICs) against natural hazards and climate
change. PREP was funded by credits from the International Development Association (IDA, US$32.29
million) and grants to Tonga and the Pacific Islands Forum Secretariat (PIFS, US$5.48 million) from the
Global Environment Facility Special Climate Change Fund (GEF SCC); grants to the Pacific Community
(PPCR, US$5.8 million) from the Pilot Program for Climate Resilience and grant to Tonga (US$1.5 million)
from the Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery (GFDRR). PREP participant countries
included Samoa, Tonga, the Republic of the Marshall Islands (RMI), and Vanuatu. The regional functions
were to be conducted by the Pacific Islands Forum Secretariat (PIFS) and the Secretariat of the Pacific
Community (SPC). PIFS supported the countries on financial protection, while SPC supported the countries
on early warning and resilient investments. This project was implemented by PIFS and focused on the
PREP component of the financial protection of the region.

Regional and National Plans: The objectives of PREP and this project were aligned with both country-
specific and regional strategies. The PDO was relevant to the following goals of the regional strategy called
the Framework for Resilient Development in the Pacific (FRDP): (i) to strengthen integrated risk reduction,
and adaptation to enhance climate change and disaster resilience, and (ii) to strengthen disaster
preparedness, response, and recovery. At closing, the PDO was relevant to the new 2050 Strategy for the
Blue Pacific Continent of the PICs and PIFS’s regional priorities. Pacific Island Forum Leaders in 2022
endorsed this regional strategy that aimed “for all Pacific peoples to remain resilient to the impacts of
climate change and disasters…” This strategy was to be achieved by strengthening regional cooperation,
building capacity, fostering community resilience, and ensuring financial commitments that responded to the
needs of the region. This project was to help PIFS achieve resilience outcomes, namely:
(i) integrate climate change and disaster risk into national public financial management systems, (ii)
advance work related to the FRDP and Pacific Resilience Partnership (PRP), and (iii) disaster risk finance
and risk governance.

World Bank Regional Partnership Framework (RPF): The PDO was aligned with the key objectives of
the Samoa, Tonga, and RMI Country Assistance Strategies (CASs), which emphasized building resilience
to natural disasters and climate change. The project’s PDO was aligned with the World Bank Group’s
Regional Partnership Framework (RPF) for Kiribati, the Republic of Nauru, the Republic of the Marshall
Islands, the Federated States of Micronesia, the Republic of Palau, the Independent State of Samoa, the
Kingdom of Tonga, Tuvalu, and Vanuatu for Fiscal Years 2017–2021. This RPF was extended due to the
COVID-19 pandemic until a new one was adopted. The PDO was relevant to one of four focus areas of the
RPF and supported one of ten objectives. The PDO was relevant to the RPF’s Focus Area 3: Protecting
Incomes and Livelihoods, and Objective 3.1 Strengthen Resilience to Natural Disasters and Climate
Change. This RPF objective referred to PREP and its three PDO outcomes. The RPF committed to
“promote regional and platform-based approaches and collaboration with regional organizations,” using
PREP as an example. The PDO and this project served as a first step in a series of projects that would
contribute to achieving the RPF objectives. The PREP and the objectives of this project were consistent

                                                                                                   Page 4 of 16
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      PACIFIC RESILIENCE PROGRAM - PIFS (P155542)



               with the priorities contained in the Program for Adaptation of the Special Climate Change Fund (SCCF) of
               the Global Environment Facility (GEF). These included (i) building institutional capacity for preventive
               measures, planning, preparedness, and managing climate-related disasters and (ii) assisting national and
               regional centers and networks in rapid response to extreme weather events.

               World Bank Experience in the countries, region, and sector: The World Bank has supported the PICs in
               disaster risk management and climate change adaptation since the late 1990s. This included support for
               the Pilot Program for Climate Resilience (PPCR) in the Pacific region. Three planning and policy documents
               were produced in 2006-2014.

               Overall, the relevance of the PDO is rated Substantial. Even though the PDO formulation was directly
               adopted from the larger program, the project PDO was to mainly focus only on one of the three sub-
               objectives/outcomes. The project was pitched appropriately as an initial step in a series of projects after
               considering the capacity of the PICs to address disaster and climate risks.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To strengthen financial protection of the participating countries.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change (TOC). No project specific TOC was prepared at appraisal. The TOC for the overall PREP
                             showed that this intervention was to contribute to PDO outcome 3 of PREP. The original design included the
                             preparation of a mutual insurance fund which was dropped at restructuring. A project-specific TOC was
                             prepared at restructuring showing a reasonably argued causal link between inputs and outputs, but the link to
                             the expected outcomes was not well established.

                             Inputs and activities were to include financing regional technical assistance, coordination for disaster risk
                             financing, and the development of a mutual insurance fund. The PICs were to capitalize a mutual insurance
                             fund, to be supplemented by donors. Funds would then be made available to contributing PICs following a
                             disaster. The concept of mutual insurance fund was dropped during restructuring and replaced with
                             knowledge products to help PICs decide on appropriate disaster risk financing instruments. Inputs included
                             support for high-level coordination of climate and disaster resilience across PICs, the establishment of a PIFS
                             Regional Coordination Unit (RCU), conducting training activities on disaster risk financing instruments (DRFI),
                             and sponsoring high-level coordination meetings on climate and disaster resilience across the region.

                             Outputs were to be advisory services on disaster financing, strengthened coordination of disaster financing
                             instruments in the region, and a mutual insurance fund. The RCU was to take over the PIFS PREP

                                                                                                                                Page 5 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   PACIFIC RESILIENCE PROGRAM - PIFS (P155542)



Secretariat to implement the regional FRDP strategy after the Asian Development Bank (ADB)
completed its two-year funding commitment. The 2020 restructuring replaced efforts to develop a single
mutual insurance fund for the region with demand-based knowledge and capacity-building products to inform
PICs on climate and disaster risk financing options that met their needs. In addition, other donors stepped in
to continue funding the PRP Secretariat, dropping the need for the RCU to absorb those functions.

Outcome was to be the expanded coordination capacity of the PIFS and enhanced ability to offer disaster
risk financing instruments. This project’s contribution to stronger financial protection in participating
countries was to be reflected in the number of beneficiaries. This outcome indicator was not linked
to strengthened financial protection of participating countries and instead linked to project beneficiaries from
strengthened early warning and preparedness in the Samoa and Tonga projects. The 2020 restructuring
redefined beneficiaries as participants in the coordination, advisory, and regional meetings where key
products would be presented. This outcome indicator remained at the output level. The team clarified that
attending the workshops would help regional stakeholders better understand disaster risk financing (DRF)
through knowledge sharing of experiences at Government and community levels and help inform decision-
making. However, no metrics were defined to reflect institutional changes that linked meeting participation to
using products to formulate financial protection policy measures.

The TOC included the following assumptions, which, if actualized, would increase the likelihood that the
outcomes would be achieved: that participating countries were willing to (i) adopt disaster risk financing
instruments for their financial protection against climate change and extreme events and (ii) follow the advice
and coordination role of the PIFS-RCU. The assumptions were unchanged at restructuring.

OUTPUTS:

The original indicator of a concept for a mutual insurance fund was not monitored and subsequently dropped
as it had become irrelevant (ICR, para 26). Restructuring replaced the outputs with the following:

      Five knowledge products on climate and disaster risk financing were produced, meeting the target.
      18 PREP Regional Coordination and Regional Advisory Committee (RAC) meetings were held
       virtually or in person. This exceeded the target of 12 (baseline 4).

OUTCOME:

The original outcome indicator related to the number of project beneficiaries was not relevant since it was not
linked to strengthened financial protection of participating countries and instead linked to project beneficiaries
from strengthened early warning and preparedness in the Samoa and Tonga projects. The revised indicator
was the following:

      2,253 direct project beneficiaries participated in the PIFS-sponsored meetings (PREP coordination
       and advisory meetings over five years and larger regional meetings where key products are
       presented) exceeding the revised target of 2,000 beneficiaries. Among the beneficiaries, 1,147 were
       women, exceeding the revised target of 1,000 women.

The ICR notes that the knowledge products delivered were to improve decision-making on climate and
disaster-resilient development in PREP countries. The following additional results contributed towards
the PREP PDO outcome 3 (ICR, Table 4, and additional information provided by the team via email dated


                                                                                                    Page 6 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   PACIFIC RESILIENCE PROGRAM - PIFS (P155542)



October 6, 2023 and Letter from the Office of the Secretary General, Pacific Islands Forum dated October 12,
2023)

      The project strengthened commitment amongst regional actors through improved coordination and
         knowledge sharing. In 2021, the Pacific Islands Forum Economic Ministers Meeting (FEMM) created
         the DRF Working Group and established the PIFS DRF mandate. PIFS hired a new Resilience
         Development Finance Advisor. Through the project's efforts, DRF has become a standing agenda
         item in the annual Forum Economic Ministers Meeting, whereas previously, it was combined with
         Climate Finance. The project highlighted and advocated for more active, strategic measures
         supporting strengthened financial protection against disasters for all Pacific Island countries. This
         culminated in development of the Pacific Regional Roadmap for Disaster Risk Financing (The
         Roadmap) and National Guidelines for the Development of National DRF Strategies (Guideline).
        In close collaboration with the Pacific Community, the PREP convened the inaugural meeting of
         Ministers responsible for Disaster Risk Reduction in September 2022. Through the meeting, PIFS and
         SPC obtained the endorsement of Ministers for furthering the work on DRF, Climate Financing, and
         Resilience building, alongside other imperatives for safety and preparedness in the region.
        The Disaster Risk Financing Learning Series delivered through the project in 2022 helped regional
         stakeholders better understand disaster risk financing (DRF), through knowledge sharing of
         experiences at Government and community levels. Further, it helped to highlight participation
         opportunities for other sectors that can cater to the needs of vulnerable groups like women and the
         elderly. The DRF learning series remains ongoing, specifically focusing on raising awareness of the
         Roadmap and Guidelines.
        Tonga established a new Aid Management and Resilient Development Financing Division and
         incorporated resilience financing in public financial management. The ICR notes that the PREP-PIFS
         project contributed by leading the group of partners providing technical assistance to the Ministry of
         Finance and advised on the design of the new division and staff terms of reference—although it did
         not contribute specifically to Tonga’s DRF Strategy. Other partners included the Climate Finance
         Readiness in the Pacific Project (funded by the Australian Government Department of Foreign Affairs
         and German International Development Agency) and the Governance for Resilience Programme
         (through the United Nations Development Programme, or UNDP).
        The ICR notes that the knowledge product “An Overview of Climate and Disaster Risk Financing for
         PICs” (started in 2018 and published in 2021) that summarized the range of climate and DRF
         instruments available to PICs, their roles, and comparative advantages helped inform Samoa’s DRF
         Policy 2022-2025 - even though the policy itself was completed under Samoa’s national PREP project.
         The new DRF policy, in turn, enabled the government to include, for the first time, annual funding for
         disaster emergency response for frontline agencies in their 2022/2023 budget and is developing a
         new social protection policy. The ICR notes that including contingency financing in budget documents
         was also a 2023 target under the Samoa Second Recovery and Resilience Development Operation
         (P174498). The Bank’s team notes that the Cat DDOs were one of the main contingent financing
         instruments promoted under the DRF strategies during regional knowledge events, which helped
         influence the increasing interest in Cat DDOs. The World Bank has four ongoing Cat DDOs (Samoa,
         Tonga, Fiji, Tuvalu), and three more (Kiribati, RMI, Solomon Islands) are currently being prepared.

The following original PREP outcomes were not monitored in the absence of an eligible
emergency: (i) Participating PICs received payments within a month of the occurrence of an insured event.;



                                                                                                 Page 7 of 16
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                PACIFIC RESILIENCE PROGRAM - PIFS (P155542)



                            (ii) Time elapsed from when the government requested to when contingency emergency funds were
                            committed following an eligible emergency.

                            While the outcome indicator of people participating in PIFS meetings and knowledge events was at an output
                            level, the team provided evidence of the project’s contribution towards the objective of strengthening financial
                            protection. The team shared additional evidence beyond the Results Framework on how the project
                            influenced decisions and policies for enhancing financial protection. It is also noted that some results
                            achieved were also supported by contributions from other operations and various donors, as mentioned
                            earlier.

                            Overall, the efficacy of the project to achieve this objective is rated as Substantial.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The efficacy of the project against the third objective, which was to be addressed by the project, i.e., "to
                            strengthen financial protection of the participating countries," is rated as Substantial.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   Economic Efficiency: This project did not have any investment components other than technical assistance
   and support for project and program management. A cost-effectiveness analysis was not presented at appraisal.
   One was prepared at closing. Cost-effectiveness was estimated using benefits such as: the reasonableness of
   costs relative to measurable results, and unit cost comparators. The following estimated benefits were
   compared to appraisal estimates: (i) disbursement profile; (ii) procurement delays; (iii) cost overruns; and (iv)
   administrative costs. (ICR, footnote 55) The project was cost-efficient, meeting its targets, delivering outputs at
   reasonable costs.

   Administrative and Operational Efficiency: This project was implemented using a newly introduced World
   Bank instrument, a Series of Project (SOP) under the umbrella program, PREP. Project deliverables were
   initially delayed, but implementation improved after the Mid Term Review (MTR), followed by a level 2
   restructuring and a 23-month extension of project closing. From the time PREP was designed until end-2016,
   the Pacific Islands received a three-fold increase in development aid for climate and disaster resilience. Donors
   sponsored new financial protection instruments that crowded the market. The mutual insurance fund concept

                                                                                                                                 Page 8 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      PACIFIC RESILIENCE PROGRAM - PIFS (P155542)



under this project became irrelevant. A PIFS-specific Project Operations Manual (POM) was completed in
September 2016, ten months after effectiveness, causing initial delays. The COVID-19 pandemic restricted
mobility, causing further delays. A category 5 storm, Tropical Cyclone Harold in April 2020, restricted the
participation of project stakeholders from Fiji, Vanuatu, Tonga, and the Solomon Islands. Deliverables were
bunched up toward the second half of the implementation period. Moderate procurement inefficiencies were
reported, with minor delays in contract signatures (24 days on average), but longer delays on contract
completion (150 days). Overall, the project was extended by 23 months beyond the original closing date.

Overall, the efficiency of the project is rated Modest. Cost-effectiveness was noted as reasonable. Operational
efficiency registered delays. The ICR notes that many of the project deliverables were concentrated in the
second half of implementation, constraining the uptake of some of the knowledge products and learning events
during the project’s timeline (ICR para 53).


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?            Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                    0
 Appraisal                                                 0
                                                                                     Not Applicable
                                                                                    0
 ICR Estimate                                              0
                                                                                     Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

This project was designed to contribute to the larger PREP that justified its substantial relevance, and it was
well-aligned with the regional and World Bank Partnership Framework. The efficacy of the project to achieve
PDO outcome 3 on strengthening the financial protection of the participating countries is rated as Substantial.
Efficiency is rated Modest, given the implementation delays. Overall. the project outcome is rated Moderately
Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome



                                                                                                    Page 9 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PACIFIC RESILIENCE PROGRAM - PIFS (P155542)



The following pose minimal risk to the limited development outcome of the project.

      Government commitment to the governance structure. In this project, PIC leaders in 2021
         endorsed the extension of PRP’s governance arrangements until 2030. This indicated a
         commitment to the PIFS-led RCU and PRP technical working groups. In disaster risk financing (DRF),
         the 2021 and 2022 Pacific Islands Forum Economic Ministers Meeting (FEMM) agreed to
         use the Disaster Risk Financing Working Group (DRFWG) as an expert group for its high-level annual
         discussions. FEMM also directed PIFS to help PICs develop national DRF strategies and encouraged
         PICs to seek DRFWG help to develop their respective DRF capacity.
        Stakeholder commitment. In this project, the FEMM gave PIFS the mandate to guide PICs in
         developing their respective DRF strategies. PIFS strengthened its core disaster resilience functions
         by hiring a Resilience Development Finance Advisor in January 2021 and a Resilience Officer was to
         be hired in 2023. The advisor was to manage the PIFS disaster risk finance and governance agenda
         and the officer was to complete the team. PIFS also prepared its Theory of Change (TOC) with a
         framework to sustain its investments, inform its medium-term strategy, and outline its’ role in
         promoting climate and disaster resilience across its members.
        Sustaining the tradition of peer-to-peer learning and long-term engagement. In this project,
         PIFS introduced the practitioners’ forum, the program coordination meetings, and the DRF working
         group. These endeavors built on the regional tradition of face-to-face interactions, oral
         communications, and sustaining long-term relations. Behavior changes over a long period of time and
         sustaining efforts to share knowledge may help reduce risk from shared hazards in the region.
        Overcrowding of donor financing. In this project, climate and disaster resilience to the Pacific
         Islands increased three-fold during the initial stages of implementation. This resulted in crowding out
         the marketplace with donor-sponsored instruments in areas such as financial protection. The
         customized mutual insurance fund concept for the region became irrelevant. Misgivings from
         participating countries such as Vanuatu also affected the viability of the planned instrument. Vanuatu
         did not want to contribute to a regional catastrophe insurance fund because other similar instruments
         were available. They were disappointed when they did not receive any payout following the Ambae
         volcanic eruptions in November 2017.
        Exposure to natural disasters. In this project, the PICs experienced Tropical Cyclone Harold, a
         category 5 storm, and the eruption of the Ambae volcano, The region is highly vulnerable to natural
         hazards as acknowledged by this project.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project was relevant to the regional strategy of addressing shared risks from disasters. Design
  incorporated lessons from more than three years' experience of the World Bank with the Pacific
  Catastrophe Risk Assessment and Financing Initiative (PCRAFI) and over a decade of experience in the
  Caribbean in disaster risk financing. The World Bank team originally designed PREP as a regional
  program implemented by two entities to achieve a program-wide PDO. The Secretariat for Pacific
  Countries (SPC) was to implement the early warning and resilient investments component. PIFS was
  to implement the disaster risk financing component. At appraisal, to facilitate disbursements, the design
  separated the components into two SOPs. The Bank team relied on the PREP program-wide results

                                                                                                    Page 10 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PACIFIC RESILIENCE PROGRAM - PIFS (P155542)



  framework, including the PDO, to serve the purposes of this project. This proved to be a significant
  shortcoming. PIFS lacked the necessary inputs to achieve the programmatic PDO and the results
  framework lacked outcome-level indicators (ICR, paragraph 68).

  Gender and safeguards aspects were addressed at the program level. An SPC project-hired procurement
  advisor for all PREP-related procurement activities was to assist this project. PIFS accounting and
  internal control procedures were assessed as adequate. External annual audits were to be conducted.

  The capacity of disaster risk management and climate resilience institutions was assessed as relatively
  weak. To mitigate these risks, the Bank team prepared an implementation support plan (ICR, paragraph
  95), including a simplified design to match capacity building with modest resources. The choice of
  implementing agency was appropriate. The regional entity was to support the countries with weak
  capacity. However, with the modest resources, the PDO proved overly ambitious. The readiness to
  implement was not sufficiently addressed. A PIFS-specific Project Operations Manual (POM) was
  completed in September 2016, ten months after effectiveness. There were also delays in hiring experts
  for the main activity of devising an appropriate disaster risk financing instrument.

  Overall, the quality of Bank performance at entry is rated Moderately Unsatisfactory. There
  were shortcomings with the design, the formulation of the PDO and the indicators, and the readiness to
  implement.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The Bank team adequately supervised the project with semiannual implementation support missions
 except during the COVID-19 pandemic. The seven-year project implementation period experienced high
 staff turnover affecting all but two of the Bank team. A Task Team Leader was assigned in Fiji in June
 2017. Fiduciary staff were based in Sydney. Both teams provided face-to-face and virtual support. Initial
 lack of clarity on the responsibilities of PIFS and SPC vis-à-vis national PREP project components led to a
 slow project start. Following the MTR, the Bank team worked closely with PIFS and restructured the project
 five years after the project start and two years away from closing to ensure that project activities and
 indicators remained relevant to participating PICs, such as a stronger emphasis on peer-to-peer learning;
 support to the FRDP’s implementation, and demand-based knowledge products. At closing, the Bank team
 worked on transition arrangements with PIFS, including opening an escrow account to complete PIFS’ own
 project evaluation.

 Bank supervision during implementation restructured the project to revise target values of indicators,
 clarified the outcome indicator, but did not sufficiently address the shortcoming in the lack of PDO outcome
 indicator, and the disconnect between the PDO formulation and the project design. Overall, the Bank
 Performance at Supervision is rated as Moderately Satisfactory.

 Overall, the World Bank performance is rated Moderately Satisfactory.



                                                                                                  Page 11 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PACIFIC RESILIENCE PROGRAM - PIFS (P155542)




  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The M&E design included a programmatic Theory of Change, which encompassed the whole PDO
 formulation (which was the same as the programmatic Objective), and thus captured the other two
 additional PDO level outcomes in addition to the one which this project was designed to focus on. There
 was no project specific M&E design or a project-specific results framework. This made M&E design
 challenging. The ICR acknowledged this as a design shortcoming (ICR, paragraph 79). The key activities
 and outputs were to contribute to the overall PREP PDO outcome even if the project itself did not include
 inputs and outputs for the other components of the overall PREP. The PDO was broad, not project-
 specific, and replicated the PREP PDO — strengthened early warning, resilient investments, and financial
 protection of participating countries. This made the project PDO overly optimistic and did not match
 the modest resources or reduced scope of the project — knowledge sharing, capacity building, and
 coordination at the regional level. The indicators were not specific to the project, with inadequate outcome
 indicators to achieve disaster resilience by strengthening financial protection of the PICs. The M&E design
 was to be managed by PIFS.



b. M&E Implementation
  PIFS was to implement the overall PREP M&E design as well as this project's. PIFS chaired the Council
  of Regional Organizations in the Pacific and served as convener of the Regional Advisory Committee
  (RAC) and Project Coordination Meetings (PCMs). A full-time M&E and communications officer was hired
  in October 2019. The restructuring changed the focus of the project and indicators introduced to
  address M&E design weaknesses did not match the unchanged PDO formulation. Outcome indicators
  were revised to match the knowledge sharing and capacity building inputs of the project —the numbers of
  participants, regional meetings, and knowledge products—although these were more at output, rather
  than outcome levels and did not produce evidence of how these contributed to strengthening the financial
  protection mechanisms for disaster risk resilience of the PICs. PIFS submitted the required bi-annual
  project reports on time. PIFS commissioned an independent MTR of all PREP projects in November
  2018, and a review of key findings and lessons learned from the PREP program at closing. PIFS
  published an online project-specific completion report in October 2022.



c. M&E Utilization
  The M&E data were used to inform the restructuring of this project and other components of PREP that
  were being implemented (ICR, paragraph 85). The results of the MTR were shared with


                                                                                                   Page 12 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PACIFIC RESILIENCE PROGRAM - PIFS (P155542)



  PREP stakeholders. The data was used to improve program implementation. RAC and the PRP
  Taskforces were used as regional platforms to help PICs navigate the overcrowded field of resilience-
  related projects in the region. Data was used to improve communication and knowledge exchanges on
  PREP activities and lessons from the operation. PIFS and the World Bank evaluation teams collected
  additional information to triangulate the outcomes. These included a PIFS-led survey of PREP
  stakeholders and a survey of participants in the Virtual Learning Series at project closing; the World
  Bank team's virtual survey of key stakeholders in January-February 2023; and a review of relevant
  policy, budget, and strategy documents M&E data were used to assess the project's contribution to
  the outcome.

  The overall quality of the M&E is rated Modest. There were significant shortcomings in the M&E design,
  and changes introduced at restructuring did not adequately address the significant design weaknesses.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Environmental and social safeguards: This project was a technical assistance (TA) and did not trigger
   any World Bank safeguards policies (ICR, paragraph 89). The FA included covenants to ensure that (i) all
   terms of reference for TA or studies were consistent with environmental and social safeguards; and (ii) any
   drafting of regulations, guidelines, procedures, or capacity building activities paid attention to safeguard
   policies and requirements. The PIFS Regional Coordinator was to be involved in grievance redress in case
   the national level could not addressed them. An appraisal-stage Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet for the
   project was disclosed by Infoshop on 27 May 2015, but in-country disclosure was not required. No
   grievance cases required PIFS’ attention. The project complied with environmental and social covenants
   (ICR, paragraph 90).




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial management. The project complied with all its financial covenants (ICR, paragraph 91). A
   Finance and Administrative Officer was hired in August 2017. Annual World Bank financial reviews found
   financial management to be acceptable, except for a period between November 2017 and June 2018 due
   to outstanding IFRs, audit, and delays in withdrawal applications. These issues were resolved following
   regular meetings between the Bank team and the finance officer. All audits were unqualified although audit
   management letters in 2017, 2018 and 2020 noted minor weaknesses such as posting to incorrect
   expense codes, overpayment of per diem, minor discrepancies between IFR and audit expenses, lack of
   updating of asset register, and lack of tax withholding. PIFS implemented corrective measures by
   reinforcing project oversight, travel instructions, and adopting International Public Service Accounting
   Standards.



                                                                                                  Page 13 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PACIFIC RESILIENCE PROGRAM - PIFS (P155542)



   Procurement. Project procurement had no governance or mis-procurement issues (ICR, paragraph 92).
   The project did experience some delays due to the misalignment between the work program, budget, and
   procurement plan, and lack of World Bank annual procurement reviews. National and regional staff were
   provided with procurement training including an incentive to receive a Strategic Diploma in Public
   Procurement after completing required courses. Non-compliance issues in contract administration and
   weaknesses in entering procurement records in the Systematic Tracking of Exchanges in Procurement
   system (STEP) were noted, citing missing records, contract publication, and justification for a contract
   increase. These weaknesses were eventually resolved with assistance from the PREP-SPC project’s
   Procurement Advisor. The Bank team conducted two post procurement reviews in June 2020 and January
   2022. The team concluded that PIFS had employed due diligence in selection processes, with extra efforts
   placed in attracting qualified candidates.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                    IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
                                 Moderately
Outcome                                                Moderately Satisfactory
                                 Satisfactory
                                 Moderately
Bank Performance                                       Moderately Satisfactory
                                 Satisfactory
                                                                                 Lack of adequate outcome
Quality of M&E                   Substantial           Modest                    indicators and weak Theory of
                                                                                 Change
Quality of ICR                   ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR provided five lessons, with three slightly edited below (ICR, paragraphs 103-107):

      Results framework for specific sub-projects of a broader program may
         help attribute outcomes. In this project, the PDO replicated the PDO of the
         broader program. However, the scope was refocused away from disaster resilience by
         strengthening appropriate financial instruments to only program coordination and knowledge
         sharing. Not all the inputs to the wider program such as early warning or resilient investments
         in participating PICs were addressed in the results framework and theory of
         change. Including outcome indicators for PIFS-implemented regional activities within the
         PREP results framework would establish how the sub-project contributes to the PREP
         outcome.

                                                                                                    Page 14 of 16
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       PACIFIC RESILIENCE PROGRAM - PIFS (P155542)



        A regional endeavor with an experienced staff may help engage member countries. In
         this project, the RCU was managed by a well-respected coordinator, supported by an
         experienced team. The PICs saw the PIFS as an external entity that did not necessarily
         represent their interests. The RCU adeptly navigated this divide. The participating PICs
         willingly participated in regional PIFS-sponsored meetings where the new concept of disaster
         risk financing was shared to influence behavior that would reduce the shared risk from
         natural hazards.
        Peer-to-peer learning promotes long-term engagement. In this project, the use of peer-to-
         peer learning took advantage of the region’s tradition for face-to-face interactions as the
         preferred means of communications. PIFS initiated the practitioners’ forums, Program
         Coordination Meetings, and established the DRF Working Group to facilitate long term
         engagement.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR followed the guidelines and provided a broad view of the project operations. The report was internally
consistent, noting mutually reinforcing results from the knowledge-sharing and capacity-building efforts. The
report focused on what occurred during the operation, providing helpful tables to highlight changes made to
justify the outcome. Lessons were based on the operation, adding helpful recommendations. Tables were
particularly helpful in painting a picture of the changes that occurred during implementation that justified the
rationale behind the restructuring. The number of pages of the ICR was double the recommended length of 15
pages.

The overall quality of ICR is rated as substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                   Page 15 of 16
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
PACIFIC RESILIENCE PROGRAM - PIFS (P155542)




                                                                           Page 16 of 16
