     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PFM Improvement and Consolidation (P133424)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0023079

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P133424                                    PFM Improvement and Consolidation

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Sierra Leone                               Governance


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-53500,IDA-60780,TF-17201               31-Mar-2018                                           25,638,493.17

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 27-Nov-2013                                30-Sep-2021

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            12,000,000.00                                     4,600,000.00

 Revised Commitment                             26,166,248.56                                     4,600,000.00

 Actual                                         25,638,493.17                                     4,599,999.92




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Shahrzad Mobasher           Judyth L. Twigg              Jennifer L. Keller              IEGEC (Unit 1)
 Fard




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The original Project Development Objective (PDO) was to "improve budget planning and credibility, financial
   control, accountability and oversight in government finances in the Recipient’s territory" (Legal Agreement, p.
   5). At a 2017 restructuring, the PDO was revised to: "improve the public financial management system and
   accountability in the use of government finances." This Review will assess achievement of two objectives: (i)
   improve budget planning and credibility (original objective) and improve the public financial management



                                                                                                    Page 1 of 23
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    PFM Improvement and Consolidation (P133424)



  system (revised objective); and (ii) improve financial control, accountability, and oversight in government
  finances / improve accountability in the use of public finances.

  The 2017 restructuring Project Paper (p. 8) justified the change in the PDO as follows: “[w]ith the withdrawal
  of DFID’s and EU’s remaining resources, the project has to be restructured to fit the available finance and
  focus on core activities linked to new priorities and the proposed revised PDO. Given this reduced level of
  available resources, the proposed restructuring will streamline the existing activities—including dropping a
  number of smaller, less pressing reform programs—and focusing the existing resources and AF on two main
  pillars that have been identified by the GoSL and the World Bank as priority areas: Strengthening Budget
  Financial, Procurement, and Taxation Systems (new Component 1) and Improving PFM Oversight and
  Accountability Systems (new Component 2)." The reform programs which were dropped as part of the 2017
  restructuring consisted, most notably, of (i) public investment management, (ii) fiscal risk management and
  reporting, (iii) cash, debt, and aid management, and (iv) local governance-strengthening public procurement
  systems and strengthening oversight and transparency systems and practices.

  The ICR (p. 17) states that "while the PDO was reworded, it rephrased what was essentially the same scope
  (i.e., public financial management (PFM) in Sierra Leone)." The ICR provides a different justification for the
  PDO change relative to the one provided in the 2017 restructuring Project Paper: “the main rationale for the
  change was to move away from the Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability (PEFA)-based indicators
  and allow more frequent assessment of project implementation since PEFA assessments may only occur
  once each 3–4-year period. The outcome areas reflected in the PDO indicators and intermediate indicators
  remained essentially the same, with modifications made to reflect restructuring at the midterm review (MTR)
  and the resulting changes in resourced activities, whereas the overall outcome sought remained the
  enhancement to the overall PFM system. The most significant changes to the project activities as part of the
  restructuring at the MTR were to a) scale-up revenue management systems, b) introduce e-procurement, and
  c) strengthen citizen engagement through open data, all of which were consistent with the original PDO and
  the revised one" (ICR, pp. 11-12).

  This ICR Review concludes, however, that the 2017 restructuring significantly reduced the scope of the PDO,
  with major reform programs being dropped, notably, on public investment management and cash, debt and
  aid management. Further, the reduction in the scope of the project cannot be justified by the withdrawal of the
  remaining commitments by DFID and EU given that the funding gap was met through additional financing by
  the World Bank and the total commitment amount remained essentially unchanged. Given that the reduction
  in the scope of the project was entirely related to activities pertaining to the achievement of Objective 1
  (including the activity on cash, debt and aid management which, although falling under Component 2
  activities, was related to Component 1 activities), the split rating will be applied to only the original and revised
  Objective 1. In light of the fact that US$14.77 million was disbursed by the June 2017 restructuring out of an
  original allocation of US$28.5 million, the share of disbursements from the project effectiveness date until the
  2017 restructuring is 51.8 percent, and the share of disbursements from the 2017 restructuring until the
  project closing date is 48.2 percent.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

                                                                                                       Page 2 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PFM Improvement and Consolidation (P133424)




  Date of Board Approval
  07-Jun-2017

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project was comprised of the following five components at the time of project appraisal through the
   June 2017 restructuring:

   Component 1: Enhancing Budget Planning and Credibility (estimated cost at appraisal:
   US$1.52 million; estimated cost at 2017 restructuring: US$24.48 million; actual cost: US$19.14
   million). This component sought to strengthen the macro-fiscal forecasting and public investment functions
   of the government to improve overall budget planning and strengthen systems and procedures for budget
   formulation, and build capacity for managing contingent liabilities. It contained four sub-components:

         Strengthening budgetary and macro-fiscal planning & forecasting aimed at building procedures,
          systems, and capacity to improve the planning phase of the medium-term budget system.
         Supporting the public investment management function aimed at improving the preparation and
          prioritization of the public investment program by supporting the establishment of the new Project
          Investment Management Unit (PIMU) through its initial year(s) of operation.
         Fiscal risk management and reporting aimed to establish a framework for effectively managing the
          government’s fiscal risks.
         Strengthening the budget framework and formulation aimed to facilitate a transition to medium-term
          budgeting by supporting the government to address key systems and resource management issues.

   Component 2: Financial Control, Accountability, and Oversight (estimated cost at appraisal:
   US$15.28 million; estimated cost at 2017 restructuring: US$4.95 million; actual cost: US$2.80
   million). This component was to strengthen financial controls, improve accountability systems and
   practices, and enhance independent and public oversight in the management of public resources. It
   contained five sub-components:

         Strengthening financial systems, controls, accounting, and reporting aimed to strengthen the
          government’s financial management system and improve accountability and reporting, contributing
          to more efficient use of public resources for service delivery. The sub-component entailed
          implementation of activities under three key areas: (i) Integrated Financial Management Information
          System (IFMIS); (ii) accounting and reporting; and (iii) internal audit.
         Cash, debt, and aid management aimed at improving fiscal control through implementing Treasury
          Single Account and strengthening regulatory/operational frameworks for managing public debt and
          aid.
         Strengthening public procurement and contract management systems aimed to strengthen
          institutional capacity of the procurement function and enhance contract management systems
          across government.
         Strengthening external audit aimed to support strengthening of the financial oversight role of the
          Audit Service of Sierra Leone and improve coordination with other parts of the government.


                                                                                                  Page 3 of 23
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  PFM Improvement and Consolidation (P133424)



      Strengthening legislative and public oversight aimed to reinforce accountability and use of public
       finances through strengthened oversight functions.

Component 3: Supporting the Strengthening of Revenue Mobilization and Administration Systems
(estimated cost at appraisal: US$4.56 million; estimated cost at 2017 restructuring: US$2.28 million;
actual cost: US$3.68 million). This component aimed to strengthen revenue policy and oversight of
revenue collection, improve the efficiency and integrity of revenue administration to increase domestic
revenue, and integrate revenue systems with overall PFM systems. It contained two sub-components:

      Tax legislation and regulatory framework and policy aimed to strengthen legislative and regulatory
       functions.
      Tax systems, business processes, collection, and reconciliation aimed to strengthen systems that
       enhanced efficiency in tax administration and non-tax revenues.

Component 4: Strengthening Local Governance, Financial Management and Accountability
Systems (estimated cost at appraisal: US$4.127 million; estimated cost at 2017 restructuring: nil;
actual cost: nil). This component aimed to improve financial management systems in Local Councils (LCs)
and strengthen accountability and oversight institutions. It contained four sub-components:

      Strengthening budgetary planning systems aimed to align service delivery by local governments to
       citizens with Agenda for Prosperity goals, and to optimize coordination between LCs and Ministries,
       Departments and Agencies (MDAs).
      Strengthening budget execution, accounting, and reporting systems aimed to strengthen local
       government (LG) PFM systems.
      Local governance - strengthening public procurement systems aimed to strengthen public
       procurement systems at the LG level.
      Strengthening oversight and transparency systems and practices aimed to ensure that LCs were
       transparent and accountable in the delivery of services.

Component 5: PFM Reform Coordination and Project Management (estimated cost at appraisal:
US$2.984 million; estimated cost at 2017 restructuring: nil; actual cost: nil). This component aimed to
provide a continuing institutional and coordination basis for overseeing the implementation of the PFM
Reform Strategy. It contained two sub-components:

      Project management and coordination aimed to provide the administrative and operational structure
       for management and coordination of the project.
      PFM Reforms Directorate was to provide technical leadership in articulating, guiding, and monitoring
       the overall PFM reforms, coordinating and providing an enabling platform for building consensus on
       priority reforms within the spirit of the government's PFM reform strategy and as defined in the
       Agenda for Prosperity.

The 2017 restructuring led to activities being redesigned around three components, with the first two
components reflecting the two main reform areas, i.e., Component 1: Strengthening budget, financial,
procurement and taxation systems and Component 2: PFM oversight and accountability systems. The ICR
indicates that Component 3 activities under the restructured project remained the same in form and in
substance as the original Component 5 activities. Furthermore, Component 1 activities under the
restructured project included the budget aspects included in the original Component 4 activities. Six project

                                                                                                 Page 4 of 23
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  PFM Improvement and Consolidation (P133424)



activities were dropped as part of the 2017 restructuring: (i) support for public investment management
(Component 1.2 of the original project, estimated cost: US$0.42 million); (ii) fiscal risk management and
reporting (Component 1.3 of the original project, estimated cost: US$0.13 million); (iii) cash, debt, and aid
management (Component 2.2 of the original project; estimated cost: US$0.48 million); (iv) tax legislation
and regulatory policy (Component 3.1 of the original project; estimated cost: US$0.47 million); (v) LG
strengthening public procurement systems (Component 4.3 of the original project; estimated cost: US$0.55
million); and (vi) strengthening oversight and transparency for LGs (component 4.4 of the original project;
estimated cost: US$1.729 million). Two activities were added to the project during the 2017 restructuring in
the areas of e-procurement, and open and big data (Table 1).

The African Development Bank (AfDB) provided funding of US$3.14 million to this project, but given that
this funding was not targeted to specific project components, it is excluded from the figures presented for
each component.

Table 1: Summary of Changes to Project Components

Original Components               Changes under the Additional Financing          New Components
                                                                                  Component 1:
Component 1: Enhancing
                                  The whole component was collapsed with          Strengthening Budget,
Budget Planning and
                                  core budget aspects moved to new 1.1            Financial, Procurement,
Credibility
                                                                                  and Taxation Systems
1.1: Strengthening budgetary &                                                    1.1 Budget Planning[1]
                                  Merged into new 1.1
macro-fiscal planning/forecasting                                                 Credibility, and Framework
1.2: Supporting the Public
                                                                                  1.2 IFMIS/Accounting and
Investment Management             Dropped
                                                                                  Reporting Systems
Function
1.3: Fiscal Risk Management and                                                   1.3 Public and Electronic
                                  Dropped
Reporting                                                                         Procurement System
1.4: Strengthening Budget                                                         1.4 Rev. Mgmt. Systems &
                                  Merged into new 1.1
Framework and Formulation                                                         Reform of Legal Framework

Component 2: Financial                                                            Component 2: Improving
Control, Accountability and                                                       PFM Oversight and
Oversight                                                                         Accountability Systems
2.1 Strengthening Financial
                                                                                  2.1 Strengthening Audit and
Systems, Controls, Accounting,
                                                                                  Oversight
and Reporting                     2.1, 2.1.1, and 2.1.2 merged into new 1.2
                                                                                  2.2 Open/Big Data and non-
2.1.1 IFMIS
                                                                                  state actors (NSA)
                                                                                  Component 3: PFM
2.1.2 Accounting and Reporting                                                    Reform Coordination and
                                                                                  Project Management
                                                                                  3.1 Project Management
2.1.3 Internal Audit              Moved into new 2.1
                                                                                  and Coordination
2.2 Cash, Debt, and Aid                                                           3.2 PFM Reforms
                                  Dropped
Management                                                                        Directorate


                                                                                                 Page 5 of 23
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  PFM Improvement and Consolidation (P133424)



2.2.1 Establishment of a TSA
2.2.2 Debt Management
2.2.3 Aid Management
2.2.4 Multilateral Projects
Division
2.3 Strengthening Public
Procurement and Contract Mgmt.
Systems                          2.3, 2.3.1, and 2.3.2 (existing activities as set
                                 out in original project description) merged and
2.3.1 Strengthening Public
                                 combined with new e-procurement activities
Procurement Systems
                                 into new 1.3
2.3.2 Strengthening Contract
Management Systems
2.4 Strengthening External Audit Moved into new 2.1
2.5 Enhancing Legislative and
                                 2.5 & 2.5.1 merged into 2.1
Public Oversight
2.5.1 Enhancing Legislative
Oversight over PFM
                                 Combined with new open/big data activities
2.5.2 Non-state Actors (NSAs) into new 2.2 (grants to NSAs retained as
                                 originally designed)

Component 3: Supporting the
Strengthening of Revenue
Mobilization and
Administrative Systems
3.1 Tax Legislation and           Dropped, with legislative aspects in Integrated
Regulatory Policy                 Taxation Administration System (ITAS) moved
3.1.1 Revenue and Tax Policy of   to 1.4
the Ministry of Finance and
Economic Development
(MoFED)
3.1.2 Customs Legislation
3.2 Revenue Systems, Business
Processes, Collection, and        Moved to new 1.4
Reconciliation

Component 4: Strengthening
Local Governance, Financial
Management and
                                  Moved to new 1.1
Accountability Systems
4.1 Strengthening Budgetary
Planning Systems
4.2 Strengthening Budget
Execution, Accounting, and        Moved to new 1.2
Reporting Systems


                                                                                                Page 6 of 23
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    PFM Improvement and Consolidation (P133424)



   4.3 Local Governance-
   Strengthening Public
   Procurement Systems
                                   Dropped
   4.4 Strengthening Oversight and
   Transparency Systems and
   Practices

  Component 5: PFM Reform
  Coordination and Project
  Management
  5.1 Project Management and
                                     Left intact (now Component 3)
  Coordination
  5.2 PFM Reforms Directorate
  (Public Financial Management
  Reform Unit (PFMRU))
  [1] This included all core budget elements from the old Component 4 dealing with LCs.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost. The original approved amount from World Bank and non-World Bank financing was US$28.5
  million. The actual disbursed amount, including the funding from the AfDB of US$3.14 million, was US$28.8
  million. The difference of US$0.3 million between the revised project cost amount and the actual disbursed
  amount is explained by changes in World Bank and non-World Bank commitments.

  Financing. At appraisal, the financing was comprised of an International Development Association loan for
  an approved amount of US$12 million (IDA-53500) and a non-World Bank commitment totaling US$16.65
  million across the EU (US$1.8 million), DfID (US$11.2 million) and AfDB (US$3.65 million). A significant
  portion of the DfID and EU funding was later withdrawn, leading to the 2017 restructuring and to the
  approval of an Additional Financing of US$10 million (IDA-60780) financed by the World Bank. The ICR
  states that "DfID’s withdrawal was cited as being due to changes in priorities and focus, whereas with the
  EU the team cited the moratorium that existed at the time regarding the Bank and the EU signing new
  Administration Agreements, which eventually caused funds earmarked to be deployed elsewhere" (ICR, p.
  11).

  Borrower Contribution. There was no borrower contribution planned or made.

  Dates. The project was approved on November 27, 2013 and became effective on September 19,
  2014. The World Bank held the MTR on October 17, 2016. The original closing date for the project was
  March 31, 2018. The actual closing date of the project was September 30, 2021. The project underwent
  three restructurings on June 7, 2017, February 5, 2020, and March 12, 2021. The first restructuring was
  Level 1, including a change to the PDO formulation and to the results framework in order to better align
  project indicators and expected outcomes with the revised activities and overall financial envelope, as well
  as the approval of an Additional Financing of US$10 million in order to meet the project’s financing gap
  caused by the withdrawal of non-World Bank commitments. The second and third restructurings were Level




                                                                                                 Page 7 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PFM Improvement and Consolidation (P133424)



   2. The purpose of these restructurings was to implement changes in the results framework, the loan closing
   dates, legal covenants, and the implementation schedule.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Some improvements in Sierra Leone’s PFM system were made prior to appraisal, including the
Accountant General Department's rollout of the government’s financial management information system to
several MDAs in 2005, the elimination of the backlog of annual financial statements beyond the statutory
deadline of three months of end of fiscal year, and the improvement in the quality and the scope of
independent external audits, as well as the time required to complete these audits. At the local government
level, improvements were achieved in basic budgeting, procurement, accounting and reporting procedures
for LCs.

These improvements were insufficient, however, to contain public expenditures and improve budget
planning, leading to inflationary pressures on the economy and threatening the country’s economic
growth and prosperity. Observations made as part of internal and external reviews of the country’s PFM
identified issues with, most notably, budget credibility and predictability, fiscal management, expenditure
controls, low levels of transparency, incomplete collection and reporting of revenues (notably, from the
natural resources sector), a lack of cash management systems, off-budget expenditures, and a budget
system focused on inputs rather than on results. Further, institutional capacity in PFM was considered
weak. These weaknesses limited the availability of public resources to finance development, led to large
fiscal imbalances and to rising levels of public debt and high inflation, threatening the country’s socio-
economic development prospects.

The objectives pursued by the project were consistent with the government’s objective to
strengthen PFM as a key foundation for improved governance, as highlighted in its Poverty
Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP-III), i.e., the Agenda for Prosperity (2013-2017). The PRSP
established the government’s vision for Sierra Leone to transition to stable middle-income country status
over a 25-year period. The strategy favored sound macroeconomic fundamentals, substantial reliance on
domestic revenue generation, the creation of job opportunities for the growing labor force, and sustainable
natural resource exploitation. It prioritized public spending in the areas of energy, transport, health,
education, and natural resource management. In the area of governance, it prioritized the strengthening of
the civil service, increasing decentralization to local governments, fighting corruption, and strengthening
PFM. The effective functioning of PFM institutions and systems at the central and local government levels
were consequently viewed as a key priority for the implementation of the PRSP. The project’s activities
were consistent with Pillar 7: Governance and Public Sector Reform of the PRSP, which emphasized PFM-
related interventions related to capacity building of state and non-state institutions and actors; intra- and
inter-MDA coordination and partnership; delivery of quality, timely services in an accountable and
transparent manner; and political governance, including decentralization and local government
transformation.

The project objectives were also aligned with the government's PFM Reform Strategy (2014-2017).
The PAD provided the following details: “this process is directed by the PFM Reforms (Oversight) Steering
Committee, and the strategy targets improvements in the quality of PFM to improve aggregate fiscal

                                                                                                   Page 8 of 23
                       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                       PFM Improvement and Consolidation (P133424)



discipline, the strategic allocation of resources, and the efficiency of public service delivery. Specifically, the
reform will be addressed through focusing on the following reform themes: improving budget planning,
comprehensiveness, and credibility; strengthening the PFM legal framework and compliance, budget
execution and control, and financial reporting; strengthening revenue mobilization and administration;
accountability and transparency in public finance management; and strengthening the financial
management aspects of decentralization through local councils. In formulating the new phase of the
strategy, the government assessed weaknesses that have been identified by the 2010 PEFA which are yet
to be fully addressed, including lessons learned; and observations by internal and external reviews and the
Audit Service of Sierra Leone” (PAD, p. 5).

The project was relevant to the World Bank’s Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) for the period
FY10-FY13, as well as the current Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for the period FY21-
FY26. A number of objectives identified under Pillar 1 of the CAS FY10-FY13 on human development and
inclusive growth were consistent with objectives pursued by the project, most notably improving and
expanding sound PFM by empowering LCs with responsibilities, revenue authority, and financial support
and encouraging them to become transparent and accountable institutions, demonstrating inclusive
leadership. This would have involved the adoption of a medium-term expenditure
framework, a macroeconomic and fiscal framework, and better revenue forecasting for a credible budget,
improved and effective expenditure controls, and suitable amendments to the legal and regulatory
framework. Another CAS Pillar 1 objective consisted of improving budget predictability, expenditure control,
and transparency in decentralized institutions and public resource management. There was no World Bank
supported strategy between the CAS FY10-FY13 and the CPF FY21-FY26 due to the 2014-2016 Ebola
pandemic that severely affected the World Bank’s project portfolio in Sierra Leone, as well as the severe
landslide in the capital city of Freetown in 2017 that killed 1,141 individuals and left more than 3,000
homeless. The project was aligned with the FY21-FY26 CPF’s first Focus Area on Sustainable Growth and
Accountable Governance, spanning its two objectives of strengthening macroeconomic stability, fiscal and
financial management, and improving government accountability and results in the use of public finances.

The project was consistent with ongoing commitments at the time of appraisal. The ICR reports that
“the Bank had been a lead co-financier of PFM reforms around the time of appraisal and the period leading
up and was a key partner in providing technical assistance to PFM reforms. The project succeeded the
Integrated Public Financial Management Reform Project (IPFMRP), which closed on 31 July 2014, and
served to sustain and build on the achievements made under that project” (ICR, p. 7).

The 2017 restructuring significantly reduced the scope of the PDO, with major reform programs
being dropped, notably, on public investment management and cash, debt and aid management. The PAD
(p. 5) identified public investment management as a critical area of reform, with the government failing to
produce costed sector strategies, and investment spending being undertaken without any planning and
consideration for its implication on recurrent spending. Similarly, the PAD (p. 3 and p. 13) identified
expenditure controls as a significant area of weakness that could be addressed through the implementation
of a Treasury Single Account and the strengthening of the regulatory and operational framework for
managing public debt and aid.


Rating Relevance TBL




Rating
Substantial


                                                                                                         Page 9 of 23
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  PFM Improvement and Consolidation (P133424)




   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               Improve budget planning and credibility

               Rationale
               The results chain in the original project design, as presented in the PAD, linked Component 1, 3 and 4
               activities to the objective of improved budget planning and credibility.

               The results chain under Component 1 activities (Enhanced budget planning and credibility) was logical,
               linking building procedures, systems, and capacity to improve the planning phase of the medium-term budget
               system (including the review and the improvement of the Sierra Leone Integrated Macroeconomic (SLIMM)),
               establishing the new PIMU, and establishing a framework for managing the government’s fiscal risks to
               intermediate outcomes of a transition to medium-term budgeting, improvements in the planning phase of the
               medium-term budget system, improved preparation and prioritization of the public investment program, and
               improved fiscal risk management and reporting. The PDO indicators consisted of average expenditure
               outturn, average revenue outturn and multi-year perspective in fiscal planning, expenditure policy and
               budgeting. IEG notes that there were issues with the measurement of the achievement of the objective.
               Indeed, the first two PDO indicators should have consisted of aggregate (rather than average)
               revenue/expenditure outturn (PEFA PI-3 and PI-1, respectively), with aggregate providing an indication of the
               coverage of revenue/expenditure outturn across the federal government, the decentralized agencies and local
               governments, and revenue/expenditure outturn defined as the change in revenue/expenditure between the
               original approved budget and end-of-year outturn, with accurate revenue/expenditure forecasts considered a
               key input to the preparation of a credible budget. IEG also notes, however, that aggregate revenue outturn
               was not an issue in Sierra Leone in 2017 as suggested by the country’s 2017 PEFA score of A on this
               indicator, with actual revenue ranging between 97 percent and 106 percent of budgeted revenue in at least
               two of the last three years. Sierra Leone’s score on this indicator remained unchanged in the 2021 PEFA.
               Meanwhile, Sierra Leone’s score on aggregate expenditure outturn was D* in the 2017 PEFA, a score which
               remained unchanged until the 2021 PEFA. Sierra Leone’s aggregate expenditure outturns in fiscal years
               2018, 2019 and 2020 stood at 85 percent, 94 percent and 114 percent, respectively, which would normally
               result in a C score according to the PEFA methodology, but the rating was downgraded to D* given that the
               data on which the score was assessed upon excluded loans and grants. As such, while aggregate
               expenditure outturn was considered an issue in Sierra Leone, aggregate revenue outturn was not considered
               to be an issue in improving budget planning and credibility.

               The results chain under Component 3 activities (Supporting the strengthening of revenue mobilization and
               administrative systems) was not logical and was not particularly relevant to Sierra Leone’s context. The PAD
               linked tax policy reforms, the consolidation of customs regulations combined with the linking of the IFMIS
               interface to ASYCUDA++/ASYCUDA World, and the acquisition of the ITAS by the National Revenue
               Authority (NRA) and the linking of the IFMIS interface to ITAS, and staff training on the ITAS, to daily reports
               of revenues being generated and to increased customs revenues and non-tax revenues to the PDO indicator
               related to improved average revenue outturn (which should have referred to aggregate revenue outturn as
               indicated earlier). IEG finds that while daily reports of revenues through ASYCUDA World and ITAS

                                                                                                                 Page 10 of 23
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   PFM Improvement and Consolidation (P133424)



constitutes an important tool for tracking revenue over time and for revenue forecasting, complementary
measures related to the treatment of tax exemptions and tax arrears over time are required to improve
aggregate revenue outturn. Further, aggregate revenue outturn was not considered an issue as elaborated
under the rationale section for Component 1 activities above. As such, IEG finds that the results chain toward
the achievement of the objective is not credible. Further, there are issues with the measurement of the
objective with increased customs and non-tax revenues being unrelated to aggregate revenue outturn.

While the results chain under Component 4 activities (Strengthening local governance, financial management
and accountability systems) may have led to improvement in budget planning and/or credibility, the indicators
were only partially acceptable as measures of progress toward that objective. The activities consisted,
notably, of the adoption of more realistic multi-year budgets through technical assistance and training, LCs
trained in collection and accounting for revenues, training of internal auditors, and training of LC staff in
procurement to improved budgetary planning systems across LCs. The intermediate results indicators
consisted of the ratio between LCs actual own source revenue and LCs original budgeted own source
revenue, the ratio between LCs actual primary expenditure and LCs original budgeted primary expenditure,
and LCs processing transactions in real-time within Petra (i.e., a financial management application). The PDO
indicators consisted of improved average expenditure outturn, average revenue outturn and multi-year
perspective in fiscal planning, expenditure policy and budgeting. As indicated above, aggregate revenue
outturn was not considered an issue in Sierra Leone at that time. The other two PDO indicators remained
relevant, however.

Outputs and intermediate outcomes

PFM improvement. The project rolled-out the IFMIS to the remaining MDAs that were not yet processing
transactions through the system. The project did not, however, roll-out the IFMIS to LCs as had been planned
at appraisal. Further, the roll-out of the IFMIS was limited to the auditing functions of PFM, which is unrelated
to the function of the overarching objective of improved budget planning and credibility. According to the PAD,
Sierra Leone's IFMIS, which runs on the FreeBalance platform, covers four modules: (i) financial
accountability (general ledger, appropriation, purchase, revenue, expenditure, bank reconciliation, and
control); (ii) civil service management; (iii) performance budgeting; and (iv) asset management. At appraisal,
however, only the financial accountability module was fully implemented and working satisfactorily. The ICR
reports that an integrated helpdesk solution was introduced at the Ministry of Finance, and associated
systems for Electronic Document Management and Electronic Funds Transfer had business process
requirements completed. The number of MDAs processing transactions in real-time using the IFMIS rose
from 7 MDAs on August 31, 2013 to 55 MDAs by June 21, 2021 (taking into account the six MDAs that were
experiencing technical issues and could not process transactions in real time), against a target of 54 MDAs.
As a result, the coverage of IFMIS rose to roughly 80 percent of MDAs.

Improving tax systems, business processes, collection, and reconciliation. The project activities were
intended to strengthen domestic revenue and customs revenue mobilization through the introduction of an
ITAS and an upgrade from ASYCUDA++ to ASYCUDA World. The introduction of an ITAS was intended to
address the challenges with the basic system that existed at the time, which included, most notably, the fact
that the system that was in place had no audit module and no interface with other systems, and that
transactions were limited to personal income taxes (with general sales taxes and corporate taxes being
recorded in other stand-alone systems). The introduction of the ITAS, which was delayed until the project
closing date, was expected to improve taxpayer compliance, service delivery, and revenue accounting. The
upgrade to ASYCUDA was intended to address challenges with ASYCUDA++, which included a lack of
functionality that limited its efficient and effective use. The upgrade to ASYCUDA World, which constitutes a

                                                                                                  Page 11 of 23
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   PFM Improvement and Consolidation (P133424)



web-based version, was expected to improve functionalities with added efficiency advantages. In order to
introduce the ITAS and ASYCUDA World in business processes, the PAD indicated that technical assistance
would need to be provided to the Domestic Tax Division and Customs and Excise Decision
for training/capacity building to staff. Customs revenues paid into the Consolidated Revenue Fund, adjusted
for inflation, rose by 110 percent from the time of the upgrade through June 21, 2021, against a target of 50
percent. Based on IEG's interview with the task team, this was achieved through: (i) the automated capture of
declarations for petroleum and wet cargo, boosting customs revenue given that significant revenues had
been lost through under-declaration by agents of quantity or type of products; (ii) the introduction of a
Customs Electronic Single Window System for clearance of goods, which allowed, among other things,
granting of exemptions in an automated manner, thereby minimizing chances of abuse related to
unauthorized exemptions; and (iii) the introduction of simplified monitoring of transit goods, enabling end-to-
end visibility of the exit of goods and a reduction in risk of diversion of consignments in transit into the
domestic market of Sierra Leone. The ICR also reports that the customs clearance time of commercial
imports was reduced to 27 hours in 2019, but it does not provide the baseline figure.

Outcomes

The 2017 restructuring marked for deletion relevant indicators related to multi-year perspective in fiscal
planning, expenditure policy and budgeting (PEFA PI-12), as well as the ratio between LCs actual primary
expenditure and LCs original budgeted primary expenditure. As such, there are no measured outcomes to
improved budget planning and credibility. Similarly, there are no outcomes related to the ITAS nor from the
transition from ASYCUDA++ to ASYCUDA World as it related to improved budget planning and
credibility. The intermediate results indicators related to daily reports of revenues based on ASYCUDA++, the
domestic tax information system (or substitute), and Commonwealth Secretariat Debt Recording and
Management System was not met, with the daily reporting of revenues being functional, but the interface with
IFMIS awaiting an upgrade to the system.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
Improve the public financial management system

Revised Rationale
The 2017 restructuring limited activities related to IFMIS to its auditing functions (covered under Objective 2),
abandoning the PFM functions on budget formulation, budget execution, and accounting and reporting which
would support the achievement of the original objective. Further, the 2017 restructuring also reduced the
IFMIS rollout to the remaining MDAs that were not relying on the system despite the fact that the rollout to the
LCs had been planned at appraisal. Finally, it dropped activities related to public investment management,
fiscal risk management and reporting, and local government, cash, debt, and aid management, and local
governance-strengthening public procurement systems and strengthening oversight and transparency
systems and practices.



                                                                                                  Page 12 of 23
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   PFM Improvement and Consolidation (P133424)



Outputs and intermediate outcomes

The introduction of e-procurement was expected to assist the government to introduce transparency, achieve
cost savings, and reduce inventory cost, ensuring that the supplier community had equal, fair, and unbiased
access to opportunities advertised online. The ICR reports that "[w]hilst an end-to-end e-procurement system
was unable to be achieved as planned under the project, important groundwork for its eventual
implementation has been made, helping to make the public procurement system more effective, efficient, and
transparent. An e-government procurement (e-GP) directorate has been created and the secretariat for
electronic contract management was moved within this new directorate. An e-GP action plan is in place.
While the Procurement Act already provides for e-Procurement, Public Procurement Regulations were
updated in late 2019 to ensure legal coverage and mandating of the electronic procurement in the
government’s legal framework. A cost benefit analysis for hosting the e-GP system has been
completed which provides important information for the e-GP bidding document. The e-GP functional
specifications have also been completed, and a bidding document for the e-GP system has been completed"
(ICR, p. 22). The ICR indicates that the task team supported the government in developing quarterly price
norms in 2019 and 2020, leading to significant savings.

Outcomes

The percentage of contracts (by value) awarded in the fiscal year through open competitive procurement
increased from 0 percent in 2013 to 91 percent in 2021 against a target of 95 percent.

IEG does not find the indicator on the average time for quarterly budget releases, which was reduced from
five weeks to two weeks, to be a relevant indicator for the purposes of measuring achievement of the
objective. P. 20 of the PAD stressed the need to establish strong communication and coordination between
LCs and MDAs during budget formulation and also indicated that while annual reporting was reasonably well
performed, in-year reporting was weak. It concluded that “it will be necessary to harmonize local government
budget preparation with the new budget classification proposed for the central budget to facilitate the on-
going incorporation of local government budgets in the national budget.” Since the lack of harmonization of
budget data across MDAs and LCs undermined the quality of budget reporting for the government, IEG finds
that the quicker release in quarterly budgets would not support an improvement in the public financial
management system.

The 2017 restructuring marked for deletion the indicator on the transparency, competition and complaints
mechanisms in procurement (PEFA PI-24). The PEFA assessment suggests that the activity related to e-
procurement did not appear to have impacted Sierra Leone’s score on the PEFA sub-indicator related to
procurement methods (PEFA - PI-24.2), which stood at D in 2021, with the score in 2017 not being assessed
due to the lack of data and being attributed a score of D*. While the overall indicator on procurement (PEFA –
PI-24) improved from D in 2017 to C in 2021, this was attributed to a functioning Independent Procurement
Review Panel and to the publication of procurement information on the website, which was less frequent and
sometimes absent in 2017, which was therefore unrelated to the activity on open competitive procurement.



Revised Rating
Modest



                                                                                                Page 13 of 23
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   PFM Improvement and Consolidation (P133424)




OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Improve financial control, accountability, and oversight in government finances / Improve accountability in the
use of public finances

Rationale
The theory of change underpinning this objective was coherent and plausible, though incomplete.
Strengthening the capacity of multiple actors -- the internal audit staff at MDAs, Audit Committees at MDAs,
the Public Accounts Committee (PAC) in its role to undertake public reviews of audit reports and the Ebola
Report, the Transparency and Accountability Committee (TAC) for its oversight role with LCs, and the Public
Finance Committee (PFC) for its oversight role with MDAs and LCs -- was reasonably expected to lead to
higher-quality and more publicly available insights into the use of public funds. Improved accountability,
however, would have also required interventions to increase the likelihood of actions being implemented in
response to the findings of these oversight bodies.

Outputs and Intermediate Outcomes

Strengthened institutional capacity. The project supported:

      training to audit assistants and auditors in the public sector on audit planning and execution and report
         writing;
        training of senior internal audit staff of MDAs on the Audit Command Language software;
        professional training of 25 senior internal audit staff who took the Certified Internal Auditors exams,
         including membership, application processing, and registration of eight senior internal audit staff on
         Certified Information Systems Auditing certification;
        distribution of a validated Standard Audit Operational Procedures Manual to central government
         MDAs;
        reconstitution and strengthening of Audit Committees at MDAs, including quarterly meetings;
        public hearings for the PAC to review the 2013, 2014, 2015, 2016, 2017 and 2018 Audit Reports and
         Ebola Report;
        TAC oversight visits to LCs on compliance with Section 107 of the Local Government Act of 2004 and
         follow up on the implementation of Committees' Recommendations in 2016, as well as PFC oversight
         visits to MDAs and LCs in 2016;
        training of TAC members on modern techniques of transparency and oversight in 2016;
        development and production of 2015, 2016, 2017 and 2018 citizens' budgets, which represent
         simplified versions of the 2015, 2016, 2017 and 2018 government budgets; and
        development of an effective partnership between non-state actors and public oversight bodies in order
         to scale up implementation of the recommendations of the Auditor General Report.

682 professionals were trained in public procurement to provide increased oversight in government finances,
exceeding the target of 250. 33 percent of those trained were female which although falling short of the target
of 50 percent, met the target if measured in nominal terms against the target of 250 professionals trained.

29 percent of Audit Committee recommendations on quarterly audit reports of MDAs were implemented by
June 21, 2021, exceeding the original target of 25 percent but not meeting the formally revised target of 50
percent. The ICR indicates that "by the project’s closure, the internal audit function was established in 45


                                                                                                  Page 14 of 23
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                PFM Improvement and Consolidation (P133424)



                            MDAs and covered over 85 percent of expenditure, which exceeded the target of 65 percent, and the project
                            supported the Internal Audit Directorate’s expansion with training and professional development. However,
                            the percentage of internal audit recommendations that were implemented by the end of the project was well
                            below the 50 percent target at 29 percent. It is challenging to assess whether the issue with implementation
                            [has to do with] the work of internal auditors and their understanding of the issues ... or whether the problem
                            is with the MDAs; most likely it is a combination of these factors, and work will be done under an ASA
                            subsequently to support the government on this" (ICR, p. 24).

                            Coverage of internal audit (as a percent of total expenditures) rose from a baseline of 10 percent to 86.4
                            percent by project closure, exceeding the target of 65 percent.

                            Outcomes

                            The number of months between submission of the audit report of public accounts by the Auditor General to
                            submission of the audited report to the legislature was initially estimated to have fallen from 12 months to
                            eight months, not achieving the original target of six months, but meeting the formally revised target of eight
                            months. The ICR and the task team, however, indicated that this reported achievement had not actually
                            materialized. At the time of the ICR, the PAC still had not published its report on the 2019 Auditor General
                            report; the ICR (p. 26) states that the report had "apparently" been completed, but that funds were not
                            available to print and distribute it, which is a prerequisite for tabling the report in Parliament.

                            288 non-state actor representatives and citizens participated in budget discussions, exceeding the target of
                            250.

                            The 2017 restructuring marked for deletion the indicator on the effectiveness of internal audit (PEFA PI-26).
                            While Sierra Leone’s score on the PEFA assessment was D+ in 2017 and 2021, there were some
                            improvements recorded on PI-26 (ii) and (iii), with the nature of audits and standards having been improved
                            since 2017 and more planned audit activities being carried out/completed compared to 2017.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Overall efficacy under the original objectives is rated Modest, with Objectives 1 and 2 rated Modest and
                            Substantial, respectively. Overall efficacy under the revised objectives is also rated Modest, with Objectives 1
                            and 2 rated Modest and Substantial, respectively. As such, the split rating does not affect the overall efficacy
                            rating, which remains Modest.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating                                   Primary Reason

                                                                                                                              Page 15 of 23
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      PFM Improvement and Consolidation (P133424)



  Modest                                                    Low achievement


 5. Efficiency
While an ex post economic analysis was not performed as part of the ICR, an ex ante economic analysis was
performed as part of the PAD. The PAD's economic analysis, which considered benefit streams related to
interest charges on "ways and means" advances and increases in revenues, among other interventions, pointed
to a net present value of US$11.6 million. The ICR indicates that the increased emphasis placed on revenue
management systems (i.e., ITAS and ASYCUDA World), as well as associated revenue gains and transaction
cost savings and gains from e-Procurement as part of the first restructuring, led the team to reassess economic
benefits against costs during the mid-term review. The task team assessed that gains in customs revenues, the
potential flows from improved indirect and direct taxation administration, and the benefits from institutionalizing
price norms in procurement led to savings of US$7.7 million from the beginning of 2019, which the ICR (p. 27)
speculates should, over time, exceed the costs associated with the project. These benefits do not include
"softer" gains from improving budget, financial, and oversight processes. It is not clear why a formal economic
analysis was not completed at the ICR stage.

The ICR indicates that "a variety of significant implementation delays, some of which were within the control of
the project’s management and some of which were not, substantially impaired project efficiency. The
implementation efficiency of the project was hampered by implementation delays mainly relating to procurement
processes. The project was subject to three no-cost extensions to ensure the new systems were properly
embedded. The first no-cost extension was provided to afford time to implement new activities resulting from the
first restructuring at the MTR; the second and third were mostly related to COVID-19" (ICR, p. 28).

The ICR argues that the breakdown of costs associated to the project are broadly in line with those of
comparable projects. Roughly two-thirds of project costs were directed to financial and revenue management
systems, which is comparable to the budget allocation for other similar projects.

This ICR Review concurs with the ICR's rating of efficiency Modest.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      0
 Appraisal                                                   0
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      0
 ICR Estimate                                                0
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.


                                                                                                     Page 16 of 23
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      PFM Improvement and Consolidation (P133424)




6. Outcome

The relevance of the objectives is rated Substantial, given that the PDO were aligned with the government's and
the World Bank's priorities for the country. Overall efficacy is rated Modest. The efficiency of the project is rated
Modest. The project outcome is rated Moderately Unsatisfactory, reflecting significant shortcomings in the
project's preparation, implementation, and achievement (Table 2).

Table 2: Overall Outcome Ratings Prior to and Following the 2017 Restructuring

                                  Original objectives prior to     Revised objectives following
Rating Dimension
                                  2017 restructuring               the 2017 restructuring
Relevance of objectives           Substantial
Efficacy                          Modest
Objective 1: Improve budget
planning and credibility /
                                  Modest                           Modest
Improve the public financial
management system
Objective 2: Improve financial
control, accountability, and
oversight in government
                                  Substantial
finances / Improve
accountability in the use of
public finances
Efficiency                        Modest
Outcome ratings                   Moderately Unsatisfactory        Moderately Unsatisfactory
Final outcome rating              Moderately Unsatisfactory
a. Outcome Rating
    Moderately Unsatisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The ICR identifies the upcoming 2023 elections and lack of funding as the key risks to sustaining the
development outcomes of the project. The ICR section on the risk to development outcomes also presents a
list of additional investments required to support the sustainability of revenue systems: (i) the creation of a
disaster recovery site in case of a crash, deliberate physical destruction, or cyberattack; (ii) the creation of a
data warehouse system to serve as a central repository of data from the revenue and third-party systems;
(iii) the training of the information and communication technology and functional staff posted to these
revenue systems to ensure sustainability of maintenance, management, and use of the systems; and (iv)
support for change management to ensure the acceptability of the reforms by taxpayers and National
Revenue Authority (NRA) staff.

The ICR also identified a number of risks inherent to continued operation of systems supported by the
project. It notes that "the ITAS system was not operationally accepted until the end of the project, and the

                                                                                                       Page 17 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PFM Improvement and Consolidation (P133424)



results may be impacted if full utilization of the system is not properly managed in the post-implementation
period" (ICR, p. 36). Furthermore, funding to support the NRA Secretariat, the PAC, and the audit
committees has not been mainstreamed into the annual budget, with the exception of partial funding of the
audit committee. As such, the functions of these institutions may be compromised by lack of funding. The
ICR also states that "incentives to ensure that Vote Controllers comply with risk management, internal control
provisions, and financial reporting requirements of the PFM Act, and timely resolution of audit
recommendations of the Audit Service of Sierra Leone (ASSL) and internal auditors, need to be put in
operation. It is noted that recent amendments to the PFM Act have provided for sanctioning for not resolving
recommendations; however, it is unclear how this provision will be operated (or whether it can be in current
form)" (ICR, p. 38). The Bank could have therefore incorporated measures to improve compliance with the
recommendations of the PFM Act in project design and have contributed to reducing the risk to development
outcome.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  This ICR Review concurs with the ICR that there were issues with the coordination of activities across the
  many stakeholders in the initial stages of project implementation, given the large scope and complexity
  of project design. Furthermore, the government's capacity to implement reforms was not well assessed at
  the project design stage, leading to implementation delays or an inability to implement activities
  early during project implementation. While the ICR states that the project benefited from the lessons
  learned from the predecessor World Bank project, it indicates that project design failed to consider the
  important set of binding constraints to efficient functioning of the PFM system that were identified in the
  Project Performance Assessment Report of the predecessor project, which included:

         The existence of extra-budgetary funds that are not subject to parliamentary scrutiny (including,
            for example, the use of donor funds);
           Supplementary budgets that are not submitted to Parliament and include variations on approved
            budgets;
           Centralized payment approval processes that lead to inefficiencies;
           Connectivity issues that limit the likelihood that citizens can access information published on
            websites and open data portals;
           Supreme Audit Institution dependence on the Ministry of Finance for adequate funding;
           Weak risk management and control environment at MDAs and local councils; and
           Low buy-in for an enhanced role for audit committees and enhanced PAC scrutiny.

  The ICR Review also concurs that there were major shortcomings with regard to the selection of
  indicators in the results framework. The ICR specifically states that "although budget inputs were well
  covered, there was little focus on the reliability of the budget. Also, the key area of public investment
  management was not reflected in the results framework at any stage despite the perennial poor
  performance in this area and the importance of it in supporting the country’s national development plan.
  Lastly, the establishment of audit committees at MDAs and their regular meetings did not reflect progress
  towards the implementation of audit recommendations by ASSL. Given the project’s initial design, which
  seemed overly ambitious, it appears that more concentration on key areas was lacking" (ICR, p. 35). The

                                                                                                   Page 18 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PFM Improvement and Consolidation (P133424)



  task team clarified that the development impact of the project would have been greater if there had been
  a PDO-level indicator that was focused on expenditure outturns, especially with regard to composition.

  Finally, the ICR reports significant delays between project approval, which took place on November 17,
  2013, and project effectiveness, which happened on September 30, 2014, due to delays in meeting the
  project effectiveness conditions. The ICR indicates that these delays could have been avoided if the
  government's capacity was better assessed and if solutions for handling effectiveness conditions were
  identified.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 While the task team views the quality of supervision to have been satisfactory, with implementation issues
 identified through support missions and reported in aide-memoires, Implementation Status and Results
 Reports (ISRs), and management letters, and an action plan being identified in order to address these
 issues, this ICR Review rates the quality of supervision to be Moderately Unsatisfactory. Following the
 2017 restructuring, the project’s aide-memoires and ISRs rated the likelihood of the project achieving its
 PDO to “improve the public financial management system and accountability in the use of government
 finances” as Satisfactory (with the exception of the first ISR which rated it MS), and the project’s
 implementation progress status as Satisfactory as well (with the exception of the first two ISRs, which rated
 it MS), which stands in sharp contrast to the findings of this ICR Review. While many of the issues may be
 attributable to poor quality at entry, the Bank clearly missed an opportunity to implement corrective actions
 at the implementation stage, including at the 2017 restructuring, to achieve the PDO. The modifications
 made to project design during the 2017 restructuring were not sufficient as corrective actions to catalyze
 progress toward achievement of the PDO, as evidenced by poor efficacy and efficiency ratings.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 Results monitoring was to be conducted by the Project Management Unit (PMU) of the Ministry of Finance
 and Economic Development. Annual reports on implementation progress were to be submitted to the
 government's PFM Reforms Steering Committee, which was to provide oversight and strategic guidance.



                                                                                                   Page 19 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PFM Improvement and Consolidation (P133424)



 There were shortcomings in the project's initial results framework, primarily stemming from the use of
 PEFA indicators to measure outcomes and the mismatch between the timing of the project and PEFA
 assessments. At the 2017 restructuring to reflect changes in project activities, the project's results chain
 became less coherent, and the new indicators that were introduced to replace the PEFA indicators were
 still not adequate measures of achievement of the objectives as stated. The ICR provides two examples in
 this regard: "The PDO Indicator on the timeliness of submission of the PAC report to Parliament did not
 reflect the work done by the PAC in resolving audit recommendations made by the Auditor General, which
 remains a significant issue. Also, the indicator on the ratio between “actual primary expenditure and original
 budgeted primary expenditure” did not account for budget composition variances, which remain an issue in
 Sierra Leone" (ICR, p. 32).



b. M&E Implementation
  The ICR indicates that a full-time M&E specialist in the PMU ensured that primary data were collected
  based on the agreed frequency for data collection, data sources, and methodology. Staff charged with
  the collection and analysis of field data were trained, and implementation progress was assessed through
  monthly, quarterly, and annual reviews conducted by the PMU. These reviews were shared with the
  World Bank. Implementation bottlenecks were discussed with the PMU during the Bank's implementation
  support missions, and action points for implementation follow-up and subsequent implementation support
  were identified. Furthermore, the government's PFM Reforms Steering Committee provided strategic
  guidance on issues raised in the implementation progress reviews conducted by the PMU and the Public
  Financial Management Reform Unit, as planned.

  The ICR states, however, that the budget allocation in support of operationalization of the results
  framework remained inadequate during the first half of project implementation, which resulted in M&E
  being mostly focused on indicators and reporting relating to project activities rather than project results.
  Furthermore, the ICR indicates that the monitoring of the implementation of the ITAS was hampered by a
  lack of clear information on progress. This was largely explained by insufficient capacity at the NRA to
  monitor and report on the progress made.

  The ICR Review concludes that there were issues with M&E implementation involving staff not being
  adequately trained to assess progress.



c. M&E Utilization
  The ICR Review does not find evidence of the task team using the M&E framework to make effective
  mid-course corrections. While the ICR states that the project's M&E framework helped inform the
  identification of priorities and the reallocation of funding across project activities during project
  restructurings, these changes did not lead to an improvement in project implementation.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest



                                                                                                    Page 20 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PFM Improvement and Consolidation (P133424)



10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was rated Environmental Assessment category C. No safeguard policies were triggered.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   The project's financial management risk was rated Substantial at appraisal. The risk was mitigated by the
   hiring of a dedicated Project Management Unit, close supervision by the Bank's financial management
   specialist, and provision of support to the PMU's finance team members. The PMU's Finance Unit was
   headed by a qualified accountant who maintained an adequate financial management system in
   compliance with the project's financing agreement. The ICR notes that audits were undertaken "most of the
   time," and that interim financial reports were prepared in a "relatively timely manner" (ICR, p. 34).




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None noted.



d. Other
   None noted.



11. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                  IEG
                                                                                Disagreements/Comment
                               Moderately           Moderately                  Modest efficacy and modest
Outcome
                               Satisfactory         Unsatisfactory              efficiency.
                                                                                Shortcomings in the project's
                                                                                design and results framework
                                                                                that were not adequately
                               Moderately           Moderately
Bank Performance                                                                identified and corrected,
                               Satisfactory         Unsatisfactory
                                                                                including at the 2017
                                                                                restructuring. Shortcomings in
                                                                                project supervision.
Quality of M&E                 Modest               Modest

Quality of ICR                 ---                  Substantial



                                                                                                  Page 21 of 23
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       PFM Improvement and Consolidation (P133424)



12. Lessons

This ICRR expands on some of the key lessons from the ICR (pp. 38-40), which are:

     1. The implementation of a PFM reform strategy requires all stakeholders to be fully engaged,
        with dedicated focal points across the government to ensure that issues are addressed in a
        timely manner, and that the implementation of activities may be adjusted to evolving
        circumstances.
     2. The introduction of modern information technology processes requires a number of
        prerequisite measures to ensure a seamless transition from existing systems in place, which
        is particularly important in fragile and conflict-affected countries such as Sierra Leone. Such
        measures include, most notably, a clear description of processes and requirements,
        adequate training of users and external auditors to ensure that new systems are fully utilized,
        and capacity building for key users and auditors to undertake their roles effectively in the
        PFM system.
     3. The government's capacity to implement a project must be carefully considered at appraisal,
        and adequate technical assistance should be provided throughout project implementation.

The ICR also elaborates on the factors that should be considered at the project design stage of any
future PFM project in Sierra Leone based on the PPAR of the predecessor project that was
undertaken (i.e., the Integrated Public Financial Management Reform Project dated March 28,
2018). These factors consist of:

     1. The existence of extra-budgetary funds that are not subject to parliamentary scrutiny
         (including for example the use of donor funds).
     2. Supplementary budgets that are not submitted to Parliament and include variations on
         approved budgets.
     3. Centralized payment approval processes that lead to inefficiencies.
     4. Connectivity issues that limit the likelihood that citizens can access information published on
         websites and open data portals.
     5. SAI dependence on the MoF for adequate funding.
     6. Weak risk management and control environment at MDAs and local councils
     7. Low buy-in for an enhanced role for audit committees and enhanced PAC scrutiny



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The quality of the ICR is rated Substantial The project was candid on the project’s shortcomings and provided a
good overview of the risks to development outcomes, noting additional measures that could be taken to
mitigate those risks. Notwithstanding this, the ICR Review finds that there were shortcomings in the quality of
the analysis presented in the ICR. The ICR does not include a discussion of the causal links between the

                                                                                                    Page 22 of 23
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      PFM Improvement and Consolidation (P133424)



project's activities, outputs, and actual/expected outcomes, and does not discuss the problems with the
selection of some of the results indicators, and yet, rates overall efficacy Substantial. Similarly, some of the
lessons offered do not appropriately respond to the specific experiences and findings of the project.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                      Page 23 of 23
