     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     China Minamata Convention on Mercury (P151281)



                                                                               Report Number: ICRR0023663

1. Project Data



 Project ID                               Project Name
 P151281                                  China Minamata Convention on Mercury

 Country                                  Practice Area(Lead)
 China                                    Environment, Natural Resources & the Blue Economy


 L/C/TF Number(s)                         Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-A3066                                 30-Apr-2021                                           7,739,733.36

 Bank Approval Date                       Closing Date (Actual)
 09-Sep-2016                              30-Oct-2022

                                          IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           8,000,000.00                                    8,000,000.00

 Revised Commitment                            7,739,733.36                                    7,739,733.36

 Actual                                        7,739,733.36                                    7,739,733.36




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                 ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Ebru Karamete              Fernando Manibog            Avjeet Singh                   IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The same project development objectives (PDOs) were used in the Grant Agreement (page 5) and in the
   Project Appraisal Document, page 13; which were: “to: (a) develop a national strategy on mercury and
   related action plans, and (b) improve China’s mercury management capacity and readiness to
   implement this strategy in the project provinces”. This was a Global Environment Facility (GEF) financed
   project and the global environment objectives were identical to the PDO.



                                                                                                Page 1 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     China Minamata Convention on Mercury (P151281)




b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project had three components:

   1. Development of National Strategy and Sectoral and Provincial Action Plans (total appraisal
   amount: US$4.72 million, actual amount: US$3.96 million).

   This component aimed at delivering the National Mercury Strategy and action plans related to: (a) mercury
   supply sources and trade; (b) mercury added products; (c) industrial point sources (coal-fired power plants,
   coal-fired industrial boilers, municipal solid waste and hospital waste, cement clinker production, and non-
   ferrous metals smelting); and (d) waste and contaminated sites. Cross-cutting elements were planned to
   address (a) environment and health monitoring; (b) monitoring and management of social impacts; and (c)
   research and development. The project aimed to support stakeholder engagement activities throughout and
   also development of specific action plans in the pilot provinces of Guizhou, Hunan and Shaanxi. The
   Ministry of Environmental Protection (MEP)/Foreign Economic Cooperation Office (FECO) were to work
   closely with industry associations and other stakeholders to deliver analytical reports and proposals
   constituting the various elements of a comprehensive national strategy.

   2. Capacity Strengthening for Mercury Management and Risk Assessment (total appraisal amount:
   US$10.48 million, actual amount: US$15.90 million).

   This component aimed to build capacity for mercury management in the MEP, Department of Environmental
   Protection (DEP) in the three pilot provinces and other stakeholders through targeted activities and
   establishing some of the building blocks that will support China’s long-term environmentally sound
   management of mercury, and mercury reduction and phase-out efforts. Activities would include (a) the
   development of a National Mercury Management Information System (MIS), tested first in the pilot
   Provinces; (b) assessment of mercury management and recycling technologies and practices in relevant
   sectors; (c) upgrade of the provincial environmental analytical laboratory of each participating province, and
   training and inter-laboratory comparison and knowledge sharing; and (d) environmental risk assessment of
   selected mercury contaminated sites to improve understanding of the scope and impact of mercury
   contamination in China.

   3. Project Management (total appraisal amount: US$0.80 million, actual amount: US$0.65 million).

   This component financed project management and implementation support activities, including coordination
   with relevant stakeholders, at the national level and the project provinces.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates



                                                                                                    Page 2 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     China Minamata Convention on Mercury (P151281)



   Project Cost. Project cost planned at appraisal was US$ 16 million, and the actual cost at closing was US$
   20.64 million (129 percent of the planned amount).

   Financing. The project was financed by a grant from GEF (TF-A3066). The planned amount at appraisal
   was US$ 8 million and actual amount at closing was US$ 7.74 million.

   Borrower Contribution. The borrower contribution planned at appraisal was US$ 8 million and the actual
   amount was US$12.9 million. The ICR did not provide a reason why Borrower contribution got increased.

   Dates: The project was approved by the Board on September 9, 2016, and became effective about five
   months later February 6, 2017. The original closing date of April 30, 2021, was extended for 18 months to
   October 30, 2022, based on delays due to Covid -19 and initial procurement delays.

   Restructuring: The project went through a level II restructuring on Oct 29, 2020, to extend the project
   closing for 18 months and to finalize the remaining project activities mainly due to delays from the impact of
   Covid-19 pandemic, in addition to delays caused by lengthy procurement processes at the start of the
   project and lack of experience of FECO staff on World Bank procurement processes.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country and Sector Context. As of 2013, China was estimated to be the biggest emitter of atmospheric
mercury in the world, accounting for about one third of global emissions. Mercury waste and emissions left
portions of the Chinese population at risk of dangerous exposure to mercury. In the same year, the
Minamata Convention on Mercury was adopted globally to protect human health and the environment from
anthropogenic emissions and releases of mercury and its compounds. China became a signatory to the
Convention in 2013 and ratified it in 2016. Reducing exposure to mercury was therefore a high priority for
the Chinese Government. China was working to meet its Convention commitments, including the creation of
a Minamata Initial Assessment, along with a review of China’s policies related to mercury reduction. An
overarching and comprehensive understanding of mercury emission and use in the country was needed as
per the requirements of the convention. The use of mercury in China was highly complex and included in
many industrial processes in many sectors over a wide geographical spread. Efforts to understand, map,
and monitor mercury use in the country were difficult. There was a noted lack of data on mercury mines,
recycling facilities, and information on mercury trade at both the country and local levels. Methods for
estimating emissions remained very basic and were not calibrated for local conditions. China also lacked
policy and strategy documents to evaluate the benefit-cost ratio and effectiveness of various mercury
control measures along with policies that would translate these measures into action (ICR, page 5).

Relevance to Government Priorities and Strategies. The PDO remains relevant to China’s 14th Five-
Year Plan (2021–25), which aims to reduce air, water, and soil pollution through its goal to “accelerate the
green transformation of the development model.” This goal includes specific targets for “clean production
transformations” of the cement clinker and non-ferrous industries, both of which are specifically addressed
by the project. The plan also aims to improve coordination and governance of pollution control, both of
which are improved by the national strategy component of the project.


                                                                                                    Page 3 of 15
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                      Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      China Minamata Convention on Mercury (P151281)



               Relevance to World Bank Strategies. The PDO was aligned to the World Bank Group’s Country
               Partnership Strategy for China FY2013–16 (Report No. 67566), which included an outcome on ‘Supporting
               Greener Growth’, of which one sub-outcome was ‘Demonstrating Pollution Management Measures’. Under
               this outcome, the World Bank was supporting the reduction in air pollution and hazardous waste and
               improving environmental governance.

               The PDO remains aligned with the World Bank Group’s Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for the
               People’s Republic of China FY2020–2025, (Report No. 117875-CN). One of the three main areas of
               engagement in the CPF is “promoting greener growth including reducing air, soil, water pollution,” which the
               project supported by promoting an enabling environment for China to reduce air, soil, and water pollution
               from mercury. In addition, cooperation on global knowledge and development, which is a cross-cutting
               theme in the CPF, was supported by helping China to report on mercury emissions and releases to the
               Minamata Convention. The project was in line with the CPF goal to support China’s contribution to global
               public goods, as mercury can be emitted into the atmosphere, be built into products sold through regional
               and global supply chains and accumulate in fish and sediments far from its waste source. The project also
               supported minimizing greenhouse gas emissions.

               The PDO was aligned with GEF priorities and strategies; mercury reduction was a key component of the
               programming directions for the sixth GEF replenishment phase, 2014–2018. As part of the financial
               mechanism of the Minamata Convention, GEF provides financial support to eligible countries, including
               China, to reduce mercury use worldwide. The GEF-6 Chemicals and Waste focal area had an objective to
               ‘develop the enabling conditions, tools and environment for the sound management of harmful chemicals
               and wastes’. The project has high relevance to the current strategy for the GEF-8 replenishment phase
               (2022–2026). GEF-8’s Chemicals and Waste focal area has an objective that aims at the “creation,
               strengthening and supporting the enabling environment and policy coherence to transform the manufacture,
               use and sound management of chemicals and to eliminate waste and chemical pollution.” Mercury
               continues to be a GEF priority, as GEF remains one of the few multilateral sources of funding for the
               Minamata Convention and mercury reduction in general.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To develop a national strategy on mercury and related action plans.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change (TOC). A TOC was developed during the 2019 midterm review (MTR) and was fine-tuned
                             for the Implementation Completion and Results Report (ICR). The PDO statement is at the output level.
                             According to the TOC, activities included developing sectoral, cross cutting and provincial action plans and

                                                                                                                            Page 4 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   China Minamata Convention on Mercury (P151281)



engaging with key stakeholders. Intermediate Outcomes and Outcomes are also very similar, i.e. developing
national strategy and relevant action plans. The PDO indicator “a national strategy developed and submitted
for approval” was relevant to measure the objective but a higher-level outcome such as 'implementation'
rather than “submission for approval’ of the strategy could have been aimed.

Outputs/Intermediate Outcomes:

      Three plans were approved in Guizhou, Hunan, and Shaanxi province and one municipal plan
       approved in Tongren municipality, exceeding the intermediate outcome target of three plans.
      Nine sectoral plans were approved meeting the target of nine plans.

Outcomes:

The national strategy on mercury was developed as a main outcome of the project, covering all the sectors
and elements addressed by the Minamata Convention that are relevant to China. At the time of the ICR, the
draft national strategy had been submitted to MEE for approval achieving the PDO indicator. The ICR noted
that final approval by MEE was expected by the end of 2023. Although the strategy approval is not complete
yet, the ICR noted that the strategy and action plans developed under the project have already been
incorporated into and are being implemented through China’s 14th Five-Year Plan and other national and
sectoral strategies and programs. (ICR, Page 11).

The ICR provided some examples on how the strategy has already been included into programs: For
example, (i) the December 2020 ban on the production of all mercury-added products which is being enforced
(with exceptions for mercury-containing thermometers and sphygmomanometers until 2025, related to Article
4 of the Minamata Convention); (ii) the updated guidelines of the National Hazardous Waste List for industrial
solid and hazardous waste for priority industries (which should lead to a reduction in mercury content in waste
that can enter into water and soil; and (iii) contaminated site remediation projects considering mercury control
actions, such as the closure and ecological restoration of a mercury mine waste dump in Guizhou Province;
(iv) based on the action plans developed under the project, starting from January 1, 2019, the use of mercury
or mercury compounds was prohibited in the manufacturing processes of various chemicals (related to Article
5 of the Minamata Convention).

The ICR also reported that mercury use is already dropping in some industries, i.e., mercury mining was
reduced from 144,500 tons in 2018 to 109,100 tons in 2020 according to China's national report to the
Minamata Convention. The 14th Five-Year Plan also places a ban on new primary mercury mining (related to
Article 3 of the Minamata Convention), including issuing new mercury mine exploration licenses and mining
licenses, which has led to a continuous decline in China’s mercury production. By 2020, China’s mercury
production was 1,993 tons, a decrease of 10.71 percent, compared to the previous year. (ICR, page 12).

Based on the additional evidence presented by the ICR on how the strategy and action plans developed
under the project have already been incorporated into and are being implemented under various programs,
how there has been a reduction in mercury production and use by various industries, and how it is helping
China accelerate its compliance with the requirements of Minamata Convention, achievement of the first
objective is rated High.



Rating

                                                                                                  Page 5 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   China Minamata Convention on Mercury (P151281)



High


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To improve the Recipient’s (China’s) mercury management capacity and readiness to implement this strategy
in the project provinces.

Rationale
TOC. The project support for the design of a national MIS to be operationalized in pilot provinces, the
assessment of two recycling technologies, and the environmental risk assessment of contaminated sites
would contribute to improvement of China’s mercury management capacity and readiness to implement
strategies in the project provinces. The PDO indicator “Mercury flow tracked by a fully functional management
information system’ was designed to measure the objective.

Outputs/Intermediate Outcomes:

The project achieved/exceeded the following intermediate outcome targets.

        Three laboratories—the Environmental Monitoring Center in Xunyang, Shaanxi, the Tongren
         Municipal Monitoring Center in Guizhou, and the Hunan Provincial Research Institute of
         Environmental Protection—received equipment and training to improve their capacity to measure
         mercury.
        The project completed environmental risk assessments at nine mercury-contaminated sites
         (surpassing the Intermediate Indicator 2.2 target of five).
        Mercury recycling assessments for Intermediate Indicator 2.1 were carried out at two locations
         meeting the indicator target.
        The project also financed several capacity-building and awareness-raising efforts in the project
         provinces, significantly surpassing intermediate targets on the number of participants (in consultation
         activities and at dissemination events, including the number of female participants). 39,516 individuals
         participated in events (surpassing the target for Intermediate Indicator 2.5) with female participants
         making up about 56 percent of the total (above the target for Intermediate Indicator 2.6). In addition,
         there were about 645,000 virtual participants, partially via the innovative use of social media, which
         was a significant over-achievement in the engagement indicators and impact.

Outcome:

The MIS system, which is the main outcome of the project’s capacity building support was first tested and
operationalized in the pilot provinces, meeting the original PDO target. The project operationalized the MIS
nationally that is managed by the NSB and that is integrated into the national information system connected
to and complementing two environmental monitoring systems. The MIS tracks mercury transport and use.
The integration of the MIS into the national information system ensures its long-term sustainability
and increased efficiency by avoiding repetitive reporting, which has far-reaching impact. It helped China
provide more accurate national reporting to the Minamata Convention and will continue to do so in the long
term. It is one of the few national-level, dedicated mercury MISs worldwide, and goes beyond Minamata
Convention requirements, as the convention does not require a national MIS.



                                                                                                   Page 6 of 15
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               China Minamata Convention on Mercury (P151281)



                            According to the ICR other activities under Component 2 contributed to meeting the PDO as well. Investing in
                            the laboratories improved the robustness and accuracy of monitoring that is needed for the national strategy;
                            these had been utilized by the end of the project and informed studies to update the mercury emissions
                            baseline for priority industries. The environmental risk assessments built capacity to safely manage mercury
                            waste, a key necessity for the strategy; and the recycling assessments helped China understand which
                            technologies are most cost-effective and useful for minimizing the need for additional primary mercury mining,
                            an additional goal of the strategy.

                            However, the ICR noted that future work may also be necessary to ensure proper capacity in additional
                            mercury-contaminated or mercury-using facilities in the pilot provinces, as well as in the non-pilot provinces
                            where mercury is present.

                            It would be helpful for the project to conduct a survey of the beneficiaries of training programs to understand
                            the utilization of the trainings and to enrich the evidence on capacity building results. Based on the evidence
                            provided by the ICR, achievement of the second objective is rated Substantial.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The achievement of the first objective is rated high, and achievement of the second objective is rated
                            substantial based on the evidence provided on key outcomes. The overall efficacy is rated high on balance.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            High



    5. Efficiency
   No attempt was made to conduct ex-ante or ex-post economic analysis of the investment supported by the
   project. The justification provided by the ICR was due to project’s focus being on technical assistance to
   strengthen institutional capacity for mercury pollution control and reduction. The ICR provided information on
   the project’s implementation efficiency, and management efficiency by reporting on cost-effectiveness of the
   allocated budgets to achieve the PDOs.

   The project’s original duration of four years was extended by 18 months, mainly due to the impact of Covid-19
   pandemic, in addition to delays caused by inexperienced FECO procurement team and lengthy procurement
   processes at the start of the project. Given the project’s complex MIS activities that required wide-ranging field


                                                                                                                               Page 7 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      China Minamata Convention on Mercury (P151281)



work and consultation process, the duration of implementation that was planned at appraisal was too ambitious.
By the revised closing date, all project activities and investments were complete.

Project management cost was only US$0.28 million, accounting for less than 4 percent of the project cost.
FECO signed an implementation agreement with each of the pilot provinces and municipality, without setting up
PMOs at the provincial level. The ICR noted that this approach not only kept costs low but also helped
internalize institutional capacity building.

Based on the above, the efficiency of the project is rated substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?              Point value (%)            *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                        0
 Appraisal                                                   0
                                                                                         Not Applicable
                                                                                        0
 ICR Estimate                                                0
                                                                                         Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The project’s objectives are highly relevant to the strategies of the World Bank and the Government both at
appraisal and at closing, with the caveat that the first objective is output oriented. The Efficacy in achieving the
first objective is rated high based on additional evidence provided by ICR on the outcomes from development of
national strategy on mercury and related action plans. The Efficacy in achieving the second objective is rated
substantial based on the evidence to improve China’s mercury management capacity and readiness to
implement this strategy in the project provinces. Overall efficacy is rated high. Efficiency is rated substantial
based on operational/administrative efficiency, although there was no economic efficiency analysis. Based on
these sub-ratings, the project’s overall outcome is rated highly satisfactory


a. Outcome Rating
   Highly Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome



                                                                                                        Page 8 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     China Minamata Convention on Mercury (P151281)



The following three risks to development outcomes were noted by the ICR (page 26):

The risk of a lack of mercury monitoring due to lack of government budgets and processes was mitigated by
ensuring that the MIS was integrated into the NSB’s monitoring system that ensures funding of mercury
monitoring and reporting.

The risk of low technical capacity and financing to reduce mercury use and emissions for the various
mercury-using industries and provinces is to be mitigated by further involvement of development partners
and the provision of grant financing to build capacity in specific mercury-using sectors. An upcoming World
Bank-implemented GEF project is planned to support the non-ferrous metal industry (P175980 ‘Sustainable
Mercury Management in Non-ferrous Metal Industry’) as a second phase of this project. Projects
implemented by other GEF implementing agencies will phase out the production of mercury-containing
medical thermometers and sphygmomanometers (such as project GEF ID 10349 implemented by the United
Nations Development Program).

There is also a risk that government policies and enforcement of mercury reductions may lag China’s
Minamata Convention commitments. The project involved many key national, provincial, and municipal
governmental entities, who were engaged and incorporated elements of the national strategy and action
plans in their own strategies and programs. Before the grant closed, China had passed laws that will begin to
reduce mercury usage, such as the ban on new mercury mines and the phase-out of mercury-added
products. All of these is expected to limit this risk.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project was relevant to the World Bank and the government strategies. While the GEF had been
  supporting China to identify policy needs under the Minamata Convention, additional support was needed
  to help the country to translate the identified policy needs into concrete policy reforms. Thus, the World
  Bank through this project supported the Chinese government to develop its national strategy on mercury,
  identify action plans of priority sectors and provinces, and strengthen its capacity in specific areas of
  mercury pollution control. These would help China to meet its obligations under the Minamata
  Convention. The project activities included a mix of technical, institutional, and policy interventions, which
  were relevant to achieve the objectives.

  The implementation arrangements were effective, with implementation of the provincial activities
  entrusted to the Department of Ecology and Environments (DEEs), which proved to improve ownership
  and increase the likelihood of sustainability as well as implementation efficiency. The World Bank
  included support from technical and international advisers and also developed an Implementation
  Support Plan, which included plans for technical support to FECO in the development of the national
  strategy and the MIS, as well as risk assessments at contaminated sites. The World Bank also ensured
  that fiduciary arrangements were adequate and the environmental and social aspects were considered
  appropriately during the environmental and social assessments.

  Given the project’s complex MIS activities that required wide-ranging field work and consultation process,
  the duration of implementation planned at appraisal was too ambitious. The identification of moderate

                                                                                                      Page 9 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     China Minamata Convention on Mercury (P151281)



  procurement risk due to the lack of experienced staff in FECO proved to be important to provide extra
  training for FECO on World Bank processes, especially given the large number of consultancies that
  needed to be contracted.

  Based on the above the quality at entry is rated as satisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The ICR reported that the World Bank oversight was consistent, with a dozen missions and technical visits
 over the course of six years and provided hands-on support to reduce bottlenecks and resolve issues (ICR,
 page 25). Aide Memoires and ISRs discussed progress toward achieving the development objectives,
 flagged key issues with proposed actions, and followed up to ensure that issues were addressed in a timely
 manner. The World Bank project team included a mix of international and local staff and consultants that
 provided implementation support on technical aspects, as well as project management, financial,
 safeguards, and operational aspects. The task team leaders and most of the core team members remained
 on the project throughout implementation, which provided continuity and developed and maintained an
 effective working relationship with the government counterpart and stakeholders.

 The Bank team identified the potential need for an extension early, before the MTR, and discussed and
 agreed with FECO on how to go about the restructuring. The Bank team helped the project remain on
 course during the COVID-19 pandemic by shifting to virtual mode, frequent communication, and fast
 turnaround.

 Based on the above, quality of supervision is rated satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The project’s TOC was simple and clear. The indicators overall were measurable and attributable. The
 PDO indicator “a national strategy developed and submitted for approval” was relevant to measure the
 objective but a higher-level outcome such as 'implementation' rather than “submission for approval’ of the
 strategy could have been aimed. In addition, there was some ambiguity in the scope of the PDO 2
 indicator. The MIS was planned to be designed from the start as a national system, but the project’s target

                                                                                                   Page 10 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     China Minamata Convention on Mercury (P151281)



 was only to have the system operational in the three pilot provinces by project end. The intermediate
 indicators covered project activities well, except for the capacity building of provincial laboratories and the
 increase in capacity to monitor atmospheric mercury emissions, which in hindsight should have been
 included.



b. M&E Implementation
  The ICR reported that the key PDO-level indicators and intermediate indicators were closely monitored
  and reported on in a timely manner through semiannual progress reports provided by FECO, with inputs
  from the provincial and municipal environmental authorities (ICR, page 21). Establishing the MIS for
  mercury management at the national level and integrating it into the NSB’s information system required
  extra effort, given the magnitude of work, cross-sectoral coordination, national-level endorsement, and
  field work required to cover a vast area across many industries and provinces.



c. M&E Utilization
  M&E data were integral to making the need for a project extension clear. The M&E data and analysis
  have been and will continue to be used to guide resource allocation and decision-making by the relevant
  environmental authorities. It has provided scarce data, video footage, and pictures and will serve as
  firsthand and evidence-based information for scientific research in the future. The M&E system is
  already being used by the NSB and MEE nationwide and informed the National Report to the Minamata
  Convention.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was categorized as Category B project (Partial Assessment) on Environmental Safeguards,
   triggering only the Environmental Assessment - OP/BP 4.01 safeguard policy. The project developed an
   Environmental Safeguards Management Framework (ESMF) that was disclosed on July 18, 2016, which
   provided a preliminary screening of the environmental impacts of the project. Environmental screening was
   to be carried out as part of the risk assessments for contaminated sites to identify issues that would need to
   be assessed in the preparation of remediation plans for future downstream activities. The national strategy
   includes a brief section on safeguards, which mentions the need to build the capacity of the national and
   local stakeholders to implement the Minamata Convention and enforce policies, regulations, rules,
   standards, and action plans associated with implementing the Convention. The ICR reported that ESMF
   implementation was satisfactory (ICR, page 22). The project did not encounter any environmental
   safeguards-related issues during implementation and complied with environmental safeguards. A grievance
   redress mechanism was developed and was disclosed nationally through the MEP/FECO website in 2016.
   No complaints were received during the project.


                                                                                                      Page 11 of 15
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    China Minamata Convention on Mercury (P151281)



  Social Safeguards:

  In terms of social safeguards, the World Bank policies on Indigenous Peoples - OP/BP 4.10 and Involuntary
  Resettlement - OP/BP4.12 were triggered as the strategies and action plans drafted by the project could
  lead to future activities that close mercury-using businesses where ethnic minority or vulnerable groups are
  employed, leading either to a loss of their livelihoods or the handling of toxic waste near communities where
  vulnerable groups live. Discovery of mercury contamination near such communities could lead to
  involuntary resettlement. The ESMF included several measures to mitigate potential social impacts that
  could arise during the project and prepare downstream activities to manage such social risks. These
  measures included ensuring that consultant terms of reference included a task to develop guidelines for
  mitigating impacts on employees and communities near contaminated sites, integrating safeguards in the
  guidelines for site assessments, and providing guidelines for carrying out stakeholder and public
  consultations and disclosure of information for downstream activities. The ESMF also included a measure to
  ensure that laboratory facilities that were renovated or contaminated sites assessed by the project would
  not expropriate additional land and lead to involuntary resettlement. The ESMF included guidelines on the
  contents of social assessment reports, a framework for public participation, an Ethnic Minority Planning
  Framework, and a Resettlement Policy Framework. These two social safeguards instruments were
  prepared under the ESMF to establish the principles and guidelines for site-specific ethnic minority
  development plans and resettlement action plans, in case of negative impacts to ethnic minorities and land
  acquisition and resettlement identified during project implementation. However, the ICR noted that there
  were no such instances during project implementation (ICR, page 23).




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management:

  The ICR reported that the project financial management was sound (ICR, page 23). The yearly audits by
  the China National Audit Office found the project in compliance with Chinese accounting standards and
  with the terms of the Grant Agreement. Interim unaudited financial statements were at times submitted late
  by FECO, but no major issues were found. Financial management was rated satisfactory throughout the
  project, except in the October 2020 Implementation Status and Results Report (ISR) because of some
  project staff being reassigned to non-project assignments. This issue was resolved by FECO by hiring new
  staff.

  Procurement:

  Procurement was identified as a moderate risk in the PAD, given the FECO project team’s lack of
  familiarity with World Bank procurement policies and procedures. This was mitigated by the World Bank-
  provided training and timely and frequent support and communication with FECO staff. FECO created a
  Procurement Plan at appraisal and managed procurement processes throughout implementation. As
  mentioned in the previous sections, some procurement delays occurred during implementation due to
  FECO’s lengthy standard procurement process and the difficulty in obtaining multiple bids for certain highly
  technical consultancies. However, such delays were recognized and addressed and did not have a lasting
  impact. Procurement reviews consistently found the project to be in compliance with the World Bank’s



                                                                                                 Page 12 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     China Minamata Convention on Mercury (P151281)



   procurement policies and requirements. FECO routinely prepared and updated the annual procurement
   plans that were submitted to the World Bank.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   No unintended impacts were reported by the ICR.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                    IEG
                                                                                Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                        Highly Satisfactory    Highly Satisfactory

Bank Performance               Satisfactory           Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                 Substantial            Substantial

Quality of ICR                 ---                    High


12. Lessons

The ICR developed several lessons, the most relevant ones are presented as follows:

      Future projects on pollution issues in China or elsewhere could consider provincial
       pilots and subsequent integration into national-level monitoring systems. Piloting the
       MIS in the project provinces proved to be a successful first step toward national
       operationalization and the integration of the MIS into the NSB’s existing information system,
       and an effective approach to ensure efficiency and sustainability. Piloting of the MIS in high
       mercury use provinces proved to be a successful method to showcase local government
       progress and generate national interest in mercury flow monitoring and reporting. After the
       initial provincial pilot, the process of operationalizing the MIS at the national level and its
       integration into the NSB statistical system was lengthy and required cross-sectoral
       coordination, but these extra efforts were critical to ensure a sustainable and national impact
       and increased efficiency.
      Implementation agreements with local governments, rather than full project
       management units at the provincial level, can be an effective and efficient
       implementation modality for decentralizing project activities. The implementation
       modality of having the Foreign Economic Cooperation Office working closely with the
       provincial and municipal Department of Ecology and Environments on pilot activities based
       on implementation agreements proved to be very effective and efficient. Cost efficiency was
       achieved by allocating a relatively small percentage of the grant funding to the provincial and

                                                                                                   Page 13 of 15
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       China Minamata Convention on Mercury (P151281)



         municipal environmental authorities to help coordinate and implement the relevant pilot
         activities. It also helped build capacity at the provincial level. Similar technical assistance
         projects with local pilot activities should consider using implementation agreements to ensure
         streamlined and effective participation by local governments.
        Mercury recycling can be a cost-effective way to reduce the use of mercury in some
         industrial processes and recycling technologies and practices could be piloted at the
         enterprise level to validate their technical and financial viability for scaling up to the
         entire industry. The assessments of mercury recycling technologies conducted under the
         project indicate that recycling is a cost-effective way to reduce use othe f mercury in some
         industries, such as non-ferrous metal smelting industry, especially in terms of reducing the
         use of primary mercury. In future investment operations, mercury recycling technologies and
         practices could be piloted at the enterprise level to validate their technical and financial
         viability for scaling up to the entire industry. It will also promote a circular economy, energy
         savings, and reduction of greenhouse gas emissions. The findings of the assessments laid a
         good foundation for follow-on projects.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The report was concise, provided a detailed overview of the project, and followed the guidelines. The lessons
were specific experiences and findings of the project. The efficacy discussion was robust; the ICR reported
additional outcome-level evidence to support the ratings linked to the impact of the project’s intervention. The
lessons were based on the project's operational experience and were relevant for future operations.

Overall, the ICR quality is rated as High.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       High




                                                                                                     Page 14 of 15
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
China Minamata Convention on Mercury (P151281)




                                                                              Page 15 of 15
