     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Poyang Lake Water Environment Management (P153604)



                                                                             Report Number: ICRR0023560

1. Project Data



 Project ID                              Project Name
 P153604                                 Poyang Lake Water Environment Management

 Country                                 Practice Area(Lead)
 China                                   Water


 L/C/TF Number(s)                        Closing Date (Original)              Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-87040                              31-Dec-2022                                       135,897,168.17

 Bank Approval Date                      Closing Date (Actual)
 16-Mar-2017                             31-Dec-2022

                                         IBRD/IDA (USD)                                    Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                        150,000,000.00                                             0.00

 Revised Commitment                         135,897,168.17                                             0.00

 Actual                                     135,897,168.17                                             0.00




 Prepared by               Reviewed by                 ICR Review Coordinator        Group
 Hassan Wally              Kishore Laxmikant           Ramachandra Jammi             IEGSD (Unit 4)
                           Nadkarni




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) of the Poyang Lake Basin Town Water Environment Management
   Project as articulated in the Loan Agreement (LA, page 5) was identical to the one stated in the Project
   Appraisal Document (PAD, paragraph 17) and aimed to:

   "Reduce the pollutant discharge into selected waterways and improve management of water quality in
   selected counties in the Poyang Lake basin within Jiangxi Province."


                                                                                              Page 1 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Poyang Lake Water Environment Management (P153604)



   Parsing the PDO. The PDO will be parsed based on the following two objectives:

   1. To reduce the pollutant discharge into selected waterways in selected counties in the Poyang Lake basin
   within Jiangxi Province.

   2. To improve management of water quality in selected counties in the Poyang Lake basin within Jiangxi
   Province.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  13-Jul-2020

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   The PDO was supported by the following four components:

    1. Institutional Strengthening for Water Management (appraisal cost: US$24.69 million, actual cost:
   US$31.66 million). The key activities supported included: (a) Establishment of the Lake Management
   Platform (LMP) designed to strengthen the Poyang Lake Basin’s management, institutional, and
   knowledge-sharing architecture; (b) Establishment of water environment monitoring systems: installation of
   monitoring stations, provision of monitoring equipment and facilities, the establishment of integrated
   information monitoring system and early warning system; (c) Preparation of studies related to the ecological
   protection of Poyang Lake, which included financing mechanisms to improve water management, with a
   focus on incentive mechanisms designed to reduce nonpoint source pollution from agricultural and
   aquaculture practices; (d) Preparation of a sensitivity assessment of Poyang Lake to strengthen basin-wide
   water environment management planning with climate resilience and adaptation measures; and (e)
   Enhancement of participatory sustainable lake basin management, including disclosing information about
   Poyang Lake protection to the public and grassroots level organizations and carrying out environmental
   awareness and social activities at the county and village levels to ensure the soundness of infrastructure
   design and operational sustainability.

    2. Lake and River Restoration and Improvement of Wastewater Management (appraisal cost:
   US$139.42 million, actual cost: US$109.85 million). This component supported demonstration of an
   integrated watershed management approach by focusing on key areas for protection, improving water
   quality, and environmental protection, and establishing ecological pollution-control zones, with the following
   activities:
   (a) Restoration of the lake and river environment in Zhuhu Lake, Pipa Lake, and Zoujiazui lakes and stream
   located respectively in Poyang, Yugan, and Duchang Counties. The restoration measures included (i) the
   construction of bio-retention swales to intercept runoff pollutants from being discharged directly into the

                                                                                                    Page 2 of 21
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  Poyang Lake Water Environment Management (P153604)



lakes; (ii) the removal of a small amount of lake sediment to reduce the inner lake pollution source; (iii) the
development of constructed wetlands designed to remove pollutants from storm water to be discharged into
the lakes; (iv) rehabilitation of water diversion structures, including four sluice gates and one pump station;
and (v) ‘nonstructural’ measures, including introduction and coordination of best farmland
practice/regulations, and sound aquaculture practices.
(b) Enhancement of wastewater management through (i) construction of wastewater interceptors/collections
and storm water pipelines, as well as associated roads rehabilitation to improve the wastewater collection
systems in towns of Fengxin, Duchang, Jing’an, and Jishui Counties; the project was not going to set up
new wastewater/solid waste treatment plants; (ii) construction of rural wastewater collection systems and
small wastewater treatment facilities such as wetlands and wastewater treatment tanks in villages around
lakes; and (iii) establishment of household connections in Poyang County.

3. Improvements in Solid Waste Management (appraisal cost: US$27.68 million, actual cost:
US$16.26 million). This component supported solid waste collection and transportation systems
improvements in the rural and urban areas of four counties, namely, Duchang, Yugan, Jing’an, and Shangli,
to reduce solid waste disposal to the lake/river systems of the Poyang Lake Basin. The collected solid
waste was to be treated and disposed at local landfills in Yugan and Jing’an Counties. Investments included
provision of solid waste bins and collection vehicles, construction of solid waste collection and transfer
stations, installation of a local solid waste management information system in Shangli, Duchang, and
Jing’an Counties connecting the existing systems in the three counties and linked to the local county urban
management information systems. Investments at the village level were to be implemented in a participatory
manner.

4. Project Implementation Support (appraisal cost: US$5.55 million, actual cost: US$5.72
million). This component supported the Project Implementing Entity (PIE) to coordinate, manage, and
supervise project implementation, including: consulting services for engineering design, construction
supervision, and environmental and social management; capacity-building workshops, training, and study
tours; regular financial management, procurement, contract supervision and monitoring and evaluation
(M&E), including procurement of external social, resettlement and environmental monitoring services; and
operation of the Project Management Offices (PMOs) including office equipment.

Revised Components. The following changes were made to the components as part of the July 2020
restructuring:

Component 1. Institutional Strengthening for Water Management. The planned studies on ecological
protection and vulnerability assessment for Poyang Lake were merged into a smaller-scale complementary
study on Poyang Lake vulnerability and ecological protection financing mechanism.


Component 2. Lake and River Restoration and Improvement of Wastewater Management. (a) The Pipa
Lake Restoration sub-project in Yugan County (covering sewer interceptions and solid waste facilities
around Pipa Lake, lake dredging, and rehabilitation of water diversion structures) was dropped as it had
been included in a government-funded program. A new sub-project was added through building and
rehabilitating 9.85 kilometers of high-priority sewer and stormwater mains and branches in the existing built-
up urban areas and rehabilitating six sewer pump stations and household sewer connections in 13 living
quarters; (b) all the planned agricultural and aqua-cultural pollution control activities, including the bio-
retention swales and introducing best farmland practices under the Zhuhu lake restoration sub-project were
dropped because the government enforcement of strict water pollution control regulations had made these


                                                                                                  Page 3 of 21
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Poyang Lake Water Environment Management (P153604)



  interventions redundant. They were replaced by the construction and/or rehabilitation of 5.22 kilometers of
  high-priority sewer collection and stormwater drainage pipelines with household connections for 14 living
  quarters in the county seat town, which would contribute to a reduction of pollutant discharge into Zhuhu
  lake and Poyang Lake. The rural wastewater collection and treatment facilities in 35 rural villages along
  Zhuhu lake remained under this sub-project.

  Component 3. Improvement in Solid Waste Management. (a) The coverage of domestic solid waste
  collection and transportation services was expanded from the original eight to 10 townships in Shangli
  county, retaining same cost through design optimization; (b) establishment of a smart solid waste
  management monitoring system (or platform, SSWMS) in Yugan County was added, and the SSWMS in
  Duchang Jing’An and Shangli Counties were expanded into a smart solid waste management monitoring
  and control system; and (c) construction of solid waste collection stations in the three counties, as well as
  collection and transport equipment in Duchang, Jing’An, and Yugan Counties envisaged at appraisal were
  dropped as the solid waste collection and transportation services had been outsourced to private providers.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost. The total cost of the project including the investments, interest, and charge was estimated to
  be US$219.90 million. The total project cost decreased from US$219.90 million at appraisal to US$185.86
  million with the restructuring, or by 15.5%. The actual cost was US$167.86 million or about 76% of the
  estimated amount at appraisal (ICR, Data Sheet, page 2).

  Financing. The project was financed through an IBRD Loan worth US$150.00 million. The actual amount
  disbursed was US$135.90 million or 90.6% of the original loan amount (ICR, Data Sheet, page 2).

  Borrower Contribution. The borrower was expected to provide US$69.93 million from the financial budget
  of Jiangxi provincial and county governments. The counterpart funds decreased from US$69.93 million to
  US$45.43 million with the restructuring. The actual amount contributed was US$31.96 million.

  Dates. The project was approved on March 16, 2017 and became effective seven months later on October
  13, 2017. The Mid-Term Review (MTR) was conducted on November 12, 2019 (about two years after
  effectiveness). The PAD did not include a specific date for the MTR. This Review finds that the MTR was
  conducted slightly early relative to other Bank-funded operations. The project closed on its original closing
  date on December 31, 2022.

  The project was restructured once, Level 2, on July 13, 2020, when the amount disbursed was US$20.19, in
  order to revise the Results Framework and apply changes to the components and costs. The total project
  costs decreased from US$219.909 million at appraisal to US$185.86 million with the restructuring, or by
  15.5%. The total World Bank financing remained the same at US$150 million while the counterpart funds
  decreased from US$69.93 million to US$45.43 million.

  As part of the restructuring, five PDO indicator targets were revised downward, mainly due to the reduced
  scope of lake and river restoration (under component 2) and solid waste treatment (under component 3).
  Therefore, this Review will assess the Outcomes based on a split rating methodology.




                                                                                                   Page 4 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Poyang Lake Water Environment Management (P153604)



3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Context at Appraisal. Poyang Lake, situated in Jiangxi Province, is the largest freshwater lake in China,
with a maximum surface area reaching 5,050 km2 and a storage capacity of 30 billion m3. At appraisal, the
Poyang Lake water was mainly used for irrigation (61.8%), industrial consumption (23.5%), domestic
consumption (8.2%), and other purposes (6.5%). The lake’s water environment conditions were declining
with chemical oxygen demand (COD) and ammonia-nitrogen (NH3-N) increasing and dissolved oxygen
(DO) decreasing. This was mostly due to increasing pollution from municipal water discharges and
increased industrial and rural wastewater and solid waste discharges. This project was designed to
contribute to the reduction of COD loads discharged from the project counties into Poyang Lake and the
increase of the solid waste collection rate in project areas. Similarly, the lake and river restoration activities
supported by the project were to enhance the habitat for sustainable function and growth of the native
aquatic and terrestrial species.

Previous Bank Experience. The Bank has had a long history of cooperation with China in various sectors
including: infrastructure, irrigation, energy and agriculture, among others. The World Bank continues to be
an important partner with the Government of China (GoC) on programs to promote water sector capacity,
most notably, the formulation of the China Country Water Resources Assistance Strategy (2002) and the
China Country Water Resources Partnership Strategy (2013–2020). This project builds on Bank-supported
China Economic Reform Implementation Project (P085124) which reported the rising pollution trends in the
lake. The project also complemented the Bank-financed Jiangxi Poyang Lake Basin and Ecological
Economic Zone Small Town Development Project (P085124), which aimed to improve key public services
in participating small towns of Jiangxi Province through improvements to priority infrastructure. The project
benefited from the experience of the Bank-financed Lake Victoria Environmental Management Project
(P100460) on adopting a participatory approach to improve management of water quality. Finally, the Bank
has a rich global experience supporting pollution control and ecological restoration projects, which enables
the Bank to bring international best practices in the management of water body pollution control and
environmental improvement.

Consistency with Bank Strategies. At appraisal, the PDO was in line with World Bank Group’s Country
Partnership Strategy for China (CPS, FY2013–FY2016), specifically the objectives set under Focus Area I:
Supporting greener growth, which was an outcome of demonstrating sustainable natural resources
management. The project contributed to this outcome through supporting an integrated approach toward
managing water in an environmentally sustainable manner. The project also contributed to the achievement
of the World Bank’s twin goals of ending extreme poverty and boosting shared prosperity. This was through
creating jobs and improving water quality to the local population.

At completion, the PDO continued to be in line with World Bank Group’s Country Partnership Framework for
China (CPF, FY2020–FY2025), particularly contributing to Engagement Area 2: Promoting greener growth.
Specifically, under Objective 2.2: Reducing Air, Soil, Water, and Marine Plastic Pollution. The project
contributed to reducing pollutant discharge into freshwater as one of its two outcomes. Also, under the
CPF Objective 2.4: Strengthening Sustainable Natural Resources Management, the project aimed to
demonstrate integrated water resource management. The project also contributed to several of the current
CPF’s criteria including: strengthening policies and institutions, addressing regional and global public
goods, and strategic piloting of approaches that address key development priorities.


                                                                                                        Page 5 of 21
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Poyang Lake Water Environment Management (P153604)



               Consistency with Government Strategies/Priorities. At appraisal, the PDO was in line with 13th five-year
               plan of Jiangxi Province and participating counties. The project was expected to contribute to Jiangxi’s
               strategy on ecological civilization. The strategy focused on applying systematic treatment and a
               combination of structural and nonstructural measures in the water sector to promote ecological safety,
               economic security, and the safety of human health and lives.

               At completion, the PDO continued to be in line with national challenges and priorities outlined in
               China’s14th five-year plan (FYP, FY2021–FY2025). The14th FYP included a specific indicator for improved
               surface water quality. The PDO and project activities continued to be in line with the plan's objectives
               to improve environmental quality, including to improve the water pollution prevention, with particular
               reference to reductions in COD and ammonia nitrogen (NH3-N) discharge to waterways.

               Summary of Relevance of Objectives Assessment. The PDO statement was specific and pitched at an
               adequate level of ambition. The PDO was sufficiently monitorable with relevant PDO-level indicators to
               measure outcomes that were exclusively attributable to the activities financed by the project. At completion,
               the PDO continued to be in line with Bank strategy and the Government priorities. Therefore, Relevance of
               Objectives is rated High.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To reduce the pollutant discharge into selected waterways in selected counties in the Poyang Lake basin
                             within Jiangxi Province.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change (ToC). To achieve the stated objective, the project supported the following activities:
                             (i) construction of wastewater collectors/interceptors and storm water pipelines, (ii) removal of sediment in
                             wetlands and lake; rehabilitation of water diversion structures; and construction of bioretention swales and
                             wetlands, and (iii) provision of solid waste bins; vehicles; construction of collection and transfer station. The
                             expected outputs were: (i) the development of an integrated wastewater collection system, (ii) restoration of
                             river and lake environment, and (iii) establishing enhanced solid waste collection points and transfer stations
                             with good transportation capacity and system. The expected outcome would be the reduction of pollutant
                             discharge into selected water ways as evidenced by a reduction in: mass of COD pollution load;
                             nitrogen load; phosphorus load; and increase the amount of domestic solid waste recycled (tons per year).
                             This would all reduce the pollutant discharge into selected waterways in selected counties in the Poyang Lake
                             basin within Jiangxi Province. Anticipated long-term outcomes included: (i) improved water quality and water-
                             based ecosystems Poyang Lake basin; (ii) improved well-being of local residents; and (iii) reduction of GHG.


                                                                                                                                Page 6 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Poyang Lake Water Environment Management (P153604)



The achievement of the PDO was underpinned by the following four critical assumptions: 1. Project Leading
Group (PLG), Project Management Office (PMO), and County Project Management Offices (CPMOs)
adequately staffed and trained, 2. Design consultant competent to complete system analysis for waste water
and solid waste management, 3. Client M&E capacity sufficient to carry out baseline survey, and 4.
Counterpart funding adequate and available for timely project implementation.

The activities included in the ToC were connected to the outputs, outcomes and the PDO in a plausible
causal chain. The stated assumptions were realistic. It is worth noting that activities to support lake and river
restoration and improvement were dropped as part of the 2020 restructuring (see section 2d for details).

Outputs / Intermediate Results

      55 water quality monitoring station/sites were established exceeding the original target of 44.
      61,897 new urban household sewer connections were constructed under the project exceeding the
         original target of 36,000 connections.
        5,912 new rural household sewer connections were constructed under the project which was
         below the original target of 13,000 connections.
        920 tons/year of Biochemical Oxygen Demand (BOD) pollution load was removed by the treatment
         plant under the project exceeding the original target of 800 tons/year.
        Sewage discharge into lake Poyang decreased by 11.73 million cubic meters exceeding the original
         target of 10.50 million cubic meters.
        Collection of solid waste reached 84% exceeding the original target of 80%, baseline was 51%.
        515 km of storm water and waste water pipe constructed or improved (no target provided).
        41 village based small scale waste water treatment facilitated built (no target provided).
        18 waste water pumping stations constructed (no target provided).
        202 garbage transportation vehicles procured (no target provided).

Outcomes

      At project completion, 2,746,000 people directly benefited from project interventions, which was below
         the original PAD target of 4,400,000 people (PDO outcome indicator 1). The actual beneficiary
         number was counted from the detailed local census conducted by county PMOs (ICR, paragraph 34).
        The volume (mass) of Chemical Oxygen Demand (COD) pollution load removed by the
         project reached 2,222 Tons/year which was below the original target of 2,700 Tons/year (PDO
         outcome indicator 2)
        The nitrogen(N) load reduction achieved under the project reached 255 Tons/year which was below
         the original target of 560 Tons/year (PDO outcome indicator 3).
        Nutrient load reduction (Phosphorus[P]) achieved under the project reached 36 Tons/year which was
         below the original target of 44 Tons/year (PDO outcome indicator 4).
        Industrial or municipal solid waste reduced or recycled under the project reached
         49,672 Tons/year which was below the original target of 99,000 Tons/year (PDO outcome indicator 5).
        GHG emissions were estimated to decrease by an average of about 8,000 tons of CO2-equivalent
         annually as a result of the project activities (ICR, paragraph 39).

Summary of Efficacy Assessment. The project achieved the reductions noted above in COD, N and P
pollutant load from existing wastewater treatment plants (WWTPs) in the project counties through the

                                                                                                    Page 7 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Poyang Lake Water Environment Management (P153604)



construction/improvement of storm water and waste water networks. The measured reductions were achieved
through process modification to reduce the load of pollutants requiring treatment and through the application
of wastewater treatment techniques to reduce the load of contaminants before discharge. All the treated
wastewater meets the discharge standard level of 1A. A third-party environmental monitoring agency with rich
experience in domestic and World Bank-financed project implementation was hired to monitor and evaluate
the achievement of these indicators (ICR, paragraph 35). The achievement under the fifth Outcome Indicator
was through: (a) provision of residential and institutional solid waste bins and construction of solid waste
collection stations; (b) provision of solid waste collection and transportation vehicles; (c) construction of solid
waste transfer stations; and (d) installation of local solid waste management information systems, which
optimize the waste transfer routes and monitor the collection real time.

Overall, the project fell short of achieving its original targets for pollutant load reduction (PDO outcome
indicators 2,3 and 4). It also fell short of achieving its target on the reduction of industrial or municipal solid
waste as well on the project beneficiaries (PDO outcome indicators 5 and 1). Therefore, the efficacy with
which this objective was achieved against the original targets is rated Modest.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
To reduce the pollutant discharge into selected waterways in selected counties in the Poyang Lake basin
within Jiangxi Province.

Revised Rationale
Theory of Change (ToC). The same ToC applies and the PDO was not changed. Three PDO indicator
targets were revised downward, mainly due to the reduced scope of lake and river restoration (under
Component 2) and solid waste treatment (under Component 3).

Outputs / Intermediate Results

      55 water quality monitoring station/sites were established exceeding the revised target of 49.
      61,897 new urban household sewer connections were constructed under the project exceeding the
         revised target of 60,567 connections.
      5,912 new rural household sewer connections were constructed under the project exceeding the
         revised target of 5,893 connections.
      920 tons/year of BOD pollution load was removed by the treatment plant under the project exceeding
         the revised target of 710 tons/year.
        Sewage discharge into lake Poyang decreased by 11.73 million cubic meters which was below the
         revised target of 13 million cubic meters.
        Collection of solid waste reached 84% exceeding the revised target of 80%, baseline was 51%.
        515 km of storm water and waste water pipe constructed or improved (no target provided).
        41 village based small scale waste water treatment facilitated built (no target provided).
        18 waste water pumping stations constructed (no target provided).

                                                                                                        Page 8 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Poyang Lake Water Environment Management (P153604)




      202 garbage transportation vehicles procured (no target provided).

Outcomes

      At project completion, 2,746,000 people directly benefited from project interventions, which fully met
         the revised target (PDO outcome indicator 1). The actual beneficiary number was counted from the
         detailed local census conducted by county PMOs (ICR, paragraph 34).
        The volume (mass) of Chemical Oxygen Demand (COD) pollution load removed by the
         project reached 2,222 Tons/year which exceeded the revised target of 1,886 Tons/year (PDO
         outcome indicator 2).
        The nitrogen (N) load reduction achieved under the project reached 255 Tons/year which exceeded
         the revised target of 201 Tons/year (PDO outcome indicator 3).
        Nutrient load reduction (Phosphorus[P]) achieved under the project reached 36 Tons/year which
         exceeded the revised target of 22 Tons/year (PDO outcome indicator 4).
        Industrial or municipal solid waste reduced or recycled under the project reached
         49,672 Tons/year which slightly exceeded the revised target of 49,645 Tons/year (PDO outcome
         indicator 5).
        While not part of the Results Framework, GHG emissions were estimated to have decreased by an
         average of about 8,000 tons of CO2-equivalent annually as a result of the project activities (ICR,
         paragraph 39).

Summary of Efficacy Assessment. The project achieved the reductions noted above in COD, N and P
pollutant load from existing waste water treatment plants (WWTPs) in the project counties through the
construction/improvement of storm water and waste water networks. The measured reductions were achieved
through process modification to reduce the load of pollutants requiring treatment and through the application
of waste water treatment techniques to reduce the load of contaminants before discharge. All the treated
wastewater meets the discharge standard level of 1A. A third-party environmental monitoring agency with rich
experience in domestic and World Bank-financed project implementation was hired to monitor and evaluate
the achievement of these indicators (ICR, paragraph 35). The achievement under the fifth Outcome Indicator
was through: (a) provision of residential and institutional solid waste bins and construction of solid waste
collection stations; (b) provision of solid waste collection and transportation vehicles; (c) construction of solid
waste transfer stations; and (d) installation of local solid waste management information systems, which
optimize the waste transfer routes and monitor the collection real time.

Overall, the project fully achieved its revised PDO outcome targets for pollutant load reduction (PDO outcome
indicators 2,3 and 4). It also fully achieved its outcome target on the reduction of industrial or municipal solid
waste as well on the project beneficiaries (PDO outcome indicators 5 and 1). Therefore, the efficacy with
which this objective was achieved against the revised targets is rated Substantial.




Revised Rating
Substantial



                                                                                                     Page 9 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Poyang Lake Water Environment Management (P153604)




OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To improve management of water quality in selected counties in the Poyang Lake basin within Jiangxi
Province.

Rationale
Theory of Change (ToC). To achieve the stated objective, the project supported the following activities:
setting up a lake management platform, enhancing participatory sustainable lake basin management, and
conducting workshops and study tours. The expected output was enhanced institutional capacity for water
management. The expected outcome was improved water quality management as evidenced by number of
counties applying participatory water quality monitoring and management system, and the lake management
platform established and operational. Anticipated long-term outcomes included: (i) improved water quality and
water-based ecosystems Poyang Lake basin; (ii) Improved well-being of local residents; and (iii) Reduction of
GHG.

The achievement of the PDO was underpinned by four critical assumptions: 1. PLG, PMO, and CPMOs
adequately staffed and trained, 2. Design consultant competent to complete system analysis for waste water
and solid waste management, 3. Client M&E capacity sufficient to carry out baseline survey, and 4.
Counterpart funding adequate and available for timely project implementation.

The activities included in the ToC were connected to the output, outcome and the PDO in a plausible causal
chain. The stated assumptions were realistic.

Outputs / Intermediate Results

      4 project counties had a smart domestic solid waste management monitoring and control system
         operational (target achieved).
        105,668 people were trained for public participation exceeding the target of 90,000 people.
        998 people participated in domestic and international training and study tour for project
         implementation exceeding the target of 920.
        One TA study on Poyang Lake vulnerability and financing mechanism completed.
        A participatory approach supported by action plans and the public participation manual were broadly
         adopted from project design through the entire implementation (ICR, paragraph 46).

Outcomes

      By project completion 7 project counties had participatory water quality management system (target
       achieved). The project provided training to promote the participation of stakeholders in water quality
       monitoring and environmental enforcement.
      Also, 7 counties had Lake Management Platforms (LMPs) established and operational exceeding the
       target of 6. The LMPs aimed to create an efficient institutional framework and facilitate information
       sharing to ensure sound coordination among all affiliated agencies and stakeholders involved in
       managing the lake’s water environment.

Summary of Efficacy Assessment. The RF lacked relevant indicators that directly measured the
improvement in institutional management, and the two PDO outcome indicators measuring this objective were
output oriented. That said, it is plausible that the institutional capacity for managing water quality was

                                                                                                Page 10 of 21
                                 Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                 Poyang Lake Water Environment Management (P153604)



                              enhanced through newly established water quality monitoring stations/sites; participation in domestic and
                              international training and study tours for project implementation; and people trained for public participation.
                              Also, in the seven project counties integrated basin water environment management was potentially improved
                              through active participatory management and capacity building, and the establishing LMPs, which were all in
                              operation (ICR, paragraph 43). Therefore, the efficacy with which this objective was achieved is rated
                              Substantial.



                              Rating
                              Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Overall Efficacy was rated Modest. For Objective 1, the project fell short of achieving its original
                            targets for pollutant load reduction (PDO outcome indicators 2,3 and 4). It also fell short of achieving its target
                            on the reduction of industrial or municipal solid waste as well on the project beneficiaries (PDO outcome
                            indicators 5 and 1). For objective 2, the project achieved its outcome targets for its two PDO outcome
                            indicators. Based on the reported achievements, it is plausible that the institutional capacity for managing
                            water quality was enhanced through newly established water quality monitoring stations/sites; participation in
                            domestic and international training and study tours for project implementation; and people trained for public
                            participation. Also, in the seven project counties integrated basin water environment management was
                            potentially improved through active participatory management and capacity building, and the establishing
                            LMPs.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating                                    Primary Reason
                            Modest                                                     Low achievement
                  OBJR1_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
                            Overall Efficacy is rated Substantial. For Objective 1, the project fully achieved its revised PDO
                            outcome targets for pollutant load reduction (PDO outcome indicators 2,3 and 4). It also fully achieved its
                            outcome target on the reduction of industrial or municipal solid waste as well on the project beneficiaries
                            (PDO outcome indicators 5 and 1). For Objective 2, the project achieved its outcome targets for its two PDO
                            outcome indicators. Based on the reported achievements, it is plausible that the institutional capacity for
                            managing water quality was enhanced through newly established water quality monitoring stations/sites;
                            participation in domestic and international training and study tours for project implementation; and people
                            trained for public participation. Also, in the seven project counties integrated basin water environment
                            management was potentially improved through active participatory management and capacity building, and
                            the establishing LMPs.



                                                                                                                                 Page 11 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Poyang Lake Water Environment Management (P153604)




  Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating
  Substantial



5. Efficiency
Economic and Financial Analysis (EFA)

ex-ante

      The analysis did not estimate an overall economic rate of return (ERR) for the project. The environmental
       benefits of the project were difficult to quantify. Thus, a cost-effectiveness approach was adopted to
       ensure that investments under the project are economically viable. A cost-effectiveness approach was
       employed to select the least-cost option.
      The cost-effectiveness approach included a comparison of two technical options to determine the least
       cost based on NPV calculation
       for cost flows during project life. The results showed that a scattered village-level wastewater treatment
       unit solution was cost-effective compared to a centralized approach.

ex-post

      Quantifying economic benefits due to water quality improvement attributed to project interventions was
       challenging. The same approach for economic assessment as used at project appraisal (cost-
       effectiveness analysis) was adopted to evaluate the project's economic viability.
      A cost-effectiveness analysis approach was applied to the project investments in wastewater
       management and sewerage collection networks by selecting the least cost option among various
       technical alternatives. The analysis showed that cost-effectiveness was improved for both waste water
       and solid waste management by incorporating the project interventions into existing local systems and
       capacities.
      The actual project costs were 75% of the appraised cost estimates, and the counterpart funding was
       noticeably reduced from US$69.93 million at appraisal to US$31.96 million at completion.
      A fiscal impact analysis of the project was conducted to ensure that the project counties had sufficient
       financial resources. The analysis concluded that project counties were could honor project-related
       financial obligations, which only accounted for a small portion (from 0.2% to 2.3%) of their respective
       government project budgets.

Implementation efficiency. All project activities were completed at costs below the appraisal and restructuring
estimates (ICR, paragraph 50). This was attributed mainly to bidding savings. Before restructuring, the project
experienced implementation delays due to slow procurement procedures and COVID-19 outbreaks.
Implementation progress improved and all project activities were completed before the closing date (ICR,
paragraph 50). Finally, the project management cost accounted for less than 5% of the overall project cost,
which was within accepted norms compared to other Bank-funded operations.

Summary of Efficiency Assessment. Assessing efficiency is challenging because an economic rate of return
was neither calculated at appraisal nor at completion. That said, the ICR provided enough information to
conclude that the project was efficiently implemented. This included a detailed cost-effectiveness analysis,

                                                                                                     Page 12 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Poyang Lake Water Environment Management (P153604)



completion of all project activities at a lower cost, completion of activities before the closing date, and acceptable
costs for project management. Therefore, efficiency is rated Substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?              Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                       0
 Appraisal                                                    0
                                                                                        Not Applicable
                                                                                       0
 ICR Estimate                                                 0
                                                                                        Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Pre-Restructuring. Relevance of Objectives was rated High. Overall efficacy was rated Modest. The project fell
short of achieving its original targets for pollutant load reduction (PDO outcome indicators 2,3 and 4). It also fell
short of achieving its target on the reduction of industrial or municipal solid waste as well on the project
beneficiaries (PDO outcome indicators 5 and 1). The project achieved its outcome targets for its two PDO
outcome indicators pertaining to improving management of water quality. Efficiency was rated Substantial. The
project was implemented in a cost-effective manner. The actual project costs were 75% of the appraised cost
estimates, and there were no implementation delays.

Based on the assigned ratings for the three Outcome criteria, Outcome is rated Moderately Unsatisfactory.

Post Restructuring. Relevance of Objectives was rated High. Overall Efficacy was rated Substantial. For
Objective 1, the project fully achieved its revised PDO outcome targets for pollutant load reduction (PDO
outcome indicators 2,3 and 4). It also fully achieved its outcome target on the reduction of industrial or municipal
solid waste as well on the project beneficiaries (PDO outcome indicators 5 and 1). For Objective 2, the project
achieved its outcome targets for its two PDO outcome indicators. Efficiency was rated Substantial. The project
was implemented in a cost-effective manner. The actual project costs were 75% of the appraised cost
estimates, and there were no implementation delays.

Based on the assigned ratings for the three Outcome criteria, Outcome is rated Satisfactory.

Overall Outcome is assessed based on the following split rating:

                                  Pre-Restructuring            Post Restructuring
 Relevance of Objectives          High                         High

                                                                                                       Page 13 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Poyang Lake Water Environment Management (P153604)



Overall Efficacy                Modest                    Substantial
Efficiency                      Substantial               Substantial
Outcome Rating                  Moderately Unsatisfactory Satisfactory
Numerical value of the
                                3                           5
outcome rating*
Disbursement (US$ million)      20.57                       129.43
Share of disbursement           13.7%                       86.3%
Weighted Value of Outcome       0.41                        4.32
                                Satisfactory                Satisfactory
Final Outcome                   (4.32 + 0.41 = 4.73,        (4.32 + 0.41 = 4.73,
                                rounded to 5)               rounded to 5)

The overall outcome rating is Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The following risks may potentially impact the Development Outcome:

1. Financial risk. This relates to the availability of adequate funding to support O&M operations. All seven
project counties developed O&M plans and handed over the assets to the responsible entities, with
earmarked funding sources from local budgets. The farmer communities manage the village-based, small-
scale wastewater treatment facilities by adopting a participatory approach.

2. Institutional support risk. This risk relates to the regular operation of LMPs, particularly for their O&M
and institutional arrangement. This risk was minimized by incorporating the operation of LMPs into the offices
of the River Chief Systems (RCSs), with adequate staffing, and O&M cost provision. Also, the operational
mechanism was embedded in the highest authorities for water sector polices formulation and
implementation.

3. Government ownership/commitment risk. The Government policy and investment program continue to
be conducive to sustain the achievement of the PDO. The PDO is supported by seven priority areas outlined
in the government’s provincial level program (5-Rivers-1-Lake Plan) in Jiangxi. These included: (a)
coordination for integrated management, (b) spatial management and shoreline protection, (c) water
resources protection, (d) water pollution control including solid waste management, (e) water environment
improvement, (f) rehabilitation of river and lake ecosystems, and (g) enhancement of river-and-lake
management capacity. Also, implementation is supported by the Jiangxi River Basin Eco-Compensation
Mechanism, which pools a range of financing sources, including earmarked funds from national, provincial,
municipal, and county governments, as well as private sector contributions.




                                                                                                   Page 14 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Poyang Lake Water Environment Management (P153604)




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
        Strategic relevance and approach. The project was strategically relevant and in line with the
           goals of the Government of China and the regional Government of Jiangxi to protect Poyang Lake
           and manage water quality in an ecologically sustainable manner. The PDO was clearly defined
           and realistic, and in line with the Bank strategies and Government priorities (see section 3 for
           details).
          Technical, financial, and economic aspects. The project design adopted an integrated
           approach through combining structural and nonstructural measures. Design featured
           the application of an integrated and participatory approach for the sustainability of environmental
           management combined with institutional capacity-building measures. Design leveraged available
           wastewater treatment infrastructure to maximize the water quality outcomes from waste water and
           storm water network investments. The PAD included an economic and financial analysis that
           featured a cost-effectiveness approach but lacked an overall assessment of economic rate of
           return.
          Poverty, gender, and social development aspects. The poor population in project areas would
           benefit from job creation during the construction and maintenance phases of works supported
           under the project. The project also would boost shared prosperity as the livelihood and welfare
           improved overall through enhanced water quality in and around Poyang Lake, with reduced health
           risks, thus promoting economic activities, recreation, and tourism. Design also featured activities
           that aimed to promote women’s participation and development. This included trainings that were
           provided for women as part of implementing the livelihood restoration measures. Also, during the
           project design phase focus group discussions with the female participants were arranged to solicit
           their opinions.
          Environmental and fiduciary aspects. The project design included appropriate environmental
           and social risk assessments with adequate mitigation strategies. Design featured
           adequate procurement and financial management (FM) arrangements.
          Implementation arrangements. Implementation responsibilities were clearly defined and divided
           between the PPMO and CPMOs. The PPMO was experienced in executing projects financed by
           the World Bank and other international financial institutions. Also, project expert teams were
           established under the PPMO to provide technical guidance at the provincial and county levels.
           Overall, implementation arrangements were adequate.
          Risk assessment. The overall implementation risk was rated Substantial. The identified
           substantial risks related to three main areas: the technical design of project, Institutional capacity,
           and stakeholders related risks. Overall, risks were well defined and adequate mitigations
           measures were reflected in the design. However, it was difficult to anticipate the risk related to
           the evolving policy environment at appraisal.
          M&E arrangements. M&E design benefited from a clear Results Framework that measured the
           achievement of the two outcomes in a logical manner. However, there were minor shortcomings
           related to the definition of some indicators (see section 9 for details).

  Summary of QAE Assessment. The project was strategically relevant, with a clear PDO.
  Design adopted an integrated approach through combining structural and nonstructural measures, and
  reflected adequate environmental and fiduciary aspects. Implementation arrangements were adequate
  and risk assessment was thorough. However, it was difficult to anticipate the risk related to the evolving

                                                                                                       Page 15 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Poyang Lake Water Environment Management (P153604)



  policy environment at appraisal. Finally, M&E design was sound. Overall, Quality at Entry is rated
  Satisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
       The Bank conducted 13 implementation support missions over the duration of the project (including
          virtual meetings because of COVID-19 restrictions in 2021 and 2022). The Bank missions
          included adequate training opportunities, and expert advice was provided on technical issues.
          The team managed the MTR mission in the field during COVID-19 spread and developed a
          comprehensive and practical project restructuring, which successfully improved the project
          implementation (ICR, paragraph 85).
         The task team reviewed the project implementation progress, quality of works, technical issues,
          fiduciary compliance, and environmental and safeguards compliance. The team also provided
          guidance constantly throughout project implementation, and provided candid and thorough
          reporting in the ISRs (ICR, paragraph 85).
         The Bank team provided procurement training and intensive implementation support to the PMO
          procurement teams which improved the procurement capacity of the project counties (ICR,
          paragraph 68)
         The Bank team maintained close collaboration with the project implementing agencies, which
          facilitated project restructuring and addressing implementation issues.

 Summary of Quality of Supervision Assessment. The Bank team successfully guided the project
 implementation to achieve the project outcomes. The team timely restructured the project to accommodate
 the evolving policy environment. Overall, Bank performance is rated Satisfactory.

 Based on the assigned ratings to QAE and Quality of Supervision, Bank Performance is rated Satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
      The PAD did not include a Theory of Change (ToC) which was not required by the Bank at the time
          of appraisal. Nonetheless, the ICR included a ToC that was constructed based on the project

                                                                                                  Page 16 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Poyang Lake Water Environment Management (P153604)



           activities, outputs, and outcomes as described in the PAD. The ToC also included the underlying
           assumptions that underpinned the achievement of the PDO.
          The PDO was measured through seven PDO outcome indicators: (1) direct project beneficiaries, of
           which female beneficiaries; (2) volume (mass) of Chemical oxygen Demand (COD) pollution load
           reduction achieved under the project (tons per year); (3) nutrient load reduction (nitrogen [N])
           achieved under the project (tons per year); (4) nutrient load reduction (phosphorus [P]) achieved
           under the project (tons per year); (5) domestic solid waste reduced or recycled under the project
           (tons per year); (6) number of counties applied participatory water quality monitoring and
           management system; and (7) Lake Management Platform (LMP) established and operational.
          The PDO outcome indicators 2, 3, 4 and 5 were directly connected to the first element of the PDO
           and measured the pollution reduction. While Indicators 6 and 7 measured the improvement in
           management element of the PDO. Overall, the PDO indicators were specific, measurable,
           achievable, relevant and time-bound. However, the wording of indicators 5 and 7 was not clear.
           This was later corrected during implementation.
          The Results Framework (RF) included ten intermediate results indicators (IRIs) to track the
           progress of the project and measure achievements of different activities. The IRIs were directly
           connected to the project activities and included reasonable targets.
          Overall, M&E design was sound with a clear RF that tracked the achievement of the two objectives
           in a logical manner.



b. M&E Implementation
       An independent external entity with experience in World Bank project M&E was tasked with the
           methodological collection and analysis of M&E data (ICR, paragraph 71).
          All the CPMOs used the same management information system (MIS) to monitor and track the
           implementation progress of each sub-project, along with the related financial and procurement
           information, disbursement progress, and other project management information.
          The MIS applied a verification mechanism for the results progress. The contractor, engineering
           supervisor, and the CPMOs needed to verify project progress, expenditure evidence, contract
           payment, and related disbursement, then sign the progress reports. The MIS automatically
           generated the project progress reports, which were used to compare with the annual work plans
           to inform project management.
          Interviews with local communities, project design institutes, and project construction companies
           were also conducted to identify the potential impacts and issues during project implementation.
          Revision of Indicators. As part of the July, 2020 restructuring, the targets for five PDO outcome
           indicators were revised down (ICR, table 1). The reduction in targets was logical given the closure
           of key pollution sources such as pig farms and fish farming ponds combined with strict control
           over fertilizer and pesticide uses in the Zhuhu lake catchment in Poyang County (ICR, paragraph
           20).



c. M&E Utilization
       The M&E data were used to inform project restructuring and implementation. The MIS also
           provided critical information for the mid-term review, restructuring, and ICR.


                                                                                                    Page 17 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Poyang Lake Water Environment Management (P153604)



        After project restructuring, M&E data were effectively utilized to identify and address key
         implementation issues, which in combination with improved contract management and
         disbursement performance had a positive impact on implementation.

  Summary of M&E Quality Assessment. M&E benefited from a sound design that included a clear
  RF that tracked the achievement of the two objectives in a logical manner. M&E implementation
  generated enough data to measure the achievement of the PDO and inform project management.
  Finally, M&E data were effectively utilized to inform project management, MTR, and the ICR. Therefore,
  M&E Quality is rated Substantial.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
        The project was classified as an environmental Category A mainly because some project activities
          were in the vicinity of Poyang National Wetland Park and the project supported the cleanup of two
          polluted lakes. Also, potential adverse social impacts related to land acquisition and resettlement
          due to construction and/or operation of the relevant infrastructure and facilities.
         The project triggered three environmental and one social safeguard(s): Environmental Assessment
          (OP/BP 4.01), Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04), Pest Management (OP/BP 4.09), and Involuntary
          Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12). Natural Habitats was triggered as the Poyang Lake is an important
          natural habitat for migratory birds. An Environmental Assessment (EA), Environmental and Social
          Management Plan (ESMP), a Social Assessment (SA) and Resettlement Plans (RPs) were
          prepared.

   According to the ICR (paragraph 74) "all safeguards’ policies were complied with."

         Compliance with Environmental Safeguards. The ESMP was implemented by the client, with
          mitigation measures incorporated into designs and contracts. The ICR (paragraph 76) noted that
          "the environmental management system was well-established in the province." The project did not
          include any procurement of pesticides or pesticide application equipment, nor did it lead to
          substantially increased pesticide use and subsequent environmental and health risks. There was no
          negative impact on natural habitats observed under the project (ICR, paragraph 77).
         Compliance with Social Safeguards. The land acquisition resettlement for project activities was
          implemented satisfactorily in compliance with the resettlement plan (ICR, paragraph79). A
          Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) was established and functional, and processed complaints,
          which according to the ICR (paragraph 81) "were properly addressed".




b. Fiduciary Compliance

                                                                                                   Page 18 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Poyang Lake Water Environment Management (P153604)



          Financial Management (FM). According to the ICR (paragraph 82) " no significant financial
           management issues were noted throughout project implementation." The project FM
           system provided accurate and timely information, and the withdrawal procedure and funds flow
           arrangements were appropriate (ICR, paragraph 82). The project submitted 10 interim financial
           reports to the World Bank during project implementation, but only half of those were timely
           submitted. No significant variations were noted in the interim financial reports. The project audit
           reports were all with unqualified audit opinions.
          Procurement. According to the ICR (paragraph 83) "the World Bank’s procurement policies were
           followed during project implementation." The project initially experienced some procurement delays
           that stemmed from the lack of procurement management capacity, differences between the World
           Bank’s and domestic bidding policies and practices, unfamiliarity with the World Bank’s bidding
           process, and ineffective communications among various parties (ICR, paragraph 83). Procurement
           performance benefited from frequent supervision by the World Bank, which contributed to
           improvements overtime.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   The project generated significant climate co-benefits, which were not accounted for at project appraisal. On
   average, the project was estimated to decrease some 8,000 tons of CO2-equivalent annually (ICR,
   paragraph 59).



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                               Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                   IEG
                                                                               Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Satisfactory         Satisfactory

Bank Performance                Satisfactory         Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                  Substantial          Substantial

Quality of ICR                  ---                  Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR included four lessons. The following three are emphasized with some adaptation of
language:

1. An integrated approach can be an effective and practical to effectively address water
pollution in lakes. The project combined physical works with non-infrastructure measures. This
included frequent consultations with the communities during project preparation and implementation.

                                                                                                  Page 19 of 21
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Poyang Lake Water Environment Management (P153604)



As a result of the high quality of consultations, communities have adopted the approach and were
active in the implementation of the Lake Management Platform (LMP).

2. A participatory approach with adequate inclusion of women is critical to implementing
sustainable lake basin management and enhance awareness of the lake and river
environment protection through practical procedures to change beneficiaries’ behavior. The
project conducted timely and frequent consultation with beneficiaries and encouraged female
participation. These were essential elements for the establishment and implementation of diversified
and long-term Public Participatory Management (PPM) mechanisms. For example, community
members in Poyang County following the participatory approach and ownership at the local level
have initiated a monetary contribution from the household at a level of US$1.5 per month to support
the sustainability of the lake and river environment protection.

3. The application of disruptive technologies, such as the pipeline clean robots and smart
dustbin systems for solid waste recycling, smart system can contribute to the wastewater
and solid waste reduction and digitized waste management. The use of the disruptive
technologies helped achieve the cost effectiveness of the entire system. This approach can be
adapted across the country and globally based on thorough system diagnosis and analysis.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

Quality of Evidence. Overall, the ICR provided a complete and robust evidence base to support the
achievements reported.

Quality of Analysis. The ICR provided clear linking between evidence and findings and used the evidence base
to serve the arguments under the different sections, in particular, the discussion on outcomes.

Lessons. Lessons reflected the project experience and were based on evidence and analysis.

Results Orientation. The ICR included a comprehensive discussion on the achievement of the PDO. The
outcome discussion was well balanced between what the project actually achieved on the ground and the
achievement of outcome indicators.

Consistency with guidelines. The ICR used the available data to justify most of the assigned ratings.

Conciseness. The ICR provided comprehensive coverage of project activities and candidly reported on most
shortcomings in a concise form.




                                                                                                   Page 20 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Poyang Lake Water Environment Management (P153604)



 Summary of the Quality of ICR Assessment. The ICR was well written. It included a clear discussion on the
achievement of outcomes and reflected relevant lessons. Most sections were concise and reflected relevant
information. Overall, the Quality of the ICR is rated Substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                              Page 21 of 21
