     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Financial Inclusion Project (P161491)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0023673

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P161491                                     Financial Inclusion Project

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Madagascar                                  Finance, Competitiveness and Innovation


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-61890                                   31-Jul-2022                                         29,812,604.39

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 28-Feb-2018                                 30-Dec-2022

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            45,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                             31,776,867.16                                               0.00

 Actual                                         29,812,604.39                                               0.00




 Prepared by                  Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Burcin Pamuksuz              Ebru Karamete                Avjeet Singh                   IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to Schedule 1 of the Financing Agreement (p.4) and to the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, p.
   19) the project development objective (PDO) was “to promote the financial inclusion of individuals and
   MSMEs in the territory of the Recipient”. The Recipient is defined as the Republic of Madagascar.

   For assessing the project’s efficacy, the PDO is parsed as:



                                                                                                   Page 1 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Financial Inclusion Project (P161491)



   Objective 1: To promote the financial inclusion of individuals in the territory of the Recipient.

   Objective 2: To promote the financial inclusion of MSMEs in the territory of the Recipient.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The Financial Inclusion Project of Madagascar (PIFM) consisted of four components and was to be
   implemented by the Ministry of Finance and Budget (MFB) and the Central Bank of Madagascar (BCM).

   Component 1: Digitalization of transactions to increase usage of transaction accounts (Estimated
   Cost at Appraisal: US$ 25.5 million; Estimated Cost After First Restructuring: US$ 25.12 million; Estimated
   Cost After Second Restructuring: US$ 25.22 million; Estimated Cost After Fourth Restructuring: US$ 19.72
   million; Actual Cost at Closing: US$ 19.72 million*): This component was to support the digitalization of
   selected transactions of individuals, government institutions and micro finance institutions (MFIs),
   improvement of the enabling environment and therefore was to facilitate the move from cash to digital
   transactions. This component was composed of three sub-components:

   Sub-component 1.1: Digitalization of teachers’ salaries and scholarships and digital collection of
   taxes: The project was to support digitalization of salaries of contracted and civil servant teachers as well
   as scholarships for university students. This activity was to start with local pilots and was to be extended
   nationally. The activities under this sub-component were to finance information technology (IT) platforms for
   Treasury and General Directorate of Taxation, subsidize the transaction fee charges for executed
   payments, and to develop an action plan to extend digitalization of government payments beyond teachers
   and university students. Furthermore, the project was to support digitalization of impot synthétique
   (corporate income tax) at the national level and the extension of the market tax pilot to another major city.
   The project was to support the regulatory framework for tax collection as well.

   Sub-component 1.2: Digitalization of MFIs: The project was to broaden the reach of selected three to
   four MFIs by supporting them to connect with digital finance. To achieve this, the activities for strengthening
   the front and back offices of MFIs were planned which included digitalization of front office operations of
   MFIs and upgrading the management information systems (MIS) through a mutualized MIS. The activities
   were to support the selected MFIs integrate mobile services to advance with digitization through the funding
   of a cost-sharing TA and IT tools.

   Sub-component 1.3 Enabling environment for increased use of transaction accounts: This sub-
   component was to include activities for updating the National Payment System (NPS). The activities to be
   implemented were, an upgrade of existing Real-Time Gross Settlement System (RTGS) and Automated
   Clearing House System (ACH) hardware, implementation of a platform providing interoperability for the

                                                                                                       Page 2 of 19
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  Financial Inclusion Project (P161491)



clearing and settlement of retail (card and e-money) payments (national switch platform); and a financial
education campaign for individuals and businesses.

Component 2: Access to credit for MSMEs (Estimated Cost at Appraisal: US$ 16.5 million; Estimated
Cost After First Restructuring: US$ 16.93 million; Estimated Cost After Second Restructuring: US$ 17.84
million; Estimated Cost After Fourth Restructuring: US$ 16.92 million; Actual Cost at Closing: US$ 16.92
million*): This component was composed of three sub-components:

Sub-component 2.1 Strengthening credit supply: This was to be achieved though (a) up-scaling of the
credit guarantee fund (a partial portfolio credit guarantee PPCG) which was initiated by a previous World
Bank Project (World Bank Financial Services Project- PASEF) and managed by SOLIDIS (a guarantee fund
manager based in Madagascar). In addition, TA was to be provided to support smooth integration of the
PPCG into the business processes of participating financial institutions. Furthermore, through a matching
grant scheme, the project was to support one or two financial technologies (Fintech) which would use new
and existing sources of data to appraise borrowers in innovative ways.

Sub-component 2.2 Enhancing credit demand: Through this sub-component, business development
services (BDS) were to be provided for micro, small and medium-sized enterprises (MSMEs). Increasing the
capacity MSMEs to develop bankable business plans and good quality financial statements was to enable
unbanked firms to become bankable with respect to lenders. The project also was to provide financing to
the expansion of MFI branches via a matching grant program.

Sub-component 2.3 Enabling environment for access to credit for MSMEs: This component was to
support establishment of a web-based registry for security interests in movable property, in line with
internationally accepted practices. In addition, TA activities to strengthen financial consumer protection were
foreseen under this sub-component.

Component 3: Project management and impact evaluation (Estimated Cost at Appraisal: US$ 3.06
million; Estimated Cost After First Restructuring: US$ 2.94 million; Estimated Cost After Fourth
Restructuring: US$ 2.63 million; Actual Cost at Closing: US$ 2.63 million*): This component was to cover
operating costs of the Project Implementation Unit (PIU) which was to be established as a dedicated unit in
the MFB. Also, impact evaluations of digitalization of government payments and financial education
campaign were to be implemented.

Component 4 Contingent emergency response: This component was to draw from the uncommitted
credit resources under the project from other project components to cover emergency response.

Revised Components: The three components of the project were revised through three restructurings
(first, second and fourth restructurings). At the first restructuring, to address impacts of the COVID-19
pandemic on the financial sector in the country, some activities were cancelled (Fintech, BDS, and
consultancy for centralized electronic guaranteed register). The emphasize was given to digitalization of
MFIs rather than digitalization of government payments. Accordingly, the budget for sub-component 1.1 was
reduced whereas budgets for sub-components 1.2, 1.3 and Component 2 were increased. Two new
windows were introduced under PPCG to help MSMEs to overcome negative financial impacts of COVID-
19. In addition, PPCG’s scope and risk coverage were expanded, and eligibility criteria modified. At the
second restructuring, activity related to digitalization of teacher’s salaries and scholarships was cancelled. A
new activity on digitalization of Treasury payment instruments was introduced (see section below on
Restructurings for details).


                                                                                                  Page 3 of 19
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Financial Inclusion Project (P161491)



  (*) The final actual cost by component was not available by the time this review was conducted, and the
  actual cost by component needs to be verified by the project team.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost: The project cost estimated at appraisal was US$45 million. The ICR data sheet reports actual
  disbursement amount as US$ 29.8 million (66 percent of the planned amount). However, the actual cost
  reported in Annex 3 of the ICR is US$ 39.3 million. (ICR, page 45).

  Financing: The project was financed through an International Development Association (IDA) credit. The
  project’s ’s financing estimated at appraisal was US$ 45 million. An advance of US$ 1.3 million was granted
  to the Republic of Madagascar from the World Bank’s Project Preparation Facility to assist the preparation
  of PIFM project. The advance was to support setting up of the PIU, financing studies for mapping of
  government operations and preparation of Project Implementation Manual. At project closing actual
  disbursements were US$ 29.8 million.

  Borrower’s Contribution: At appraisal, no Borrower’s contribution was foreseen, and none materialized at
  closing.

  Dates: The project was approved on February 28, 2018, and became effective six months later on
  September 27, 2018. The project’s original closing was on 31 July 2022. However, the implementation was
  extended for five months at the third restructuring and the project was closed on December 30, 2022.

  Restructurings:

  The project had four restructurings:

  Restructuring No.1 (January 14, 2021): The first restructuring was introduced in order to support financial
  sector as well as the MSMEs to overcome adverse economic, social and fiscal impact of COVID-19.
  Accordingly, the project funds were reallocated between disbursement categories and project components.
  The budget for digitalization of government payments (sub-component 1.1) was reduced from US$ 9.3
  million to US$ 6.8 million. The saved amount from subcomponent 1.1 was to be used to support the
  implementation of the national switch for an additional US$ 1.7 million which was to be complemented by
  the unallocated fund of US$ 324,706. To further support the resilience of microfinance institutions in the
  pandemic, the budget for digitalization of MFIs (Sub-component 1.2) was increased from US$ 5.1 million to
  US$ 6.9 million. Some activities under Sub-components 2.1 and 2.2 (Fintech, BDS, and consultancy for
  centralized electronic guaranteed register) were cancelled and the corresponding budgets were reallocated
  to other parts. Two additional windows (credit restructuring window and emergency assistance to MSMEs
  window) were introduced under the PPCG (sub-component 2.1) and its budget was increased from US$
  9,470,500 to US$ 13,153,623. Regarding the project’s results framework, the target for the first PDO was
  revised downwards to match with the new conditions and the remaining implementation period. Two new
  intermediate results indicators (IRI) were introduced matching the new windows under the PPCG. Indicators
  for cancelled actions were deleted. The targets for several IRIs was revised.

  Restructuring No.2 (October 13, 2021): In accordance with the Government of Madagascar (GoM)’s
  decision to award the Postal Institution with the responsibility to process the digitization of student
  scholarships and teachers’ salaries, the related activity (estimated cost:US$3.1 million) under Sub-

                                                                                                  Page 4 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Financial Inclusion Project (P161491)



   component 1.1 was cancelled and the relevant PDO indicator was removed from the results framework.
   This cancelled activity was replaced with new activity “Digitalization of Treasury payment instruments” to
   support GoM’s focus on strengthening the Treasury’s payments. Accordingly, a new and more holistic PDO
   indicator (number of (i) civil servants paid through transaction accounts, ii) service providers paid through
   transaction accounts, and iii) business that pay taxes digitally) was introduced (ICR, p. 13). The total budget
   of Component 2 was increased from US$ 16.9 million to US$ 17.8 to allow SOLIDIS to support the cost of
   technical assistance for the participating financial institutions (PFIs) and to increase cost sharing for the
   expansion of MFI agencies in rural network. The targets for three IRIs were increased and two new IRIs
   were introduced related to digitalization of Treasury payments.

   Restructuring No.3 (April 2, 2022): This restructuring extended the project implementation period for five
   months until 31 December 2022. This extension was to enable completion of the remaining activities
   particularly implementation and launch of national switch platform and other activities which could not be
   completed due to procurement delays and supply chain shortages imposed by COVID-19 pandemic.

   Restructuring No.4 (December 20, 2022): It was decided that the uncompleted activities (due to
   procurement delays or delays resulting from supply chain shortages) were to be implemented through two
   new WB projects namely Economic Transformation for Inclusive Growth (PIC3, P174684) and Project for
   Digital Governance and Identification Management System (PRODIGY, P169413). Under Component 1, the
   unutilized amount of US$ 4,574,337 related to activities with the Central Bank and the National Treasury, as
   well as US$ 911,000 under Component 2, was cancelled. The bulk of this cancellation was because of the
   inability of vendors to deliver parts because of the supply chain shortages. Two intermediate level indicators
   were dropped. The targets for IRIs were adjusted.

   Reason to not to undertake a split assessment of the project outcome: The change introduced related
   to the first PDO indicator was to reflect on shifts in government policies (government decision to pay
   teachers’ salaries and student scholarships through Postal Institution). The revised indicator was broader as
   it covered civil servants, service providers and businesses. The original and the new indicator both served
   for assessing the level of digitalization of government payments and the project’s objective to promote
   financial inclusion of individuals remained unchanged. In addition, as the establishment and full
   operationalization of the National Switch (main output for the digitalization of payments) could not be
   achieved during the project implementation which would trigger digitalization of transactions to increase the
   use of transaction accounts, even if a split assessment of the project outcome were to be implemented, it
   would not have an impact on the overall efficacy rating of the first PDO. Because of these reasons, a split
   assessment was not undertaken.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country Context: At appraisal and at closing, the project development objective was well aligned with the
Government of Madagascar’s priorities and strategies. According to PAD, as of 2016, 41 percent of
households were fully financially excluded and only 12 percent of Malagasy households had access to
banking services in the country (page, 11). The lack of access to basic formal financial services, starting

                                                                                                     Page 5 of 19
                       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                       Financial Inclusion Project (P161491)



from transaction accounts and credit for MSMEs, had severe repercussions on the life of the Malagasy. To
address this challenge, the Government included “inclusive financial system” (focus area 2) in 2017-2019
Economic Development Paper (EDP). The project directly supported this focus area. At closing financial
inclusion has remained as priority. The country’s National Financial Inclusion Strategy (NFIS) for the period
of 2018-2022 included a target ratio of 45 percent of banked adult population by 2022. The PIFM was
designed according to the NFIS, and the activities included in the project supported the implementation of it.
According to the ICR, the authorities will be updating the current NFIS based on the results of the current
NFIS and the impact of the PIFM (ICR, p. 12). However, although relevant and aligned with the country
context, the PDO in general but particularly the first PDO was slightly ambitious for development status and
for the activities planned under the project since the activities for digitalization of payments to and from
government were pilot implementations.

World Bank Strategy: At appraisal, the project was aligned with the Country Partnership Framework (CPF)
for the period of 2017-2021. The CPF identified access to finance as one of its key objectives to promote
inclusive growth. The World Bank Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD) for Madagascar (2016) also
identified broadening of financial access as a measure with large poverty impact over the long run. In this
respect, the project contributed to the broader World Bank twin goals of eliminating poverty and boosting
shared prosperity. At project closing, the PDO remained consistent with the CPF approved for 2023-2027.
In order to increase economic opportunities and create jobs, the CPF underlined the importance of financial
inclusion. The project also contributed to the achievement of the Universal Financial Access (UFA) agenda.
The World Bank Group (WBG) with private and public sector partners set an ambitious target to achieve
UFA by 2020. The UFA goal is that by 2020, adults globally have access to a transaction account or
electronic instrument to store money, send and receive payments (PAD, p.18).

Previous Sector Experience: The project design and the activities benefitted from lessons learnt through
the previous PASEF project particularly on areas of MFI rural network expansion, establishment of a
dedicated PIU, up-scaling of PPCG, and flexible project design. The design of the PPCG also reflected the
findings of the World Bank report “Principles for Public Credit Guarantee Schemes for SMEs”. The PPCG
supported by PIFM was consistent with the listed principles in the report (PAD, p.28). In addition, lessons
from IFC’s SME Solutions Centre, and the Integrated Growth Poles and Corridor Project 2 (P113971) were
considered while designing BDS component. The design of the project as a whole was built on key findings
and recommendations of the 2015 joint WB/International Monetary Fund (IMF) Financial Sector
Assessment Program (FSAP). The findings of the program identified low financial inclusion, weak financial
sector supervision and outdated legal framework as the key challenges in Madagascar. Being able to have
access to a transaction account would constitute as a first step toward broader financial inclusion (for both
individuals-particularly for women in Madagascar- and for MSMEs) since a transaction account provides a
safe store of a value, an efficient tool to send and receive payments and a steppingstone to other more
advanced financial services. On the other hand, access to credit for MSMEs was to allow productive
businesses to grow, invest and contribute to employment in the country.

Overall, the relevance of the project’s objectives is rated Substantial.


Rating Relevance TBL




Rating
Substantial



                                                                                                    Page 6 of 19
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  Financial Inclusion Project (P161491)



   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               Objective 1: To promote the financial inclusion of individuals in the territory of the Recipient

               Rationale
               Theory of Change: The theory of change suggests that the financial inclusion of individuals can be increased
               if the usage of transaction accounts which would allow people to store money, and send and receive
               payments, is promoted. In order to achieve this, the project included activities of procurement of hardware,
               software and relevant technical assistance services for setting up strategic platforms for digitalization of
               government payments and for MFI operations. Also, the transaction fees charged by service providers to
               execute payments were to be subsidized to encourage individuals to open transaction accounts. As output, a
               retail payment processing platform (National Switch) for Treasury to pay salaries of public servants, pensions
               and service providers was to be developed. In addition, the RTGS and ACH systems were to be upgraded,
               terminals/ATMs were to be installed at the Treasury’s service points to facilitate digital payments. Also,
               digitalization of front and back offices of selected MFIs and development of a shared MIS for MFIs were to be
               achieved. The availability of National Switch would lead to unbanked people to open transaction accounts to
               receive their payments which constitutes the first step of financial inclusion and gateway to other financial
               services like insurance and credit. Also, since MFIs are particularly important in reaching the most vulnerable
               and unbanked population in the country, digitalization of MFIs’ was to contribute to lower transaction costs,
               increase their efficiency, transparency and thus facilitate onboarding process of new customers, and their
               financial inclusion.

               Overall, the causal pathways from the activities (TA, hardware, and software) to outputs (new financial
               infrastructure), and to outcomes (increased use of transaction accounts, expanded MFI coverage) were valid
               and direct. However, the first objective was ambitious when the scale and scope of activities under the project
               are considered. The M&E framework concentrated more on the project’s second objective therefore, there
               were not sufficient indicators to capture the impact of the activities implemented regarding this objective. The
               outcome indicator for this objective was at output level and did not reflect the impact of the intervention on the
               financial inclusion of individuals. Besides, the revised indicator was not specific enough to address
               “unbanked” civil servants and service providers and was vague. The outcome indicator could have been
               revised further to reflect conditions imposed by COVID-19, including the disruptions in the supply chain.

               Outputs:

               Achievements as reported in the Results Framework:

                     National Switch developed and operational: According to FSAP 2015, the adoption of a National
                      Switch was a key step for modernization of payment infrastructure and promotion of financial inclusion
                      in the country. This target could not be fully achieved. The platform went live on December 30, 2022,
                      but was not fully operational at project closing due to delays in procurement processes and delivery of
                      key materials during COVID-19. According to the ICR, this activity was transferred to another World
                      Bank Project (Economic Transformation for Inclusive Growth, PIC3, P174684) to ensure finalization of
                      the activity.

                                                                                                                   Page 7 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Financial Inclusion Project (P161491)




      Number of terminals/ATM installed at the Treasury's service points: This intermediate results indicator
         was introduced at the second restructuring. No terminals were installed at the Treasury’s service
         points at project closing. Target was 30 terminals.
        Percentage of banks and microfinance institutions reporting data to the CBSF on financial consumer
         complaints: This indicator was associated with the implementation of a capacity building activity for the
         supervisory unit of the central bank (CSBF) assisting in the drafting of a regulation related to
         consumer protection. However, this activity could not be implemented due to delay in hiring of a
         technical expert assisting the CBSF. Target could not be achieved.
        Shared MIS developed and operational for the participation of MFIs (This IRI contributes to both
         objectives of the project): Target could not be achieved. Because of the delays in procurement
         (change in procurement methodology, several changes of procurement specialist in the PIU), delivery
         of IT solutions, and TA services to support the MFIs, the system could not be fully operational. When
         operational, the mutualized MIS will be used remotely by MFIs wishing to outsource this service.
         Without a shared MIS, most of the small and medium MFIs would not be able to acquire an MIS
         system as well as employ qualified human resources to manage it. The project funded participation of
         four selected MFIs in the mutualized MIS.
        The number of MFIs that allow loan repayment through a mobile money account (wallet-to-account)
         (This IRI contributes to both objectives of the project): A total of eight MFIs received loan repayments
         through a mobile money account exceeding the target of four MFIs.
        Number of clients of the new MFI branches established through the project (This IRI contributes to
         both objectives of the project): The target was to have 15,000 new clients. The project exceeded the
         target by 141 percentage reaching 21,148 clients.
        Number of female clients of the new MFI branches established through the project (This IRI
         contributes to both objectives of the project): Through the project, 10,304 female clients were reached
         through new MFIs as of February 2023, far reaching the target of 6,000 female clients.

Additional output achievements reported in the ICR:

      Upgraded RTGS and ACH: Through the project, the hardware of the RTGS and ACH were renewed.
       When fully operational, the National Switch Platform is expected to interface with these systems.
      Expansion of MFIs in remote areas (This IRI contributes to both objectives of the projects): The PIFM,
       following the methodology adopted by PASEF project, co-financed MFI expansion projects (at a
       minimum of 30 percent and a maximum of 70 percent) in 14 regions and 6 MFIs benefitted from this
       co-financing. However, few materials could not be delivered before the end of the project and the
       target could not be achieved fully.
      Digitalization of front offices of selected MFIs (This IRI contributes to both objectives of the project):
       Ten MFIs were selected under the project to acquire front office materials and IT tools to accelerate
       their business transactions. Although the ICR reports that the participating MFIs benefitted from
       modernization of their front offices, there were remaining material to be delivered after the project
       closing. These were to be covered by PIC3 Project. The activity could not be fully achieved.

Outcomes:

Achievements as reported in the Results Framework:

      Number (i) of civil servants who receive their pay, (ii) of service providers who are paid via an
         electronic money account: This target could not be achieved since the National Switch was not fully

                                                                                                    Page 8 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                     Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Financial Inclusion Project (P161491)



       operational at closing. If the National Switch were to become fully operational, it was to facilitate all
       state payments to civil servants and service providers. If any of these beneficiaries were unbanked,
       they would need to open transaction accounts to receive their payments. If they were already banked,
       they would have additional options to receive their salaries such as wire transfers large payments or
       through mobile money for small payments. As the National Switch was not fully operational at project
       closing, no new civil servants (target: 36,000) and service providers (target: 300) had received their
       salaries or payments electronically. The ICR reports that measurable impacts on financial inclusion
       are likely to materialize once the platform is fully operational following completion of the pilot phases
       (ICR, p.13). The project team informed the IEG that that the National Switch was not operational at the
       time of the ICR meeting (Project team meeting: September 15, 2023).

Some of the activities were designed as pilot activities such as digitalization of payment of salaries,
digitization of collection of taxes. The achievement of one major activity (full operationalization of National
Switch) was beyond the implementation period, and activities like financial education campaigns addressed to
individuals were cancelled during the implementation. The activity for shared MIS did not have a TA
component to ensure and clarify ownership of the platform. Furthermore, as the output indicator was not
specific, it is not clear how much of the civil servants were unbanked and if the transaction accounts would
lead to financial inclusion of the unbanked individuals. Although the project involved activities and outputs
aimed to set up several strategic infrastructures there is insufficient evidence regarding their impact on
promotion of financial inclusion of individuals in the country.

Overall, the efficacy of the project’s first objective is rated Modest.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Objective 2: To promote the financial inclusion of MSMEs in the territory of the Recipient

Rationale
Theory of Change: The theory of change suggests that the financial inclusion of MSMEs can be improved if
access of MSMEs to finance is increased and if payments to government are leveraged for financial inclusion
purposes. This is expected to be achieved through activity of scaling up of PPCG (from US$ 4 million to US$
12 million) which was established by PASEF and improved financial infrastructure. The project included
activities of procurement of software, hardware, and TA services for development of a digital platform for
payment of corporate income tax for MSMEs, and development of centralized collateral registry. In addition,
the project was to subsidize transaction fees collected by mobile money operators. These activities were
expected to lead outputs of a digital platform (eHetraphone) for the payment of corporate income tax by
MSMEs, adoption of a centralized collateral registry, and utilization of PPCG funds for new MSME loans. The
outputs of the project would lead to increased access to credit by the MSMEs and foster the use of electronic
payments, boosting the efficiency of public administrations, businesses and individuals also contributing to
financial inclusion.



                                                                                                        Page 9 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Financial Inclusion Project (P161491)



Overall, the causal pathways from the activities (TA, hardware and software) to outputs (new financial
infrastructure (eHetraphone), increased funds for PPCG, collateral registry), and to outcomes (increased use
of transaction accounts, increased access to credit by the MSMEs) were direct. Regarding the results
framework, the outcome indicator for this objective was relatively output oriented and did not reflect the
impact of the PPCG on financial inclusion. In addition, the results framework did not have an indicator
regarding development and/or adoption of eHetraphone and its possible impact.

Outputs:

Achievements as reported in the Results Framework:

      Number of women owned businesses that pay the "impot synthetique" through a transaction account:
         The project achieved 10,010 women owned businesses, exceeding the target of 5000 businesses.
         The figure reached 17,893 as of February 2023 (ICR, p.19).
        Number of loans to MSMEs eligible for the Restructured Credit Window that banks and MFIs have
         registered under the partial credit portfolio guarantee: Project achieved 20 loans. Target of 656 loans
         was not achieved.
        Number of loans eligible for the Emergency Assistance to MFIs and MSMEs that banks and MFIs
         have registered under the partial credit portfolio guarantee: Project achieved 27 loans. Target of 656
         loans was not achieved.
        Number of MFIs and MSMEs eligible for the emergency assistance to MFIs and MSMEs that banks
         and MFIs have registered under the partial credit portfolio guarantee: Target of 656 was not achieved.
        Number of MSMEs benefiting from restructured loans: Target was 611 MSMEs and the project
         achieved to support 20 MSMEs. Target was not achieved.
        Percentage of loans extended to MSMEs registered under the portfolio guarantee that are non-
         performing: The project achieved 3.40 percent slightly over the target of 3 percent.
        Report drafted annually on Citizen Engagement Survey: Drafted.

Additional output achievements reported in the ICR:

      Adoption of a digital platform (eHetraphone) for the payment of “impot synthetique” (corporate income
       tax): The platform enabled more than 30,000 MSMEs to open a mobile money account to pay their
       profit tax. The PIFM provided TA and capacity building to the Tax General Directorate as well as
       funded the fees collected by mobile money operators to encourage use of and access to the
       eHetraphone (ICR, p.12).
      Adoption of a centralized collateral registry: Madagascar lacked a structured secured transaction
       system. The project supported the acquisition of a web-based registry hosted by the Ministry of
       Justice and co-supervised by the Central Bank. The registry went live in December 2022 but was still
       in test phase at the time of the ICR mission. Although five local jurisdictions were already using the
       registry, a full operationalization of this platform will require a broader adoption, including by
       Antananarivo’s jurisdiction, which may be delayed for technical and political reasons (ICR, p. 15).

Outcomes:

Achievements as reported in the Results Framework:



                                                                                                  Page 10 of 19
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Financial Inclusion Project (P161491)




                                   Number of MSMEs with access to the PPCG: By project closing 7,744 MSMEs had access to PPCG,
                                    exceeding the target of 5,000. The PPCG was initiated by PASEF (US$ 4 million capitalization) and
                                    PIFM further contributed to the PPCG by an additional US$ 8 million. At project closing in total 12,103
                                    loans were granted to MSMEs between 2018 and 2022 (more than two times higher than the initial
                                    target of 5000, ICR, p.15). Although more than half of the funds were granted to existing borrowers 45
                                    percent of the loans were granted to new borrowers indicating financial inclusion for these new
                                    MSMEs The ICR reports that implementation of the PPCG could be considered as a success story
                                    and was set as an example. Similar instruments are being replicated in more than ten other countries
                                    based on the experience of Malagasy PPCG (ICR, p.16). On the other hand, the two new windows
                                    introduced at the first restructuring (window for restructured credits and window for emergency
                                    assistance to MFIs and MSMEs) were ineffective and the relevant targets set for these windows could
                                    not be met. The credit restructuring window achieved only 25 percent of its target and the emergency
                                    assistance window achieved 10 percent. Although creation of these windows was to address difficult
                                    financial conditions imposed by COVID-19 on the MSMEs and the MFIs, due to complex creation
                                    processes, the accounts could not be operational timely, and the funds allocated to those windows
                                    could not be used at the times of emergency.
                                   Number of unbanked companies that pay synthetic tax via an electronic money account (this indicator
                                    was part of the first PDO indicator and is broken down to reflect on improvement on financial inclusion
                                    of MSMEs): With the adoption of eHetraphone platform, more than 30,000 MSMEs to open a mobile
                                    money account to pay their corporate profit tax. The number of MSMEs were three times higher than
                                    the target value (10,000).

                            Although the two new windows did not yield to expected results, the project continued to successfully
                            implement PPCG under the original framework which was stablished by PASEF project. The new digital
                            platform for tax collection (eHetraphone) and collateral registry contributed to financial inclusion of MSMEs.

                            Overall, the efficacy of the project’s second objective is rated Substantial.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The project’s efficacy in promoting the financial inclusion of individuals was modest whereas its efficacy in
                            promoting the financial inclusion of MSMEs was Substantial. Even though some of the important activities
                            could not be completed during the project implementation, significant investments were made to upgrade
                            financial infrastructure which would constitute the basis for financial inclusion. Taking these developments
                            into account, the overall efficacy is rated Substantial.




                                                                                                                               Page 11 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Financial Inclusion Project (P161491)




  Overall Efficacy Rating
  Substantial



 5. Efficiency
Economic and Financial Analysis: At appraisal, quantitative economic and financial analysis were not made.
At closing, the ICR did not provide an analysis either. However, for the first component, the ICR compares the
costs associated with digitalization of the tax collection covered by the project (payment of transaction fees and
communication campaign -total of US$ 65,749)) and the number of transaction accounts used by tax payers
(30,000) with the expected budget which was US$ 507,000 per 10,000 targeted taxpayers. Regarding the
Component 2, the ICR reports that the efficiency of the windows of the PPCG vary across the different windows.
The initial MSME window was particularly efficient compared to the two restructured windows. Through the
MSME window, PIFM guaranteed, 7,184 loans for a total amount of US$ 77 million. In terms of amount, US$ 1
guaranteed US$ 10 of credit for the MSME window, US$ 0.7 for the COVID-19 windows and US$ 5 for the
MSME window of the PASEF project (ICR, p.17).

Administrative and Operational Efficiency: Complex project design which involved procurement of complex
IT solutions and large number of activities became challenging for the implementing agencies which did not
have significant previous experience regarding the implementation of World Bank Projects. Particularly the
procurement of activities related to digitalization of MFIs, the lack capacity of the PIU to adapt to new
procurement methodologies, the staffing crisis within the PIU procurement team with several and consecutive
resignations and the disruptions of the supply chain, negatively impacted the administrative and operational
efficiency. The realization of some of the activities could not be completed during the project’s implementation
period. The remaining activities were cancelled and transferred to other World Bank Projects as a result of shifts
in government policies and supply chain shortages due to COVID-19. US$ 5.7 million of undisbursed funds
related to unimplemented activities were cancelled in December 2022 through a final restructuring of the project
(ICR, p. 16).

Efficiency is rated Modest due to shortcomings in administrative and operational efficiency.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?            Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     0
 Appraisal                                                  0
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     0
 ICR Estimate                                               0
                                                                                      Not Applicable


                                                                                                    Page 12 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Financial Inclusion Project (P161491)



* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The project development objectives were substantially relevant to the country context and the World Bank
strategy. The project’s efficacy in achieving the first objective (to promote the financial inclusion of individuals in
the territory of the Recipient) is rated Modest due to lack of achievement of results and lack of evidence on
inclusion of the unbanked individuals. The efficacy in achieving the second objective (to promote the financial
inclusion of MSMEs in the territory of the Recipient) is rated Substantial, and the overall efficacy rating is
Substantial considering the significant investments made in upgrading the financial infrastructure that would
form the basis for financial inclusion of individuals and MSMEs. The project’s efficiency is rated Modest because
of the significant shortcomings in operational and administrative efficiency, including the procurement activities,
causing implementation delays. Based on these sub-ratings, the overall outcome is rated Moderately
Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Financial Risks: The PIFM supported the digitalization of government tax collection through eHetraphone.
Part of the support provided was to cover fees collected by mobile money operators so that these fees would
not discourage taxpayers from accessing the platform. The platform had a positive impact on opening and
utilization of transaction accounts. To sustain this impact, these fees need to be covered. According to the
ICR, the General Directorate of Treasury decided to cover the transaction fees (3 percent of the transaction
amount) after the finalization of the project, the authorities are looking for partners to finance these costs
(ICR, p.24) to ensure sustainability. This uncertainty in financing of the fees poses a risk to the sustainability
of the government’s digital tax collection process.

Technical Risks: The full operationalization of the National Switch could not be achieved by project closing.
The delivery of key materials and final TA under the PIC3 are expected. The ICR reports that although the
activities were successfully transferred to the PIC3, additional delays in implementation of the PIC3 project
could be expected (ICR, p.25). Additional TA activities and a communication campaign will be needed for the
utilization of the platform by all participants which would provide significant impact on financial inclusion.

Governance Risks: Regarding the activity of digitization of the back office through the creation of a
mutualized MIS, four MFIs were selected to participate at the platform. Although the platform went live in
December 2022, for full operationalization, a TA supporting the MFIs in the use of the new tool would be
needed. According to the ICR, success of this activity will depend on the capacity of the PIC3 project to
support microfinance institutions. Regarding the centralized collateral registry, although the platform was
operational and five jurisdictions were using it at project closing, but for the platform to have a broader
impact, broader adaptation including by Antananarivo’s jurisdiction would be needed (ICR, p.25).




                                                                                                        Page 13 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Financial Inclusion Project (P161491)




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project had strategic relevance as it supported the Government of Madagascar’s priorities and
  strategies. The key findings and recommendations of the 2015 joint WB/International Monetary Fund
  (IMF) FSAP were embedded in the design of the project. The PIU at the MFB was responsible for the
  day-to-day management of the project in addition to its fiduciary responsibility. In general, the
  implementation arrangements were in line with that established under the PASEF. However, the number
  of activities were quite high and technically complex in nature, challenging the absorption capacity of the
  PIU. At appraisal complexity of project design, fiduciary capacity and institutional capacity were identified
  as significant risks. A group of mitigation measures were identified such as close coordination among the
  stakeholders, reliance on capacity built by PASEF project and TA components. However, these were
  insufficient in the context of complex project design and pandemic. The World Bank’s inputs and
  processes were overall sufficient. Members of the project team were based in the field to ensure close
  cooperation with the authorities, beneficiaries, and implementing units (ICR, p.22). The PIU was
  responsible for the data collection, management, and monitoring of the agreed project development
  outcome indicators. The results framework had some weaknesses. The intermediate results indicators
  were not sufficient to adequately capture the impacts of the activities implemented. Both outcome
  indicators were relatively output-oriented (see M&E section for details).



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The project team monitored progress of the implementation closely through implementation support
 missions. Implementation Status and Results Report (ISRs) were produced twice a year. Some of the team
 members of the project were based in the country contributing to regular communication during the
 implementation. The World Bank team’s focus on development results was demonstrated by their effort to
 address the changing needs of the borrower (with regard to activities of payment of teachers’ salaries and
 scholarships and COVID-19 pandemic) and to restructure the project accordingly. The restructuring
 addressed the changing needs of the borrower and aimed to support the country the during pandemic.
 However, two new windows under the PPCG were ineffective and the disbursements remained very
 limited. Although some changes were introduced in the results framework, the restructurings did not
 address the weaknesses regarding both the outcome and intermediate results indicators. The project
 encountered significant procurement issues during the implementation arising from the complex structure
 of the project as well as the frequent changes and resignations of the procurement specialists in the PIU.
 The ICR reports that these difficulties could have been better addressed by the World Bank by getting
 additional support from procurement specialists within the Country Management Unit. Also, participation of
 the procurement specialist at the supervisory meetings could have helped PIU overcoming the difficulties
 (ICR, p.23). Despite the impact of COVID-19 and delays due to complex procurement processes, the
 implementation period was extended for six months only. The project could have benefitted from a longer
 implementation period to achieve its intended results.


                                                                                                     Page 14 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Financial Inclusion Project (P161491)




  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 When the activities are concerned within the scope of the project, the project’s first PDO was ambitious.
 Besides, it did not have relevant indicators to capture the impact of the major activities such as
 development of National Switch. Similar argument is valid for the project’s second PDO. The results
 framework did not have an indicator on the digitalization of payment of taxes. Although the development of
 eHetraphone was a significant activity, the results framework could not capture its impact. In addition, the
 revised first outcome indicator was rather vague in assessing the financial inclusion of the unbanked
 individuals. Also, the outcome indicators were at the output / intermediate results level. The M&E
 framework could have benefited from stronger outcome indicators to reflect the impact of the PPCG fund
 on financial inclusion for MSMEs, and on improvement of their businesses, rather than reporting only the
 number of MSMEs or the number of loans. A beneficiary survey could have contributed to the evaluation
 process. The data collection, analysis and reporting (quarterly and annual reports) activities were carried
 out by the PIU.



b. M&E Implementation
  According to the ICR, M&E implementation was satisfactory throughout the project (ICR, p. 21). The mid-
  term review was conducted in April 2021. The M&E specialist prepared quarterly, bi-annually and annual
  reports. The ICR reports that the closer monitoring carried out by the Task Team through bi-weekly
  meetings with the PIU during the last year of the project, contributed to the completion of several key
  procurements and disbursement of project’s funds (ICR, p.23). Two independent impact evaluations
  financed by the project were conducted; one at the mid-term of the implementation which recommended
  restructuring and extension of the implementation period, and the other at the end of the project both of
  which recommended extension of the project implementation period. The results framework was modified
  in accordance with the cancelled activities. However, the weaknesses mentioned in the M&E Design
  section were not addressed while making these amendments..



c. M&E Utilization
  The recommendations developed as a result of WB’s supervisory missions, were implemented by the
  PIU. Although the ICR reports that the two independent impact evaluations were useful, it does not
  provide any information regarding how the inputs from the reports were used or results of the studies at
  closing. The ICR suggests that a self-evaluation conducted by the relevant authorities could have been


                                                                                                  Page 15 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Financial Inclusion Project (P161491)



  useful for the authorities to prepare their own ICR report to reflect on the impact of the project in the
  country.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   At appraisal, the project was classified as Category FI and an Environmental Assessment OP 4.01 was
   triggered owing to the activities of sub-borrowers who were to benefit from credit guarantees under the
   PPCG Program. The PPCG program was initiated under PASEF. The PFIs’ environmental and social
   responsibilities were already determined. However, with the PIFM, the responsibilities were further clarified
   and reinforced. The environmental and social screening process at PFIs and SOLIDIS were improved.
   During the implementation, according to the ICR, environmental and social management action plans and
   activities were carried out in an acceptable manner despite the resignation of the Environment and social
   safeguards specialist in July 2022. The results of the environmental audit of the PPCG Fund found that
   more than 80 percent of the files were compliant with the project's ESMF. Accordingly, the compliance
   management activities of the PPCG portfolio were transferred to SOLIDIS (ICR, p. 23).




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management: At appraisal, the financial management risk of the project was rated substantial,
   due to the country-level fiduciary risk, but also partly due to the lack of experience with respect to project
   management of the Financial Operations Department (DOF) within the Treasury General Directorate of the
   Ministry of Finance, which was to implement the project. The mitigation measures were mostly
   implemented within the scope of the Project Preparation Advance. The ICR reports that the project did not
   face serious financial management compliance issues. All reports were submitted on time and ratings were
   MS/S throughout the project life.

   Procurement: At appraisal, the procurement assessment revealed limited capacity and little prior
   experience in managing World Bank funds by the DOF. These risks were to be mitigated by an early
   recruitment of a qualified and experienced project Procurement Specialist using the Project Preparation
   Advance. However, the project incurred significant procurement delays impacted by several external and
   internal factors. One of the internal factors was the change of procurement allotment methodology to which
   the PIU lacked the capacity to adapt. In addition, staffing crises as a result of several resignations of
   procurement specialists and procurement assistants delayed procurement processes. The disruptions in
   the global supply chain experienced as a result of COVID-19 negatively impacted timely delivery of the
   major material and delayed implementation of activities. The procurement processes of development of
   National Switch and digitalization of MFIs and were particularly impacted by these external and internal
   factors. The ICR reports that some difficulties in procurement could have been better addressed by the



                                                                                                      Page 16 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Financial Inclusion Project (P161491)



   World bank team through using additional support from procurement specialists within the Country
   Management Unit to reduce several delays in the implementation of key activities (ICR, p.24).




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None.



d. Other
   None.



11. Ratings
                                                                                   Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                    IEG
                                                                                   Disagreements/Comment
                                 Moderately
Outcome                                                Moderately Satisfactory
                                 Satisfactory
                                 Moderately
Bank Performance                                       Moderately Satisfactory
                                 Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                   Modest                Modest

Quality of ICR                   ---                   Modest


12. Lessons

The following are lessons learned from the ICR with some paraphrasing:

      In low-income and low-capacity countries, keeping the project design simple and the
       level of complexity of the activities low that match the absorption capacity in the
       country, can help improving project achievements. In the case of the project, the project
       design had many activities and majority of them involved procurement of complex IT
       solutions. During the implementation of the project, this has created procurement problems
       for the PIU, delaying completion of the activities such as operationalization of National
       Switch, digitalization of the front office of the MFIs. During the design stage, better sizing the
       coordination structures, the human resources of the PIU, as well as the capacities of the
       partners with the project interventions can help improving project results.
      In low-capacity environments implementing financial infrastructure
       development/upgrade with complex IT solutions, having an implementation period
       matching the complexity of the tasks can help full achievement of results. The ICR
       reports that most financial sector projects are designed for at least 60 months whereas the
       PIFM was designed for 48 months and extended only for 6 months. In addition to the limited
       implementation period, disruptions to the global supply chain of specialized materials

                                                                                                      Page 17 of 19
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Financial Inclusion Project (P161491)



         imposed by COVID-19 impeded timely completion of these activities. Longer implementation
         period for projects of this nature can support full achievement of results.

        Partial Portfolio Credit Guarantee Fund can be beneficial in improving access to
         finance. However, to address macroeconomic shocks, emergency liquidity lines and
         prudential forbearance measures can be better tools, if these are included early on.
         The PPCG fund had a significant impact on MSME financing in Madagascar and represents
         a success story which inspired other countries in Africa and Asia to replicate the same
         model. However, in the case of PIFM it was not an effective tool for addressing emergency
         situations. Under the PIFM, two new lines introduced during COVID-19 to support MSMEs’
         and MFIs’ liquidity. But the creation and capitalization of these windows were included later
         during implementation and too slow, thus did not yield to expected results.
        Effective collaboration with IFC in preparation and implementation of similar projects
         can contribute to financial inclusion agenda. In the case of the PIFM project collaboration
         was particularly efficient in infrastructure related activities such as secured transactions and
         collateral registry. The activities related to digitization of microfinance institutions were also
         taken over by the IFC, especially the provision of training and awareness raising campaign to
         MFIs in order to use the Digital Financial Services after project closing.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR reports comprehensively on the project context, design, and implementation. It is candid in explaining
the issues encountered at different phases of implementation. The report is consistent with the guidelines.
The discussion in the Lessons and Recommendations section is useful and supported by the narrative.
However, there are moderate shortcomings in the ICR. There is a substantial discrepancy in the total actual
project cost reported in the ICR data sheet and the one reported in Annex 3. The assessment of the efficacy of
the project was structured around the project’s components instead of the project’s development objectives.
The efficacy section of the report could have been improved by (i) providing additional outcome-level evidence
regarding the achievement of the project’s objectives by providing results of the impact assessments and
(ii) ensuring consistency between the narrative part and the achievements reported in Annex 1. Lastly, it would
have been useful for the ICR to provide some information about why the implementation period was not
extended any further and closed in less than five years, although it argues that the project’s achievements
could have been improved if a more extended implementation period was available.

The overall quality of the ICR is rated as Modest.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Modest


                                                                                                       Page 18 of 19
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)      Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
Financial Inclusion Project (P161491)




                                                                     Page 19 of 19
