     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Urban Productive Safety Net (UPSN) (P151712)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0023481

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P151712                                    Urban Productive Safety Net (UPSN)

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Ethiopia                                   Social Protection & Jobs


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-57560                                 07-Jul-2021                                        299,586,478.73

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 16-Dec-2015                               10-Oct-2022

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                          300,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                           300,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Actual                                       299,586,478.73                                              0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                 ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Judith Hahn Gaubatz         Salim J. Habayeb            Eduardo Fernandez              IEGHC (Unit 2)
                                                         Maldonado




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Financing Agreement (page 5) and the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, page 8), the
   project objectives were as follows:

           To support the Government of Ethiopia to improve income of targeted poor households and establish
            urban safety net mechanisms.



                                                                                                 Page 1 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Urban Productive Safety Net (UPSN) (P151712)




b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   1. Safety Net Support (Appraisal: US$ 336.0 million; Actual: US$ 336.0 million): This component aimed to
   support the delivery of a predictable, timely, and productive safety net through conditional and unconditional
   safety net transfers. Activities included: conditional cash transfers to able-bodied persons in poor
   households (upon participation in public works subprojects that would benefit the community while
   increasing skills and productivity of beneficiaries); unconditional cash transfers for those unable to work;
   and development of common safety net mechanisms such as payment systems, targeting (combination of
   geographic, community-based, proxy means testing, and self-selection), wage rate setting, and market price
   monitoring.

   2. Livelihood Services (Appraisal: US$ 79.0 million; Actual: US$ 79.0 million): This component aimed to
   support interventions that will improve employability and facilitate eventual graduation from the program and
   moving out of poverty, for those beneficiaries of the conditional cash transfers who desire more and higher-
   paid work. Activities included: life skills counseling (workplace expectations and readiness), financial
   literacy training (savings, budgeting, planning), employment guidance (viable self-employment opportunities
   or wage jobs); entrepreneurship grants to open or expand a small enterprise; and livelihood grants to
   pursue wage employment.

   3. Institutional Strengthening and Project Management (Appraisal: US$ 35.0 million; Actual: US$ 35.0
   million): This component aimed to support the development and strengthening of project systems for
   targeting, monitoring, evaluation, management information systems, payments, and citizens engagement,
   as well as the related capacity building.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project cost

         The project cost at appraisal was US$ 450.0 million. The actual project cost was US$ 437.8 million.
         Additional resources were made available from currency exchange gains and contributions from
          UNICEF, WFP and the Danish Trust Fund (US$ 10.6 million total) in response to internal conflicts
          (internally displaced persons) and COVID-19.

   Financing

         The project was financed by an IDA Credit of US$ 300.0 million, of which US$ 299.6 million
          disbursed.



                                                                                                    Page 2 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Urban Productive Safety Net (UPSN) (P151712)



   Borrower contribution

         The Borrower contribution at appraisal was US$ 150.0 million, of which US$ 138.2 million was
            provided. The government also provided the equivalent of US$ 174.0 million in in-kind contributions.

   Dates

         December 2015: Project approval.
         June 2016: Project effectiveness.
         June 2019: Mid-term Review.
         December 2020: The project was restructured in response to initial delays in start-up, compounded
          by the COVID-19 pandemic. The project closing date was extended from July 2021 to October 2022
          in order to allow for the completion of activities, specifically for beneficiaries in some cities that had a
          delayed start to the three-year public works/ livelihoods support program cycle, the social services
          support for beneficiaries of the unconditional cash transfers program, and the final round of data
          collection in September 2022 to inform the impact evaluation.
         October 2022: Project closing.



3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Ethiopia is a large and geographically diverse country with a total population of about 90 million people. It
is projected to be among the world's ten largest countries by population in 2050. Despite having achieved
high levels of economic growth and progress on human and social development in recent years, it is one of
the world's poorest countries. The country’s per capita income of US$550 (2014) is substantially lower than
the regional average of US$1,257 and the eleventh lowest worldwide, and it is ranked 173 out of 187
countries on the Human Development Index (as reported in PAD, page 1). Reductions in extreme poverty
have occurred mainly in rural areas. Urbanization is also taking place, and thus poverty has become more
urban. In 2000, 11% of Ethiopia’s poor lived in cities, but this rose to 14% in 2011; the poverty head count
in 2011 was 30.4% percent in rural areas and 25.7% in urban areas (as reported in PAD, page 1). In
addition to the visibly destitute (street children, homeless, beggars) and those unable to work (elderly and
disabled), the urban poor includes those who are unemployed or underemployed - almost half (48%) of the
poorest 15% of urban households live in households where, at a given point in time, all adults are working,
half in marginal self-employment (mostly in services) and half in low-wage employment (services,
manufacturing and construction). The social protection efforts in urban areas had until recent years been
marked by fragmented and small-scale initiatives with limited coverage. Thus, there is a need to align with
existing rural safety nets program and develop a coherent national program. Development efforts
addressing these challenges in urban areas is needed, both to address increasing urban poverty and to
enable the country to reach middle income country status and improve shared prosperity.

The government's National Social Protection Policy, which was approved by the Council of Ministers in
2014, has broad objectives to provide an overall social protection system and create an enabling



                                                                                                        Page 3 of 15
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Urban Productive Safety Net (UPSN) (P151712)



               environment in which all citizens have equitable access to social protection services. The policy
               also identified social safety nets and livelihood/ employment generation as key pillars.

               The Bank's Country Partnership Strategy for FY13-16, in place at the time of appraisal, identified enhancing
               resilience and reducing vulnerabilities by improving delivery of social services and developing a
               comprehensive approach to social protection and risk management as a key pillar, with the indicator
               measuring households facing food insecurity. Similarly, the more recent Country Partnership Framework
               for FY18-22 identified the focus area of building resilience and inclusivity, with the sub-objective to improve
               sustainability and effectiveness of safety nets and a target to increase protection from food insecurity to 14
               million people.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To support the Government of Ethiopia to improve incomes of targeted poor households

                             Rationale
                             The theory of change was sound, with the overall approach to provide cash transfers (short-term protection to
                             cover immediate needs) and livelihoods support (longer-term human capital investments) to targeted poor
                             households likely to lead to the intended outcome to improve incomes. Specific activities included a first
                             phase of conditional cash transfers for labor intensive public works, unconditional cash transfers and other
                             support services for those unable to work (the chronically ill, the elderly, people with disabilities, and urban
                             destitute); a second phase of life-skills training (financial literacy, soft skills), business skills training; and a
                             third phase of livelihood/ entrepreneurship grants. The project design also included elements to ensure
                             participation of women. A critical assumption of the theory of change was that the majority of the urban poor
                             are households in which working-age members have little work or are in low-quality employment,
                             thus moving between unemployment, marginal self-employment, and low-wage employment, and therefore
                             the proposed activities aimed to provide a more permanent and stable employment pathway to help
                             beneficiaries to move out of poverty.

                             The project aimed to provide access to these safety nets for the poorest 12% in the selected urban areas (11
                             major cities of Addis Ababa, Adama, Assayita, Asosa, Dessie, Dire Dawa, Gambella, Hawassa, Harari, Jijiga,
                             and Mekele). Poor households were to be targeted through community identification and proxy means
                             testing. According to the PAD estimates (page 47), for a program targeting the poorest 12% percent, the
                             estimated reduction in poverty is 29% and the reduction in the severity of poverty among the poor is 20%.

                             Outputs


                                                                                                                                    Page 4 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Urban Productive Safety Net (UPSN) (P151712)




      Implementation of public works subprojects (note: the ICR did not report on how many subprojects
         were implemented), which created 58,420,000 person-days of employment (target: 58,666,000). The
         public works subprojects included collecting 806,340 tons of solid waste; planting 3.5 million trees for
         greenery and beautification; rehabilitating 736 hectares of degraded land; preparing 317 hectares of
         land for urban agriculture; constructing 70 sheds for use by micro and small enterprises; and
         constructing 128 school kitchens/ dining halls with septic tanks. With regards to the quality of the
         public works: 94% of beneficiaries reported that the public works reflected their needs (target:
         70%), 85% of the subprojects met quality standards (which the project team defined as whether the
         project was implemented with the appropriate technology, appropriate work norms were followed,
         appropriate dimensions were followed, and adequate technical input used) and 72% of the
         infrastructure subprojects had clear maintenance plan and sustainability measures (target:
         70%). However, the government ICR (ICR summary, page 73) noted that "ineffective operations and
         maintenance plans for many completed subprojects did not have full functionality" and "only 31% of
         public works plans had followed Project Implementation Manual requirements but with inadequate
         identification and prioritization of community engagement during planning."
        Conditional cash transfers to 488,880 beneficiaries (target: 391,104).
        Unconditional cash transfers to 93,122 beneficiaries unable to work (target: 74,496). Of these, 20,991
         beneficiaries also received economic, education and social reintegration services, which were
         contracted out to 80 NGOs. These services included provision of food, shelter and hygiene;
         counseling and substance abuse treatment; and reintegration into households and communities.
        Provision of life skills and financial literacy training to 238,086 beneficiaries. Of these, 88.982
         beneficiaries were also linked with providers of health, education and psycho-social services.
        Provision of business skills training and employment guidance to 128,000 beneficiaries, business
         planning and technical skills training to 18,000 beneficiaries, and mentoring to 137,000
         beneficiaries. Of these, 142,335 subsequently prepared business plans. 80% of the training recipients
         reported improved skills.
        Entrepreneurship grants to 100,727 beneficiaries to expand or create new businesses. Livelihood
         grants were provided to142,335 beneficiaries to provide support during pursuit of employment (i.e.,
         transport, child care).

In addition,

      Following the outbreak of conflict in a number of regions, more than 379,986 conflict-affected persons
       in 105,855 households in Amhara, Afar, and Benishangul-Gumuz regions received universal cash
       transfers (persons registered as displaced and living in designated sites). As reported in the ICR
       (page 35), the project adapted to this emergency situation by implementing blanket registration rather
       than poverty-based targeting and having banks move closer to camps for ease of opening bank
       accounts.
      The targeting mechanism appeared timely and effective in identifying the poor. 98% of payments
       were delivered within fifteen days of the due date (target: 90%). 73% of beneficiaries were below the
       national poverty line (target: 75%).
      The livelihood activities were intended as pilots, as this is the first project of this nature in urban areas.
       Although not discussed in the ICR, the project team reported that the livelihood program was piloted
       and evaluated as planned, generating lessons to inform adjustments to the project design, including
       the following: a new livelihood process map was developed to standardize the sequence of services
       and to improve delivery; the training curriculum was also reviewed and revised to simplify the content
       and introduce adult learning principles; a minimum staffing requirements at each level have been

                                                                                                       Page 5 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Urban Productive Safety Net (UPSN) (P151712)



       agreed to; and the amount of grant delivered to individual households was increased from $500 to
       $600 to enhance impact.

Outcomes

602,993 people directly benefitted from project activities (target: 604,000), of which 361,796 were female
(target: 308,244).

      488,880 participants saved over ETB 812 million in bank accounts.
      According to the impact evaluation (2021) (page 20), which measured among others, the short-run
       direct effects of the project, total household earnings increased by ETB 540 per month from Nov/Dec
       2016 to Apr/May 2018, which was 25% more than the control group.
      The number of beneficiaries engaged in self-employment rose from 36% to 46% and permanent wage
       employment increased by 4%. The number of hours worked in self-employment rose from 31.3 hours
       to 44.1 hours per week.

However,

      According to the ICR (page 15), 81% of beneficiaries reported increased household consumption,
       achieving the target of 80%. However, the source of this figure is cited as Ethiopia Poverty
       Assessment: Harnessing Continued Growth for Accelerated Poverty Reduction (2020), which
       covered the period 2011-2016. Also, the impact evaluation (pages 19-20) reported that the estimation
       results do not suggest a statistically significant positive effect on household consumption.
      There were mixed results reported by the ICR on the employability aspects: the government ICR
       reported that 53% of livelihood service beneficiaries who secured a new job or set up/ expanded a
       business remained as such twelve months later, while the project impact evaluation found that only
       24% of households were still operating their business twelve months after receipt of the grant. 8% of
       the participants in the wage employment track actually started a new job, and only 5% of households
       were still in wage employment twelve months later.
      The government ICR (ICR summary, page 73) also noted "poorly capacitated and insufficient
       dedicated front-line staff to deliver livelihood support" and "training materials that were too complex
       and poorly tailored to the investment needs of the program clients."

The ICR (page 15) noted that the overall operating environment had significantly changed and negatively
impacted project implementation, including the COVID-19 pandemic and the conflict in Tigray and
neighboring regions. These factors likely forced households to adopt negative coping strategies and use part
of the livelihood grants for consumption spending, while also decreasing the availability of wage employment
and other economic activities.

Achievement is rated Substantial due to evidence of increased income.




Rating
Substantial

                                                                                                 Page 6 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Urban Productive Safety Net (UPSN) (P151712)




OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To support the Government of Ethiopia to establish urban safety net mechanisms.

Rationale
The theory of change was clear. Activities included the development of operational systems that would
become building blocks for the safety net program, including monitoring and evaluation, targeting,
management information systems; strengthening of program management (financial management, human
resources management); and citizen engagement (participation and grievance). Activities also included
training for urban local government staff to improve their capacity to deliver programs. (Note: some of the
operational tools were to be partially financed by the ongoing operation, PSNP4, such as development of a
single registry and the management information system).

Outputs

      Training of 26,169 staff from various Ministries and implementing agencies on safety net design and
         implementation functions (target: 850). 100% of federal institutions and project cities established the
         appropriate project management structures to implement safety nets programs (target: 90%).
        Development of targeting mechanisms, including community-based and proxy-means testing.
        Development of payment mechanisms.
        Operationalization of the management information system which provides public works and livelihood
         support databases.
        Community score cards and grievance mechanism, including establishment of 1,053 kebele-level
         project complaint and appeals committees. 12,030 cases were received and recorded in the registry.

Outcomes

The project was implemented by the Ministry of Urban Development and Infrastructure and the Ministry of
Women and Social Affairs, with implementation arrangements fully integrated into the existing government
structure at the federal, regional, city and local levels.

      100% of urban local governments reported improved capacity to deliver safety nets and livelihood
         services as a result of project support, surpassing the target of 94%.
        98% of payments were delivered to beneficiaries within 15 days of the due date, surpassing the target
         of 90%.
        93% of public works sub-projects were identified through community participation, achieving the target
         of 90%.
        100% grievances received were handled within three months of being received, surpassing the target
         of 90%.
        Lower-level kebeles established structures to implement community-based targeting with proxy means
         test verification.




                                                                                                   Page 7 of 15
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Urban Productive Safety Net (UPSN) (P151712)



                            Achievement is rated Substantial due to evidence of implementation structures and tools being put into place
                            for the social protection program, as well as capacity built at all levels to implement and monitor safety nets
                            programs.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Achievement of the first objective to improve incomes of targeted poor households is rated Substantial as it
                            was almost fully achieved. Achievement of the second objective to establish urban safety net mechanisms is
                            rated Substantial due to evidence of structures and tools being put into place for the social protection program
                            and capacity built at all levels to implement and monitor safety nets programs.

                            Therefore overall Efficacy is rated Substantial.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   The economic analysis at appraisal (PAD, pages 25-26) provided an economic rationale for the selected project
   design: the targeted approach would have a greater impact on poverty reduction than the existing (non-
   targeted) subsidy program; the public works subprojects would lead to additional productive benefits; increased
   employability would lead to sustained impact; and investments in the safety net delivery system would lead to
   long-term returns. An economic rate of return (ERR) was not calculated because the demand-driven nature of
   the project supported microprojects (community-driven, participatory planning and implementation) meant that
   benefits cannot be known ex ante.

   At completion, the ICR (Annex 4) provided the following figures to demonstrate cost-efficiency in project
   implementation compared to appraisal estimates.

                               29.5% more direct beneficiaries were reached by the project, while using only 95.2% project funding.
                               US$ 710 spent per beneficiary was 26% lower than the planned US$ 966 at appraisal.
                               58.2 million persons-days of employment were created against a target of 58.7 million at a cost of US$
                                5.44, lower than the estimated US $5.73 per job created.
                               A 4.8% underutilization in project budget only led to 0.4% fewer person-days of employment created.


                                                                                                                               Page 8 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Urban Productive Safety Net (UPSN) (P151712)



      Project administrative costs were US$ 13.7 million, compared to US$15.5 million allocated at appraisal.

Another cost-efficiency analysis compared administration and transfer costs with the market value of
transfers: the project's total cost to transfer was 1.4 (meaning that it cost US$1.4 to transfer US$1 to a
beneficiary). The total cost-to-transfer ratio was on a declining trend until 2018/19 but fluctuated year on year
since then. This is also higher than the cost-to-transfers ratio for the ongoing rural PSNP4, which has a cost
transfer ratio of 1.15; the ICR suggested that this could be due to differences in the scale at which programs are
run, with the rural program financing a wider pool of beneficiaries but with the similar fixed costs.

The ICR also suggested the following elements of the project design that likely contributed to implementation
efficiencies: community based targeting (allocative efficiency and use of lower level structures), localized
infrastructure construction and supervision (compared to private wage contractors), and the Ekub savings
programs using community structures to collect and deposit money in banks.

However, there were delays in start-up (in part due to project implementation systems being put in place (ICR,
page 17). Also, the return on investments in the livelihoods activities remains unclear. Despite these minor
shortcomings, other aspects of project implementation indicate substantial efficiency.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     0
 Appraisal                                                  0
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     0
 ICR Estimate                                               0
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance is rated High due to alignment with country conditions, country and Bank strategies. Overall Efficacy
is rated Substantial due to achievements for both first and second objectives. Efficiency is rated Substantial due
to evidence of cost-effectiveness of implementation, compared to appraisal estimates.

Therefore, Outcome is rated Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


                                                                                                     Page 9 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Urban Productive Safety Net (UPSN) (P151712)




7. Risk to Development Outcome

The project established and successfully implemented modalities in urban areas for community targeting,
wage payments, and grievance redress. These modalities were effectively integrated into the
government's systems of planning, implementation, technical supervision, monitoring, and recurrent
financing of assets. Also, the project is being followed up by another Bank operation and will expand to an
additional 73 cities. The public works subprojects were handed over to urban local governments, and
although most have maintenance plans, the capacity to implement the plans is limited. Also, the longer-term
impact of the livelihoods activities, in terms of increased employability and improved human capital, is not
clear.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project built upon lessons and experience from a prior series of rural safety nets programs, including
  the importance of timely and predictable cash transfers and efficiencies gained through use of electronic
  payments. The project drew upon the prior government experience in implementing safety
  nets programs through decentralized platforms. Government commitment to addressing urban poverty
  was high, including integrating implementation responsibilities into national and subnational entities and
  providing necessary financial and in-kind contributions. The project was appropriately designed in
  phases, to account for its innovative nature and longer-term employment "pathway" approach. The
  design also included explicit elements to ensure participation of women, such as targets for female-
  headed households and participation in community-level committees, gender-informed public works
  subprojects, training of staff on gender issues, reporting on gender-based violence complains,

  The overall risk was assessed as Moderate, due to the government's significant experience with safety
  net programs but limited in urban context. Institutional capacity, fiduciary, and environmental risks were
  rated Substantial. Appropriate mitigation measures were identified, including capacity building support,
  fiduciary accountability mechanisms, community participation, and a phased approach to the livelihoods
  support activities. The M&E design was well-considered, including clear and measurable indicators and
  establishment of a management information system as a key project activity.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The Bank team adapted to challenges from external circumstances, including shifting institutional setting (a
 new primary implementing agency needed to be established), the COVID-19 pandemic, and regional
 conflict. Also, recruitment of contractual staff for project implementation was problematic, due to low


                                                                                                   Page 10 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Urban Productive Safety Net (UPSN) (P151712)



 government salaries. The Bank team responded with engagement with new staff, allowing additional
 beneficiaries (namely internally displaced persons) and working with the Ministry of Finance to set a
 harmonized salary scale for contract staff across World Bank and other donor-funded projects and a
 negotiated salary scale for specialist positions such as procurement and information technology.
 Safeguards and fiduciary performance were overall satisfactory.

 The ICR (p. 32) reported that the World Bank Team was proactive in addressing challenges and worked
 closely with the PCU team to identify and resolve critical issues, including providing timely hands-on
 technical assistance to conceive a youth pilot using project resources, followed by the design of a new
 project (UPSNJP) to expand the UPSNP with jobs creation and skills training (using early lessons from the
 UPSNP). The World Bank also secured a trust fund for strengthening capacity development in
 implementing cities and continued to support the improvement of financial and procurement management
 as well as strengthened safeguards compliance and policies in the regions and cities where technical staff
 needed much support to integrate the UPSNP implementation into GoE national development programs.
 The ICR also reported that Bank support was strong and with quick decision-making.




  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The M&E arrangements were clear. The results framework and indicators addressed multiple aspects of
 the objectives including relevance, quality, capacity development; although as noted in the ICR (page 25),
 there were no indicators tracking the many community assets created through public works.

  The project design included the key activity of establishing a management information system at national
 and decentralized levels to monitor implementation. There were also evaluative activities to assess pilot
 interventions, public works quality, and overall impact on urban poverty.



b. M&E Implementation
  By integrating project management into the government's systems, the project was able to immediately
  tap into existing systems for routine administrative data collection. For the management information
  system, all system and hardware design documents were delivered and several modules were
  developed, tested, and installed. User training for the completed modules was completed, but some

                                                                                                 Page 11 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Urban Productive Safety Net (UPSN) (P151712)



  M&E and payment modules were not finished due to incomplete M&E/MIS requirements and
  procurement delays, and other delays (ICR, page 26) caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, a restructuring
  of Government ministries during the MIS development period, which led to high turnover of technical
  personnel, and lack of technical personnel to support and direct MIS development. Indicators for the
  project results framework were monitored and reported as planned.

  Eleven assessments were conducted, including two UPSNP impact assessments, livelihood impact
  evaluation, urban destitute scoping study, UPSNP IDP response study, urban destitute children tracer
  study, Public Works Review for UPSNP, Procurement Audit of UPSNP, Short Term Effect of the Public
  Work and Direct Support Component of the UPSNP, Urban Productive Safety Net Program Livelihoods
  Baseline Study, and Institutional Capacity Assessment.



c. M&E Utilization
  The government used M&E findings in conducting regular quarterly joint reviews of project performance
  and compliance. According to the ICR (page 26-27), information gathered from routine data collections
  as well as findings from assessments, were used in annual reports and implementation support reports.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as an Environmental Category "B" project and triggered the safeguard policy
   on Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01), due to the public works subprojects that had the potential to
   have adverse environmental impacts on human population or environmentally important areas, including
   wetlands, forests grasslands, and other natural habitats. An Environmental and Social Management
   Framework (ESMF) was prepared and required that each subproject be screened for environmental and
   social impacts using the approved screening checklist. Although not all beneficiary towns/cities established
   fully functional environment, health, and safety risk management teams with qualified staff on time, project-
   supported public works had positive environmental impacts such as improved solid waste management,
   flood management, air quality, and environmental sanitation.

   The project also triggered safeguard policies on Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11), and Involuntary
   Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12). A Resettlement Action Plan was prepared in case of subprojects involving
   involuntary loss of assets or access to assets (subprojects involving physical relocation of households were
   ineligible). The ICR (page 30) reported that all safeguards were addressed satisfactorily during project
   implementation.




                                                                                                  Page 12 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Urban Productive Safety Net (UPSN) (P151712)




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial management: The financial management arrangements built upon existing capacity, which was
   deemed strong, as demonstrated by the performance of other Bank projects in the country. The project
   also built on the strengths of the country’s public financial management system such as the budget
   process, classification system, and compliance with financial regulations. Payment to project beneficiaries
   was made through microfinance institutions or commercial banks, based on lessons learned from the prior
   safety nets projects. According to the ICR (page 29), the financial management arrangements designed for
   the project were able to (a) provide timely and quality interim financial reports; (b) use computerized
   accounting system at regional and city levels and integrated financial management information system at
   federal level); (c) use the Urban Payroll and Attendance Sheet System for beneficiary payment; (d) obtain
   adequate FM staffing, (e) oversee a robust fund flow mechanism for funds from IDA to central and regional
   bureaus of finance, city finance offices, and beneficiaries; (f) adopt a reasonable internal control system;
   and (g) produce and submit timely annual audits reports and address issues.

   The ICR did not report on results of financial audits and whether there were any qualifications; the project
   team subsequently provided the following information:

   Two audit reports out of seven were qualified. The qualifications in both reports were due to a lack of
   access to documentation as two of the 11 project cities were affected by conflict/social unrest at the time of
   audits. The qualified audit reports were (i) the report for the year ended July 7, 2020, (ii) the final audit
   report for the period from July 8, 2022, to January 8, 2023. For the first report, the qualification issues were
   addressed during subsequent year audit based on alternative documentations presented to the auditors.
   For the second report, the issues were addressed as the unaudited balances were attributed to the
   counterpart contribution.

   Procurement: Similarly, the government had existing strong procurement capacity (especially in
   infrastructure implementation). Although there was high turnover of staff with procurement skills, the
   project contributed to improved selection of procurement documentation and the online procurement portal
   was well-utilized to regularly update results. There were some delays in the approval of procurement
   decisions at the federal level (most notably in the processing of contracts for suppliers of MIS services).
   However, procurement performance significantly improved after the hiring of an experienced procurement
   specialist. Procurement performance was rated Moderately Satisfactory at project closing.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings


                                                                                                     Page 13 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Urban Productive Safety Net (UPSN) (P151712)



                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                   IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                          Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Bank Performance                 Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                   Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                   ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

Lessons drawn from the ICR (pages 34-25), adapted by IEG:

       Flexibility built into the social protection mechanisms can allow for quick response to
        shocks. In the case of this project, the internal conflict led to millions of displaced persons
        who were in need of social protection support. The government set up temporary
        coordination mechanisms at the federal and regional levels in response to the crisis, and
        adapted implementation mechanisms (blanket registration vs. poverty-based targeting,
        temporary bank locations) to quickly provide access to cash transfers for those in need.
       Targeting can be effectively and efficiently carried out in an urban context to ensure the
        poorest households are reached. In the case of this project, a combination of geographic
        (selected areas in eleven cities) and community-based targeting was able to identify the
        poorest households such that 73% of project beneficiaries were living below the poverty line.




13. Assessment Recommended?

  Yes
  ASSESSMENT_TABLE
  Please Explain
  To verify impact on household poverty, particularly with regards to the livelihoods component, and to learn
  lessons from this innovative urban safety nets project.



14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR quality is rated Substantial, but marginally so. The quality of evidence and analysis were overall
adequate to properly assess the project's achievements, but there were some discrepancies: as noted in
Section 4, household consumption is reported as having increased (ICR, page 15) but the source cited
covered the period 2011-2016 while the impact evaluation (2021) reported that there was no statistically

                                                                                                    Page 14 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Urban Productive Safety Net (UPSN) (P151712)



significant positive impact on household consumption; the ICR (page 17) reported that 73% of those surveyed
in the 10 beneficiary cities were no longer living below the poverty line but the source cited was the preliminary
impact assessment report (2019) not the final report that covered the period through 2021. Lessons are clearly
drawn from project experience, although perhaps more could have been drawn from the livelihoods pilot
activities given the innovativeness of the graduation approach.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                    Page 15 of 15
