     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PASO Reform Project (P145057)



                                                                               Report Number: ICRR0023547

1. Project Data



 Project ID                               Project Name
 P145057                                  PASO Reform Project

 Country                                  Practice Area(Lead)
 Pacific Islands                          Transport


 L/C/TF Number(s)                         Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-D3190,IDA-H8830,TF-A3687             31-Dec-2018                                           6,138,492.15

 Bank Approval Date                       Closing Date (Actual)
 30-Sep-2013                              31-Dec-2022

                                          IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                          2,150,000.00                                       950,000.00

 Revised Commitment                           6,294,828.23                                       633,815.41

 Actual                                       6,138,492.15                                       633,815.41




 Prepared by               Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Ebru Karamete             Avjeet Singh                 Avjeet Singh                   IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The project Development Objectives (PDO) stated in the PAD and the Grant Agreement were: “to ensure
   effective regional delivery of aviation safety and security oversight in Pacific Island Countries by
   strengthening the Pacific Aviation Safety Office’s technical and coordination capacity”.




                                                                                                Page 1 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PASO Reform Project (P145057)



   The PDO was revised on January 5, 2017, as: “to strengthen the coordination capacity of the Pacific
   Aviation Safety Office to deliver regional aviation safety and security oversight, and technical and
   advisory services to the Pacific Island Countries”.

   Since the PDO revision was grammatical in nature and did not essentially change the meaning of the PDO,
   this will not be the basis for a split rating. However, a split rating will be applied for the second objective due to
   revised targets.

   For assessing the project’s efficacy, the PDO is parsed as: PDO1: Strengthen PASO’s coordination capacity;
   and PDO 2: deliver regional aviation safety and security oversight, and technical and advisory services to the
   Pacific Island Countries.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  05-Jan-2017

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   The project originally had three components:

   Component A: Transitional Management and Support (Appraisal Amount: US$ 1.65 million, Actual
   Amount: US$ 4.03 million)

   This component aimed to assist PASO through the restructuring process by: (i) implementing a new
   organizational framework and staff changes; (ii) conducting legal reviews for strengthening its governance
   and management; (iii) evaluating the PASO funding approach, including finding new revenue sources; (iv)
   conducting workshops and seminars for PASO Council members; (v) developing a communications
   strategy; (vi) transitional support to implement the new Business Plan, including engagement of TFSU for
   provision of support to PASO as per terms of a Service Agreement; and, (vii) carrying out annual financial
   audits of the Project.

   Component B: Establishment of a Pool of Regional Aviation Inspectors (Appraisal Amount: US$
   0.27 million, Actual Amount: US$ 0.94 million)

   This component aimed to support the establishment and training of a pool of inspectors to be used by
   PASO to oversee aviation safety and security, through a series of activities.




                                                                                                         Page 2 of 16
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    PASO Reform Project (P145057)



  Component C: Quality Management (Appraisal Amount: US$ 0.23 million, Actual Amount: US$ 0.37
  million)

  The component aimed to support establishing a quality assurance system for PASO to ensure that all
  operations meet an appropriate standard; and implementing a PASO Management Information System with
  an appropriate IT network, including a document management system.

  The following component was added in January 2017 via Additional Financing.

  Component D: Safety Equipment and Infrastructure (Appraisal Amount: US$ 0.99 million, Actual
  Amount: US$ 0.99 million)

  The component aimed to finance very small aperture terminal (VSAT) installations in Cook Islands and
  Niue.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost: The project cost planned at appraisal was US$ 2.15 million and with two additional financings
  of US$ 4.5 million, the total planned amount was US$ 6.65 million. Actual project cost at closing was US$
  6.33 million (95 percent of total planned amount).

  Project Financing: IDA grants planned were US$ 2.15 million (IDA-H8830) and US$ 3.55 million (IDA-
  D3190, as additional financing) and the actual disbursements at closing were US$ 2.13 million and US$3.38
  million respectively. Multi Donor Trust Fund provided US$ 0.95 million as an additional financing and actual
  disbursement at closing was US$ 0.63 million.

  Borrower Contribution: There was no borrower contribution.

  Dates: The project was approved on September 30, 2013, and became effective in about 3.5 months on
  December 12, 2013. Mid-term review took place on April 20, 2016. Original project closing date of was
  extended for four years from December 31, 2018, to December 31, 2022, to complete all the planned
  activities including under the additional financings, to reorient savings and to address delays due to Covid-
  19 as well as to accommodate implementation delays at the beginning of the project (see below for details).

  Restructuring: The project went through five restructurings:

        The first one was a level 1 restructuring, approved on January 5, 2017 and provided additional
         financing of US$ 0.95 million; revised the PDO to recognize PASO as the primary beneficiary of the
         IDA grant; included Component D to include regional aviation infrastructure in two islands and
         revised the results framework to reflect the new component activities.
        The second restructuring approved on May 23, 2018, was a level II restructuring that provided
         additional financing of US3.55 million as the funding resources were not sufficient to meet the
         investment expectations; and three-year extension of the closing date of the project to December 31,
         2021 to enable new financing modality and additional project resources.
        The third restructuring approved on December 18, 2018, was level II and extended the MDTF
         duration for 12 months to December 31, 2019, to ensure completion of infrastructure work in Cook
         Islands and Niue.

                                                                                                  Page 3 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PASO Reform Project (P145057)



         The fourth restructuring approved on December 20, 2019, was level II and extended MDTF closing
          for six months to June 30, 2020, to reorient some project savings and to change implementation
          arrangements.
         The final restructuring approved on December 3, 2021, was also level II, and extended the closing
          date to December 31,2022, to achieve the PDO indicators, to cancel US$ 0.32 million from the PRIF
          grant, to revise the results framework to reflect the impacts of Covid-19.

   Split Rating: This review will conduct a split rating based on the following: While the PDO revision did not
   change the intended objectives of the project and was grammatical in nature, and the project scope was
   expanded with the additional financing; the end target of PDO Indicator 3 was substantially reduced on
   December 3, 2021. Thus, a split rating will be conducted for the 2nd Objective taking the disbursement
   amounts before and after this restructuring date to calculate the overall weighted outcome rating.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country / Sector Context: The aviation sector provides essential national, regional, and international
connectivity for Pacific Island Countries (PICs) by allowing for the import and export of essential goods, as
well as for education and medical needs to be met. Air services enable effective regional integration and
are a pre-requisite for tourism development, the main economic driver for PICs. An effective aviation safety
and security oversight system is required to ensure that services are maintained and, where possible,
expanded to facilitate the development of tourism and the economies of PICs. As part of a broader effort by
PICs, the Pacific Aviation Safety Office (PASO) was formally established, with ratification by the Pacific
Islands Civil Aviation Safety and Security Treaty (PICASST), in 2004. Formed through an Asian
Development Bank (ADB) loan that was guaranteed by four member states (Kiribati, Papua New Guinea,
Samoa, and Vanuatu), PASO’s role is to provide technical advisory services to State Civil Aviation
Authorities (CAAs), as well as aviation safety and security oversight. PASO performs entry control and
auditing of airport and airline operators and aims to assist with aviation capacity building, so that they meet
the international standards required under the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) convention.
Assessments of the aviation sector in the South Pacific by ICAO have found that many of the countries lack
the proper policies, regulations, and infrastructure to comply with ICAO’s Standards and Recommended
Practices. PICs are required to maintain international and domestic air services as part of a safe and secure
air transport system. Therefore, ensuring that PASO remains a viable entity is an urgent priority. However,
most PASO members are unable to fully meet all their oversight obligations, and any interruption to PASO’s
services would be detrimental to the provision of safe and secure air transport services across the region.

When it was first established, it was envisaged that PASO would be financially self-sustaining through a
combination of annual subscriptions and service fees. Unfortunately, PASO has operated at an annual
financial loss since its inception mainly since the envisaged commitment from member states to purchase
PASO services or pay subscription fees was not realized. A PASO Financial Review funded by the Pacific
Regional Infrastructure Facility (PRIF) determined that if PASO was to disappear, or its operations further
weaken, several member states would face significant challenges in meeting national and international
regulatory obligations. Considering the urgent need for ensuring the continuation of PASO services in the
region, the PASO Reform Project was prepared within a condensed timeframe. PASO Business Plan that


                                                                                                    Page 4 of 16
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                     Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      PASO Reform Project (P145057)



               was developed in 2012 by a consulting firm with funding from PRIF was incorporated into the basis for this
               PASO Reform Project.

               Relevance to Regional / Government Strategies: The project PDO is well aligned to the regional
               strategies. The Pacific Regional Aviation Strategy (PRAS) 2022–2023 outlines a framework for aviation in
               the Pacific and continued commitment to comply with ICAO standards, maintain a safe aviation system,
               strengthen regulatory oversight capacity, and increase connectivity in support of economic growth. The
               strategy recognizes the need for a harmonized, collaborative, and connected Pacific aviation system. The
               PASO Strategic Plan 2023–2032 sets the 10-year strategic focus of PASO and operationalizes the regional
               priorities for the aviation sector.

               Relevance to World Bank Strategies: The project PDO is well aligned to the World Bank regional
               strategies at inception and closing. The World Bank Regional Partnership Framework (FY17-FY21) that
               was extended to FY23 through a Performance and Learning Review Performance highlighted that World
               Bank support to PASO has been instrumental in enabling this regional safety and security oversight
               organization to overcome its early financial problems and strengthen its capabilities (page 10). Papua New
               Guinea and the Solomon Islands are not covered by the WB-RPF for nine PICs but are informed by their
               country partnership frameworks (CPFs). The importance of improving connectivity and service delivery was
               highlighted in both the Papua New Guinea CPF FY19–FY2311 (Focus Area 2: Ensuring More Effective and
               Inclusive Service Delivery) and the Solomon Islands CPF FY18–FY23, extended to FY24 through a
               Performance Learning Review12 (Objective 3.1: Improve connectivity).

               Based on the above the relevance of the PDO is rated High.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To strengthen PASO’s coordination capacity.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change (TOC): The ICR noted that “coordination capacity” relates to strengthening the
                             organizational, procedural, and administrative governance arrangements through which PASO is better able
                             to collaborate and cooperate with member states (ICR, page 17). The project activities outputs and outcomes
                             were aligned and relevant to achieve the objective. Intermediate outcomes were the following: (i) a revised
                             governance structure that provided adequate staffing arrangements for PASO to meet core oversight
                             requirements as well as strengthen organizational management and ownership; (ii) strengthened role for
                             PASO as a regional safety oversight organization; (iii) implementing a new financing mechanism and
                             enhancing quality management; and (iv) establishing a clear strategy and vision for PASO moving forward.

                                                                                                                           Page 5 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   PASO Reform Project (P145057)



The PDO indicators were in general sound and relevant to measure the achievement of PDO, except that a
PDO level indicator measuring the financial sustainability (e.g., cost recovery) for PASO was needed as this
aspect was a key development challenge for PASO to continue its functions.

Outputs / Intermediate Outcomes:

      The project supported the review of the PASO Constitution and recommended updates to its
         governance structure. The revised draft Constitution was completed in 2020 and adopted at the
         Regional Aviation Ministers Meeting (RAMM) in June 2021, meeting the Intermediate Result Indicator
         (IRI target).
        The project met the IRI ‘sustainable financing mechanism is in place’. However, it did not define what
         sustainable financing means, no target for cost recovery was set. As part of a revised financing
         mechanism, PASO developed the Work Plan Percentage Model (WPPM), which established a way
         forward to allow prepayment by member states for specific baseline services and delivery of these
         work plans through service level agreements signed between member states and PASO. The WPPM
         removes the need to have subscription fees and a fee-for-service model and replaces it with an
         agreed budget against the PASO Strategic Plan, under which member states’ individual contributions
         are calculated as a percentage using their work plans against the total costs required to fund PASO.
        There were 5 beneficiaries being trained to become inspectors (3 males and 2 females). However, the
         training taking place in Singapore was interrupted by COVID-19. Once travel resumed, there was no
         time to do a new assessment of CAA members to find new candidates to be trained. The target of 10
         beneficiaries was not met by project closure.
        The project supported establishment of a Quality Assurance System, as well as the modernization of
         communication technology, with an upgraded information communication technology (ICT) system in
         place and in use by PASO, meeting the IRI targets.
        The project supported the development of the marketing and communications strategy and plan, the
         PASO Strategic Plan 2023–2032, and the pacific regional aviation strategy (PRAS 2023–2032). The
         marketing and communications strategy and plan for PASO reflected the transformation of PASO in its
         regional aviation role. The PASO Strategic Plan 2023–2032 takes the goals and priorities determined
         at the regional level and operationalizes them with specific actions and performance measures to
         enable PASO to track progress and success.
        The project installed VSATs and they are operating, meeting the IRI target.

Outcomes:

The project supported a revised governance structure that provided adequate staffing arrangements for
PASO to meet core oversight requirements as well as strengthen organizational management and ownership.

While the PASO Reform Project originally envisaged recruiting three technical staff to coordinate main
oversight areas, the PASO Council endorsed a new organizational framework that was recommended as part
of the “Strengthening PASO Governance and Management” assignment completed under the project in 2016.
As such, a general manager, operations manager, and corporate services manager were put in place,
meeting the revised PDO Indicator. In addition, the project supported the appointment of a transition manager
to help facilitate the organizational changes and to oversee initial activities and procurements.

According to the new global safety oversight system developed by International Civil Aviation Organization
(ICAO), which is called Global Aviation Safety Oversight System (GASOS), Regional Safety Oversight

                                                                                                 Page 6 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   PASO Reform Project (P145057)



Organizations (RSOO) would need to demonstrate their ability to deliver adequate levels of service and, thus,
qualify as an ICAO-recognized safety oversight provider. There are three levels of the RSOO status, and
PASO has achieved a Level 1 RSOO and it is working toward becoming a Level 2 RSOO. As, PASO
addressed at least 80 percent of GASOS functions for Level 2 RSOO, the PDO indicator was achieved.

The PASO Reform Project has supported the preparation of documentation to provide PASO with a clear
strategy and vision moving forward. The new strategy, PRAS 2023–2032, is designed to support Pacific
States and the aviation industry to align with ICAO safety and security requirements and support regional
compliance.

The introduction of the work plan percentage model represents a significant step forward in the ongoing
resilience and sustainability of PASO, as it has stabilized PASO’s revenue and improved its cashflow, and,
therefore, contributed to supporting the future operation of PASO in the region.

Based on the above, the achievement of the PDO, to strengthen PASO’s coordination capacity, is rated
Substantial, noting the remaining challenges on full cost recovery and financial sustainability for PASO as an
independent regional oversight organization. The ICR acknowledges (para 65) that while the revised
financing mechanism is in place (i.e., the WPPM), the inclusion of a revised financing mechanism does not
directly correlate with sustainable operations.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
As above.

Revised Rationale
Unchanged following the restructure. As above.



Revised Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To deliver regional aviation safety and security oversight, and technical and advisory services to the Pacific
Island Countries

Rationale
TOC: The TOC was sound and activities, and outputs were connected and relevant to achieve the objective.
According to the ICR, the PASO Reform Project supported enhanced delivery of regional aviation safety and
security oversight, and technical advisory services to PICs through: (i) supporting an increase in the scope

                                                                                                   Page 7 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   PASO Reform Project (P145057)



and breadth of inspector expertise; and (ii) increasing implementation of the annual work program (ICR, page
21).

Outputs:

PASO has recruited several types of inspectors (22 experts in the pool) to support the annual work plans for
the member states, meeting the PDO indicator target. The pool includes inspectors from several different
technical areas including airworthiness, aerodromes, air navigation, flight operations, aviation security, and
personnel licensing.

Outcomes:

PASO has also recently expanded its services and is now offering surveillance support as well as audits and
entry into service support. PASO has also recently been offering aviation meteorological support. The size
and composition of the ROI has responded to the needs of member states, inspection and compliance
schedules, and the annual work program.

Measuring the implementation of the recommended annual work program demonstrates the percentage of
PASO services utilized by member states. PASO’s overall work program has roughly doubled over the project
period, which reflects the fact that its expanding role continues to be crucial in supporting member states in
safety and security oversight. Between 2014 and 2019, many member states achieved the target for
adherence to annual work plans (80 percent), with 2020 onwards affected by the impact of COVID-19 travel
restrictions. However, in 2022, average work program implementation was 52 percent which was less than
the original target of 80 percent (65 percent of the target), mainly due to impact of Covid-19.

Based on the above, the achievement of the objective, to deliver regional aviation safety and security
oversight, and technical and advisory services to the Pacific Island Countries, is rated modest due to
shortcomings in achievement of the original outcome target at project closing.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 2 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
To deliver regional aviation safety and security oversight, and technical and advisory services to the Pacific
Island Countries.

Revised Rationale
The project design was essentially the same. The only significant revision was with the PDO outcome
indicator that measured the implementation of the recommended annual work program to demonstrate the
percentage of PASO services utilized by member states. The target for this indicator was reduced from 80
percent to 60 percent on December 3, 2021, to better reflect the impacts of Covid-19. At project closing, the
average work program implementation was 52 percent, which was only slightly below the revised target of 60
percent. Thus, the achievement of the revised objective is rated Substantial.


                                                                                                   Page 8 of 16
                                 Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                 PASO Reform Project (P145057)




                              Revised Rating
                              Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            First objective is rated Substantial, as the project improved the capacity of PASO via a revised governance
                            structure and a financial framework and a strategy, noting the remaining challenges on financial sustainability
                            for PASO. The achievement of the second objective is rated modest due to not being able to meet at project
                            closing the PDO indicator on target work program implementation. Overall Efficacy is rated Substantial with
                            moderate shortcomings



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial

                  OBJR1_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
                            The project supported the transformation of PASO from a small organization comprising four staff to a
                            regional organization supporting member states across the Pacific. The first objective was essentially the
                            same and the rating is Substantial. The target for PDO indicator measuring the second objective was reduced
                            in 2021, and the achievement was slightly below the revised target. Thus, the overall efficacy for the revised
                            project is rated Substantial.



                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   The project appraisal phase did not include economic and financial analyses. PASO, while a non-profit
   organization, needs to generate a profit for financial viability and operate cost-effectively, as stipulated in its
   Constitution, particularly since it now has equity. A significant accomplishment for PASO has been the
   improvement of financial reporting and controls, enhancing its resource management capabilities. The
   governance reforms have enabled PASO to meet interest and loan repayment obligations for the ADB loan,
   reducing the risk for member states as loan guarantors. With the World Bank’s assistance, PASO has
   strengthened its cash management forecasting and financial practices, ensuring financial integrity and liquidity,


                                                                                                                              Page 9 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      PASO Reform Project (P145057)



even during periods of fiscal uncertainty, such as the challenges posed by COVID-19 for debtors and member
states.

However, PASO is still pretty much reliant on external resources of funds to sustain its functions. According to
the ICR, external funds (by the Australian Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade, New Zealand Ministry of
Foreign Affairs and Trade, and the World Bank) comprised 77 percent and 81 percent of total funds in 2021 and
2022 respectively.

Regarding project implementation efficiency, the project closing date was extended for a total of 4 years. While
delays were mainly due to the addition of a new component as well as COVID-19, the ICR also reported
procurement-related issues, noting that the absence of a procurement plan in the early stages of implementation
did affect project implementation, but was resolved later during implementation (ICR, page 32).

The overall efficiency of the project is rated Substantial with moderate shortcomings.




Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?               Point value (%)         *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     0
 Appraisal                                                   0
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     0
 ICR Estimate                                                0
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The outcome of the project is rated moderately satisfactory, based on a split evaluation.

                                                                                 Objectives after
Rating Dimension                                      Original Objectives
                                                                                 Restructuring
Relevance of Objectives                               High
Efficacy
Objective 1                                           Substantial               Substantial
Objective 2                                           Modest                    Substantial
                                                      Substantial with moderate
Overall Efficacy                                                                Substantial
                                                      shortcomings

                                                                                                    Page 10 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      PASO Reform Project (P145057)



Efficiency                                            Substantial
Outcome Rating                                        Moderately Satisfactory     Satisfactory
Outcome Rating Value                                  4                           5
Disbursement, percent                                 83                          17
Weight Value                                          3.32                        0.85
Total Weighted Rating                                 4.17
Overall Outcome Rating                                Moderately Satisfactory




a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The ICR's assessment of substantial risk to the development outcome (RDO), particularly regarding financial
sustainability, is concurred by IEG. As highlighted in the ICR, the COVID-19 pandemic underscored the
vulnerability of the aviation sector, especially in the Pacific region. This emphasized the imperative for states
to bolster their own financial sustainability going forward. Although the PASO Reform Project has played a
role in bolstering PASO's financial sustainability and improving donor coordination and support, PASO still
depends on external donors to sustain its operations and expand its regional support. Key areas of focus for
PASO include the development of an implementation plan for continued service provision to member states,
managing a growing program to attain the next level of international accreditation, and implementing a
financing mechanism that ensures stable services while reducing reliance on donor funding for day-to-day
operations. (ICR, page 34).




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  Strategic relevance, approach, and institutional aspects were well-defined during project appraisal. The
  preparation of the project benefitted from upstream work by other donors, which shortened preparation
  timelines. For example, the financial review funded by PRIF in 2013 highlighted an urgent need to
  provide financing for PASO in the short-term to ensure that it would remain a viable entity. Thus, the
  World Bank support was vital for PASO's continuity in serving the Pacific region, reducing uncertainty
  about its sustainability. The initial World Bank support was targeted and limited, gradually increasing. The
  project was appraised very quickly, so challenges in governance, politics, human resources, and
  organizational capacity weakened the quality at entry. The decision-making time in a complex regional
  setting was underestimated and it was assumed that key stakeholders were familiar with World Bank
  processes.



                                                                                                      Page 11 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PASO Reform Project (P145057)




  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The ICR noted that the World Bank Task Team provided proactive support for project adaptation during
 implementation, conducting frequent implementation support missions and monitoring progress closely.
 They engaged with PASO Council members in annual/semi-annual meetings to address key reform
 decisions. Face-to-face missions were paused in 2020 and 2021 due to COVID-19 but resumed in 2022. A
 mid-term review in April 2016 evaluated project performance within the five-year cycle. During the project's
 duration, the Results Framework indicators underwent frequent updates and were reported in World Bank
 Aide Memoires and Implementation Status and Results Reports (ISRs) following implementation support
 missions. A total of 20 ISRs were submitted throughout the project.

 Opportunities for improvement and project scope adjustments were pursued through two additional
 financings and three stand-alone project restructurings over nine years. However, the rationale and details
 behind the frequency of these restructurings were sometimes lacking. Task Team composition changes
 occurred during implementation, occasionally causing knowledge gaps and shifts in supervision approach.
 Additionally, some Task Team leaders lacked a technical aviation regulatory background, which could have
 benefited project implementation.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 At project appraisal, a significant concern was the financial sustainability of PASO due to its ongoing
 financial losses and insolvency risk. However, there was a lack of clarity on how this sustainability would be
 measured. The Project Development Objective (PDO) lacked specific indicators for financial sustainability,
 having only one Indicator Result Indicator (IRI). The project didn't explicitly state that it would lead to
 PASO's financial independence. While the Project Appraisal Document (PAD) implied strengthening
 PASO's business model for financial sustainability, it wasn't clear how this would be assessed.

 Changes to the PDO indicators occurred, suggesting that the original ones were inappropriate. For
 instance, the addition and subsequent revision of the PDO 4 indicator related to ICAO Regional Safety
 Oversight Organization Service Level raised questions about its relevance to the project's activities and
 funding allocation, as external donor support also contributed to achieving this indicator.


                                                                                                   Page 12 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PASO Reform Project (P145057)




b. M&E Implementation
  M&E reporting, initially handled by PASO with Technical and Fiduciary Support Unit support under Tonga
  Aviation Investment Project (TAIP) via Quarterly Project Implementation Status Reports but saw a
  transition in responsibility to the Project Implementation Support Team when the institutional arrangement
  changed with the closure of TAIP. Initially, project reports were delayed and lacked sufficient detail,
  requiring multiple World Bank Task Team reviews before acceptance. They also didn't consistently offer
  solutions to PASO's challenges. The institutionalization of project management structures, such as the
  PASO Council and Steering Committee, improved M&E reporting, transparency, and accountability as
  the project progressed. Towards the project's end, reports were generally submitted on time.



c. M&E Utilization
  Detailed action plans for PASO follow-up, contributed to effective M&E efforts, which in turn helped to
  report on project results.

  Due to the above-mentioned shortcomings in the design and the implementation of the M&E, the overall
  M&E of the project is rated modest.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   E&S policies were not triggered.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial management was rated as Moderately Satisfactory at project closing. The ICR notes
   that financial management met the World Bank Policy requirements, with occasional issues like an inactive
   designated account and misunderstandings about grant fund use, which were resolved (page 31). The
   project team noted that the final audit issued had an unqualified opinion.

   Procurement, which TFSU centrally managed between 2013 and 2019, was rated as Moderately
   Satisfactory at project closing. According to the ICR, the challenges included ineffective work planning,
   lengthy terms of reference preparation, and procurement delays due to limited resources and evaluation
   committee establishment. Implementation Plan by Component and Activity and improved coordination
   mitigated these issues. Frequent adjustments to the procurement plan reflected changing project


                                                                                                   Page 13 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PASO Reform Project (P145057)



   directions. Many low-value, high-transaction procurements, mostly for individual consultants, were noted,
   aligning with PASO's preference for interaction and effectiveness. Changes in market rates affected
   contract costs versus planned estimates, monitored through quarterly and semi-annual reports since 2020
   (ICR, page 32).




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   The ICR noted that (page 27), while COVID-19 presented many challenges it also offered opportunities for
   enhancing service delivery, with restrictions in mobility allowing for greater use of ICT tools and remote
   support.



d. Other
   The ICR noted that the PASO Reform Project contributed to enhancing the climate resilience of the sector
   (ICR, page 24). Project investments supported enhanced resilience, including the installation of the VSAT,
   provision of training, and strengthening of safety. The installation of the VSAT communications systems
   provided an alternative channel for member states to connect in the event of extreme weather events. The
   Remotely Piloted Aircraft System training also supported the enhanced provision of services, including
   during extreme weather events. Weather can significantly affect aircraft operation and improvements in
   safety contribute to strengthening the climate resilience of air transport services. Project investments have
   supported resilience by helping to ensure operational safety in low visibility situations or during extreme
   weather events.



11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
                                                                                 Due to moderate shortcomings
                                                                                 in the achievement of the
Outcome                         Satisfactory          Moderately Satisfactory
                                                                                 second objective before
                                                                                 restructuring.
                                Moderately
Bank Performance                                      Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                  Modest                Modest

Quality of ICR                  ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR developed several lessons, the most relevant ones are presented as follows:


                                                                                                   Page 14 of 16
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       PASO Reform Project (P145057)



        Projects aimed at setting up or reforming regional institutions can effectively address
         bottlenecks by incorporating flexible designs and allowing for longer implementation
         periods. The project experience showed that greater flexibility in project designs is
         necessary for course corrections to be made during implementation and to support changing
         needs in complex regional environments. Furthermore, strengthening the capacity of
         member states in governance and enhancing stakeholders' abilities in implementation is
         crucial. For instance, empowering PASO Council members with skills in governance,
         strategy, finance, and leadership was vital for decision-making in aviation safety and security.
        Creation of regional approaches with a phased approach, when small states face
         challenges to deliver certain services independently could be valuable. Many Pacific
         states face challenges to independently deliver their own internationally compliant aviation
         oversight and resolve aviation safety deficiencies. These common challenges highlighted the
         need for a regional organization to provide a collective approach to aviation safety oversight.
         When collaborating with regional organizations, it's advisable to adopt a phased approach to
         prevent overambitious program objectives and ensure realistic outcomes achievable within
         the project timeframe. Additionally, coordinating with prominent donors in the sector can
         maximize project investments, bolster organizational capacity, and support continuous
         service delivery. Other projects by other donors such as the World Bank funded, which
         ensured construction of critical aviation infrastructure and strengthening the policy and
         regulatory environment in participating countries in the region, also contributed to successful
         achievement of project results.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR was concise, provided a detailed overview of the project, and followed the guidelines. The ICR
prepared a clear and comprehensive theory of change. The M&E section was robust, and clearly indicated
issues with the results framework. It was also not clear from the ICR, how other donors parallelly supported and
contributed to the achievement of some of the project results.

Overall, the ICR quality is rated as Substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                     Page 15 of 16
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
PASO Reform Project (P145057)




                                                                  Page 16 of 16
