     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     COVID-19 Income Support for the poor (P174197)



                                                                               Report Number: ICRR0023572

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P174197                                   COVID-19 Income Support for the poor

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Brazil                                    Social Protection & Jobs


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)              Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-91720                                31-Dec-2022                                     1,000,000,000.00

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 29-Oct-2020                               31-Dec-2022

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                    Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                        1,000,000,000.00                                             0.00

 Revised Commitment                         1,000,000,000.00                                             0.00

 Actual                                     1,000,000,000.00                                             0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator        Group
 Salim J. Habayeb           Judyth L. Twigg              Eduardo Fernandez             IEGHC (Unit 2)
                                                         Maldonado




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The objectives of the project were to mitigate the negative economic effects associated with COVID-19 on
   income and risks of damaging human capital of poor families (Loan Agreement dated June 17, 2021, p. 6).



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?


                                                                                                Page 1 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     COVID-19 Income Support for the poor (P174197)



  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   I. Conditional Cash Transfers (CCTs) of the Bolsa Família Program (BF) for Poor and Extremely Poor
   Families (Appraisal: US$997.50 million; Actual US$997.50 million). This single component of the project
   aimed to mitigate the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on poor families through the expansion of the BF
   Program. The component would finance CCTs for a minimum of 1.2 million additional poor families added to
   the BF Program in response to the crisis (PAD, p. 13). Note: Bolsa Familia is a conditional cash transfer
   program with national coverage that aims to support families living in poverty or extreme poverty, as well as
   expand access to education and health services.

   The BF Program expansion was defined as the increase in coverage of the BF Program compared to a
   baseline value of 13 million families already included in the program up to March 2020. At that point, 1.2
   million families were on a waitlist and were found to be eligible for BF before the COVID-19 crisis, but they
   could not be added to the beneficiary rolls because of budget restrictions. The project would reimburse the
   average value of BF benefits paid to the number of families in excess of the baseline. The project would be
   expected to finance approximately 23 months of the BF expansion (PAD, p. 23).

   Revisions: The component was not revised, but there were changes in the overall BF program and
   benefits. On August 9, 2021, the government replaced the BF Program with the Auxilio Brasil Program (AB,
   “Brazil Assistance”) through an interim measure later converted into Law on December 29, 2021. The AB
   Program increased the payment amounts to beneficiaries through Benefício Extraordinario (a top-up cash
   benefit to the AB program), and further increased coverage of poor families.

   The project transition from BF to AB was facilitated by a provision in the Loan Agreement on the definition of
   the BF Program as “any successor acceptable to the Bank." The World Bank Task Team and the Ministry of
   Citizenship (MOC) confirmed the equivalence of the AB and BF programs in February 2022, and BF
   families migrated automatically to AB. The Project Operations Manual was revised accordingly. Operational
   and institutional arrangements did not change (ICR, p. 7). Also, the ICR (p. 68) reported that, after project
   closing, a new BF program replaced AB and its top-up benefits in March 2023.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   In the larger context, the government committed a targeted and time-bound fiscal package of US$148.5
   billion, equivalent to 11.4 percent of the gross domestic product (GDP), in response to COVID-19, including
   US$108.1 billion in new spending, focused on social assistance and support to small and medium
   enterprises.

   Six international financial institutions (listed below) committed to contribute/support the government in
   sustaining and deploying new social protection interventions in response to the crisis caused by the COVID-
   19 pandemic. The six agencies coordinated and diversified their support to the following four programs
   based on their specific institutional experience and in line with their broader engagements with the
   government: (1) Bolsa Familia or BF; (2) Emergency Aid or Auxilio Emergencial (AE) consisting of
   temporary income to adults without formal income; (3) Unemployment Insurance Program for formal

                                                                                                    Page 2 of 16
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  COVID-19 Income Support for the poor (P174197)



workers (SD); and (4) Emergency Employment and Income Maintenance Program (BEm) consisting of
temporary support for furloughed formal workers. These four programs accounted for 66 percent of the
government response to the pandemic through new spending (PAD, p. 12). The six international agencies
supporting the four social programs noted above were the following:

    1. The World Bank would finance the expansion of BF for US$1 billion. The expansion was both
         "vertical" and "horizontal": (i) BF increased its coverage by incorporating additional eligible families;
         and (ii) the value of the BF transfer was also temporarily increased to match the amount received by
         families covered by the emergency benefit.
    2.   Interamerican Development Bank (IDB) would contribute a total of US$1 billion that included
         US$600 million to AE; US$200 million to BEm; and US$200 million to support CCT for the existing
         stock of BF beneficiaries.
    3.   The New Development Bank (NDB) would contribute another US$1 billion to the AE Program.
    4.   The German Development Agency or Kreditanstalt für Wiederaufbau (KfW) would contribute
         US$420 million that included US$180 million to SD, and US$240 million to support CCT for the
         existing stock of BF beneficiaries.
    5.   The Development Bank of Latin America or Corporacion Andina de Fomento (CAF) would
         provide US$350 million to support the BEm program.
    6.   The French Development Agency or Agence Francaise de Développement (AFD) would
         contribute US$240 million that included US$256 million to support the AE Program, and US$84
         million to support CCT for the existing stock of BF beneficiaries.

Project cost: At appraisal, the World Bank’s commitment to the Bank-supported project on BF expansion
was estimated at US$1 billion. The actual cost to the Bank was also US$1 billion, reflecting full
disbursement (US$997.5 million plus a Front-end Fee of US$2.5 million). The loan was part of the larger
government response and was meant to provide support to the Borrower to finance the expansion of the BF
Program, as explained by the Loan Agreement (p. 6).

The PAD (p. 32) noted that, being a small fraction of the total fiscal package dedicated to the
pandemic response, World Bank financing was expected to visibly affect neither the government’s gross
public debt nor its trajectory (PAD, p. 32). Based on World Bank analysis, disbursement projections of the
Bank-supported operation would account for only 0.04 percent of the debt in 2021 and 0.03 percent in
2022.

Dates: The project was approved on October 29, 2020 and became effective on July 2, 2021. (The ICR, p.
20, reported that the delay in government approval was due to the government's protracted negotiations
about the required documentation of the Environmental and Social Framework, as the latter was recently
introduced in Brazil, and this project was the first operation to apply it. Nevertheless, such a delay was not
expected given the imperatives of the urgent prevailing circumstances.) The project closed on December
31, 2022, as planned.

Additional concurrent World Bank support provided through Advisory Services and Analytics (ASA)
and technical assistance associated (TA) with the loan: The World Bank provided a new ASA
associated with this operation (ICR, p. 5). The ASA amounted to US$1.6 million for three fiscal years
(TTL clarification on September 25, 2023) and aimed to assist the government in adapting the design of the
BF program to meet additional challenges posed by the COVID-19 pandemic, rethinking how social



                                                                                                     Page 3 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     COVID-19 Income Support for the poor (P174197)



   protection should evolve in the post-pandemic era, and documenting lessons learned from Brazil’s
   response.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The World Bank's prior engagement in social protection in Brazil was vast, and the Bank played a leading
role in federal social protection investments and policy development over the last 15 years. The World Bank
supported two investment operations to develop the BF Program since its inception in 2003, first through
the Bolsa Familia 1st Adaptable Program Lending (P087713) and, between 2012 and 2018, through the
Second Bolsa Familia Project (P101504). Engagement in policy aspects was long-standing, and the World
Bank had flagship publications dedicated to the reform of social assistance and labor market policies. In
addition, the World Bank provided significant TA in support of BF and complementary services. TA helped
to build the capacity of the BF delivery mechanisms, the management model for the Unified Registry
(Cadastro Unico), and monitoring and evaluation (M&E) (ICR, p. 13). In 2019, a multisectoral World Bank
team developed advanced analytical tools to support MOC counterparts in the simulation of reforms of
social assistance and labor market programs, including Brazil Social Protection and Labor Benefits Reform
(P168285), Brazil Poverty and Inclusion (P171105), and Brazil Support for Structural Reforms and Trade
Policy ASA (P172039). In FY20, the World Bank delivered to MOC a database linking beneficiaries of BF
with administrative records of formal employment and analysis on the flows of BF beneficiaries into and out
of formal employment.

At appraisal, project objectives were responsive to the country context and social protection challenges
generated by the COVID-19 pandemic. Since reaching Brazil in February 2020, the pandemic caused a
health, economic, and social crisis of unprecedented levels. Brazil entered the crisis as it was still
recovering from the 2014–2016 recession, with slow economic growth and poverty reduction (PAD, p. 7).
The income of the poorest 40 percent remained below the pre-2014 recession level, and inequality
increased (the Gini index increased from 51.9 in 2015 to 54.7 in 2019). First-time labor market entrants and
low-skilled workers experienced increasingly long unemployment spells. Thus, Brazil entered COVID-19
facing high vulnerability among large sections of the population. As of 2018, 19.9 percent of the population
lived on less than US$5.50 per day, including 9.3 million people on less than US$1.90 per day (the global
reference for extreme poverty).

The pandemic caused dramatic decreases in domestic and international demand, and Brazil was projected
to fall into its deepest recession on record, which could lead to about 7.2 million Brazilians falling into
poverty in 2020, bringing the poverty rate to 22.7 percent of the population. The World Bank estimated a
drop of 8 percent in GDP in 2020 with widespread implications for poverty and employment. In addition,
COVID-19-related containment measures and demand disruptions were projected to further reduce private
consumption, investment, and labor demand. Industrial production declined by 21.9 percent in May 2020
relative to May 2019.


                                                                                                  Page 4 of 16
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                      Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      COVID-19 Income Support for the poor (P174197)



               On March 20, 2020, the government declared a "State of Public Calamity" to allow an increase in public
               spending beyond existing limits, and to put in place a Health and Social Protection Response with a fiscal
               package of US$148.5 billion (see section 2e). With social protection being at the center of the fiscal
               response package to the COVID-19 pandemic, the incremental national response aimed to extend existing
               benefits and to create new emergency benefits. The intended inclusion of at least 1.2 million new eligible
               families in the CCT scheme of BF was a central part of the response. Beyond the context of the COVID-19
               crisis, the ICR (p. 5) noted that the World Bank loan would ensure the countercyclical policy choice to grow
               BF after years of zero real growth and mounting waiting lists in the BF program.

               The Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for the period FY18–FY23 was in place at appraisal and at
               project closing, and its focus was adjusted to respond to the COVID-19 pandemic. A Performance and
               Learning Review (PLR) of the CPF was carried out in 2022 (Report No. 143636-BR) with the aim to assess
               CPF progress until January 2022 and to propose adjustments up to June 2023, as a CPF Realignment. The
               latter included countercyclical emergency support to protect the poor and vulnerable and to address the
               impact of the pandemic. The support provided by the project was captured under CPF Focus Area 1: Fiscal
               Consolidation and Government Effectiveness for Sustainable, Inclusive and Efficient Service Delivery.
               Under Specific Objective 1.2, the PLR added a supplementary indicator to capture the shift in World Bank
               emphasis (“new families who are maintained above extreme poverty with conditional cash transfer program
               supported by the Bank”), which mirrored a PDO indicator under the project. The PLR noted that the long-
               standing dialogue in social protection and just-in-time TA provided by the World Bank allowed rapid and
               effective lending following the government’s request for this project. The ASA associated with the project
               also remained central to the CPF Realignment, as it would support the government in facilitating economic
               recovery by informing social protection reforms. In addition, the PLR highlighted the World Bank’s role in
               coordinating the joint social protection response of six development partners and financing institutions,
               extending beyond the project.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Mitigate the negative economic effects associated with COVID-19 on the income of poor families

                             Rationale
                             The theory of change was applicable to both project objectives in view of close linkages. It held that the
                             provision of financing for BF expansion and the provision of cash transfers to beneficiaries, along with
                             monitoring of CCT conditionalities; implementation of communication strategies targeting the vulnerable; and
                             implementation of a grievance redress mechanism (GRM) would plausibly contribute to protect the income



                                                                                                                              Page 5 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   COVID-19 Income Support for the poor (P174197)



and human capital of poor families from the negative economic effects associated with COVID-19, and to
incentivize CCT families to maintain children in education and health checks.

The project had two critical assumptions under the theory of change: (i) the BF Program would continue to be
adequately funded in 2021; and (ii) COVID-19 infection rates would slow down, and, by 2021, education and
health functions would resume.

Key Outputs and Intermediate Results

- After registration of applicants and verification of eligibility, the BF program issued cash transfers that were
received by beneficiary families.

- The BF Program prioritized certain groups to enter the program based on their degree of vulnerability.
According to the ICR, women were prioritized. Examples of priority groups included indigenous peoples,
Quilombolas, and families with children in child labor situations. Additional noteworthy attention to gender
issues in the larger social protection context was provided, as the ICR reported that two analytical studies
provided information on constraints in the participation of women to work and determinants of their insertion in
the labor market.

- The project adapted communication strategies that were implemented with specific channels to vulnerable
groups.

- The project implemented the GRM, answered questions, and responded to complaints, but with a
shortcoming for the Quilombolas (see section 5). Ninety-four percent of GRM cases were responded to within
30 days, and 41 percent of cases were resolved within 30 days.

Outcomes

New families maintained above the extreme poverty program threshold with project financing increased from
a zero baseline in March 2020 to 9.96 million families in December 2022, significantly exceeding the intended
target of at last 1.2 million families. The ICR (p. 10) noted that for the purposes of calculation of the indicator,
“with project financing” was defined as the difference between the March 2020 baseline of 13 million families
and the updated total coverage of BF/AB. The above results included new families of 39,984 indigenous
females, exceeding the target of 1,800; 24,190 indigenous males, exceeding the target of 400; 35,365
Quilombolas females, exceeding the target of 1,100; 28,583 Quilombolas males, exceeding the target of 400;
7.1 million other female groups, exceeding the target of 0.93 million; and 2.75 million other male groups,
exceeding the target.

The mean income support received with project financing by families as a share of the income at the time of
the benefit application increased from a baseline of zero in March 2020 to 53.3 percent in December 2022,
slightly short of the target of 55 percent, but essentially meeting it. This meant that the benefit that was
received among project beneficiaries amounted to an average of 53.3 percent of their reported income at the
time of registration. Hence, the project had a direct positive impact on increasing household income of poor
beneficiaries (ICR, p. 14).

In addition, the World Bank Poverty Team conducted simulations that suggested poverty reduction benefits,
with a particular effect on extreme poverty (see section 5).


                                                                                                      Page 6 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   COVID-19 Income Support for the poor (P174197)




Rating
High


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Mitigate the risks of damaging human capital of poor families

Rationale
The theory of change is the same as under Objective 1, above.

The ICR (pp. 14-15) noted that the Results Framework focused on what the project could realistically be held
accountable for within its short implementation period, i.e., monitoring of compliance with health and
education conditionalities.

Outputs

In addition to the outputs noted under objective 1, the project monitored compliance with health and education
conditionalities through well-established systems in MOC.

Outcomes

The percentage of children 6–17 benefiting from CCTs with project financing and whose school attendance
was monitored by the program reached 70.6 percent, short of the target of 85 percent, including an
achievement level of 63.3 percent for indigenous children and 76.3 percent for Quilombola children. The
percentage of children under 7 years old benefiting from CCTs with project financing and who were monitored
by the program for compliance with health checkups reached 45.3 percent, short of the target of 60 percent
(including an achievement level of 45.2 percent for indigenous children and 59.8 percent for Quilombola
children).

The above indicators were measured for all children under the program, not solely for the children associated
with the BF expansion, as differentiation was difficult at the service level.

The project and BF program context affecting these targets is likely to return to normal during the post-
COVID-19 pandemic era, and the targets that reflected pre-pandemic patterns are also likely to be achieved
in the near and intermediate terms of recovery. Although the targets were not reached by project closing,
they were in the range that we generally consider to be substantial achievement. It is likely that the
incremental process of resuming monitoring of compliance with conditionalities after the pandemic disruptions
has affected the achievement of intended outcomes during the project period.




                                                                                                Page 7 of 16
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                COVID-19 Income Support for the poor (P174197)




                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The project fully achieved (and exceeded) its first objective to mitigate the negative economic effects
                            associated with COVID-19 on income, and almost fully achieved its second objective to mitigate the risks of
                            damaging human capital of poor families. The aggregation of achievements is consistent with Substantial
                            overall efficacy.




                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   At appraisal, the economic analysis focused on targeting performance and on the impact of the BF expansion on
   poverty reduction. It noted that the operation was expected to reach 1.2 million households or approximately 2.9
   million individuals. The analysis suggested that the inclusion of these households would be expected to reduce
   extreme poverty by about 325,000 people (PAD, p. 70).

   The ICR updated the PAD’s estimates using household data of 2022. The ICR’s analysis indicated that BF and
   its successor, the AB Program, maintained strong targeting performance despite the rapid expansion: 76
   percent of beneficiaries were in the bottom 30 percent of the income distribution, including 37 percent in the
   bottom decile and 61 percent in the bottom quintile. Simulations (using the BraSIM 2.0 tool -- as in the PAD)
   suggested that without the full BF/AB program, the extreme poverty rate would increase by 3.6 percentage
   points from an estimated 6.6 percent baseline. The increase would be equivalent to 7.7 million more individuals
   in extreme poverty (ICR, p. 41).

   Design and implementation aspects harnessed existing systems and capacities, thus contributing to efficiency.
   The ICR (p. 12) reported that common arrangements agreed among donors for financial reporting and audits
   also fostered efficiency. The actual financing provided by the donors was broadly in line with PAD estimates,
   and the World Bank played a leading role in the above noted efficiency-producing donor coordination (ICR, p.
   15). The loan was fully disbursed. Operating costs were low, and the Project Implementation Unit (PIU) fulfilled
   all its roles and responsibilities. The project was compliant with all fiduciary requirements, all interim financial
   reports (IFRs) were satisfactory, and all audit reports were unqualified by the auditors and acceptable to the
   World Bank.


                                                                                                                            Page 8 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      COVID-19 Income Support for the poor (P174197)



Concurrently, minor and moderate inefficiencies were observed. Effectiveness was delayed by government
negotiations on Environmental and Social Framework documentation (see section 2e). Due to changes in the
information system of the MOC ombudsman during project implementation, it was not possible to monitor or
track results of GRM cases for the Quilombolas (ICR, p. 17 and p. 19). In the context of the COVID-19
pandemic, there were delays affecting the monitoring of compliance with health and education conditionalities,
as compliance was affected by policies and decisions of state governments in reopening schools and by
variable decisions of health and education authorities in requiring schools and health centers to record related
information. In the case of education, additional delays were experienced due to the launch of a new information
system to record school attendance (ICR, p. 16).


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                    0
 Appraisal                                                 0
                                                                                     Not Applicable
                                                                                    0
 ICR Estimate                                              0
                                                                                     Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of objectives is rated High in view of full alignment with the government’s national contingency plan
for the COVID-19 pandemic and with the Country Partnership Framework for FY18–FY23. Efficacy is rated
Substantial, as the project almost fully achieved its development objectives. Efficiency is rated Substantial in
view of good value for money, but with moderate shortcomings in the efficiency of implementation. Therefore,
the overall outcome is rated Satisfactory, indicative of essentially minor shortcomings in the project’s overall
preparation, implementation, and achievement.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

According to the ICR (p. 20), a risk that may affect maintaining development outcomes is that the
administrative budget for the new BF program in 2023 did not match its expansion. With a much larger
number of beneficiaries, the BF program reached an unprecedented scale, but the administrative budget did

                                                                                                    Page 9 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      COVID-19 Income Support for the poor (P174197)



not grow commensurably. The project closed in December 2022, and, according to the ICR, the 2023 budget
was inherited from the previous administration. Nevertheless, the ICR considered the overall risk to be low,
as the current government recognizes the importance of increasing investment in the central administrative
structure and delivery systems of the CCT program and Unified Registry, and the social assistance network
would likely pay for itself by maintaining reduced inclusion errors.

The recently elected administration launched a reformulated Bolsa Familia Program on March 2, 2023. The
most important development in comparison with the AB Program relates to the consolidation in a single
budget line and a single program of what used to be two benefits: AB and Benefício Extraordinario. The new
BF thus resembles in structure and funding the transfers that beneficiaries received in 2022. The centrality of
monitoring compliance with health and education conditionalities, and of following up with families
experiencing difficulties, remains an important principle of BF. One of the priorities recognized by the Ministry
of Social Development (the renamed Ministry of Citizenship) in the context of the current BF program is to
renew efforts with municipalities to increase the share of children whose compliance is being monitored,
including by restoring the value of block grants for the municipal social assistance network closer to that of
pre-pandemic years in the next budget.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The approach adopted by the World Bank in the urgent provision of income support to the poor in the
  context of the COVID-19 crisis, in harnessing an existing and robust social protection system, and in
  coordinating efforts with development partners was highly pertinent. Implementation arrangements built
  on the extensive experience of the government in implementing cash transfer operations through
  established processes and mechanisms that would be expected to facilitate orderly implementation and
  eligibility controls.

  The project benefited from a simple design and high readiness for implementation (ICR, p. 14), although
  the imperatives of the situation were expected to shorten subsequent government negotiations on the
  documentation of the Environmental and Social Framework to facilitate project effectiveness. The lead
  implementing agency was MOC, supported by a PIU. The MOC and its PIU had built extensive
  experience and capacity through prior BF operations (PAD, p. 30). The PIU had adequate resources and
  staffing set forth in the Operational Manual, including specialists for financial management, environmental
  and social standards, and results monitoring. The PIU would manage project activities and would carry
  the main fiduciary responsibilities of the project, including financial management, documentation,
  preparation of IFRs, and the provision of all financial records and project reports requested by external
  auditors and the World Bank. The World Bank fiduciary and Environmental and Social Framework teams
  provided further training at the project onset (ICR, p. 12). M&E arrangements under the existing BF
  program were very adequate, although there were some issues in the formulation of some indicators (see
  section 9a).

  In addition to the PIU, a Project Coordination Unit would address the alignment of arrangements adopted
  by financing agencies. It would be responsible for the following functions: oversight to ensure that all



                                                                                                     Page 10 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     COVID-19 Income Support for the poor (P174197)



  project executors follow the Operational Manual; preparation of the final completion report of the project;
  and coordination and supervision of the implementation of program activities.

  The World Bank Task Team played an important role in planning donor coordination at entry. The six
  donor agencies (including the World Bank) supporting the four main social protection programs (noted in
  section 2e) agreed on a common format for reporting, using the World Bank template for IFRs as a
  model, and the terms of reference for a single audit. The arrangement reduced the potential duplication of
  efforts and the need for the PIU to handle different procedures and requirements in these areas (ICR, p.
  15).

  The adequacy of existing arrangements of the ongoing BF program facilitated the quick preparation of the
  project and its implementation readiness. Also, the PAD (p. 9) noted that the intended rapid expansion of
  BF was made possible due to prior investments made by the government, including with World Bank
  support. These included the availability of well-established and functioning programs, a network of social
  assistance offices, a Unified Registry of program beneficiaries, and digital delivery systems. Hence,
  implementation arrangements were appropriately embedded in the existing structure of MOC. The ICR
  (p. 20) noted that, after the government request was received by financers in early April 2020, a Regional
  Operations Committee Decision Review was held in early July, followed by the Operations Committee
  Decision Review in August 2020. The availability of robust technical and economic information that built
  on the history of World Bank support was helpful. The risk analysis and mitigation measures were
  adequate. World Bank inputs and processes made a positive contribution to the quality of
  preparation. Importantly, based on good foresight by the preparation team, there was an explicit mention
  of flexibility in the loan to accommodate additional eligible families and anticipated successor programs,
  thus facilitating implementation continuity. Also, the loan included specific mechanisms to ensure that the
  loan would not finance social protection expenditures covered by other donors.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The Task Team provided regular supervision and implementation support. Four missions were undertaken
 during the short implementation period. According to the ICR (p. 20), the World Bank Team focused on the
 achievement of stated objectives. When AB replaced the BF Program in May 2022, the World Bank Team
 adapted appropriately to related changes, including by assessing AB as equivalent to BF, thus facilitating
 continued project progress and disbursements (ICR, p. 16).

 The Team closely monitored financial management and ESF aspects. Quality and candid reporting was
 provided by four Implementation Status and Results Reports ISRs (ISRs) that were produced (ICR, p. 20).
 Supervision benefited from pro-activeness and continuity, as the same Task Team Leader and most of the
 team members remained in place during implementation, and provided appropriate advice and support,
 notably for M&E. The ICR stated that, given the products available in parallel ASA, supervision inputs were
 well above the norm. The ISRs adequately reported on the changes in the country context, including AB
 and the extension of AE. The Team clarified that reforms in the BF Program did not pose a risk to the PDO
 achievement.


                                                                                                    Page 11 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     COVID-19 Income Support for the poor (P174197)




  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Highly Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 Objectives were clearly stated and reflected by the selected indicators, with some shortcomings. The use of
 the terminology “with project financing” could not be adequately applied to the monitoring of compliance
 with education and health conditions, as it was difficult to have differentiated measurements at the service
 level (between the existing stock of beneficiaries and new beneficiary children who were included in the
 program as a result of governmental efforts to protect more families during the pandemic). The initial
 definition of indicators related to the GRM were not consistent with national regulations, as the PAD’s
 definition referred to “cases being resolved within 30 days," while the applicable regulations required
 “cases to be replied to within 30 days." Monitoring compliance with conditionalities was reasonable, given
 that it was planned for the normalization period, after the COVID-19 shutdowns.

 Notwithstanding the above issues, overall M&E arrangements were adequate and well-embedded
 institutionally. The Operational Manual further clarified monitoring protocols. An impact evaluation was also
 planned.




b. M&E Implementation
  M&E proceeded as planned, but with moderate shortcomings. Data were generally of good quality and
  reliable (ICR, p. 17). The MOC team collected and analyzed monitoring data. The PIU effectively
  consolidated the required information into progress reports. There were delays in reporting on the
  indicators related to the monitoring of compliance with BF conditionalities and in finalizing the
  arrangements for the planned impact evaluation. While the issue of GRM definitions was resolved by the
  government, it was not possible to track results related to the GRM for the Quilombolas due to a change
  in the information system in the responsible unit (see section 5).

  The impact evaluation survey was carried out but could not be used as intended due to the lack of a
  control group, thus limiting the ability to draw causal inference from the results. The World Bank Team
  had planned to conduct an impact evaluation of the expansion of BF/AB as part of the parallel ASA to
  provide additional evidence on project impact. The survey was completed by November 2022. However,
  after the sample was drawn, many sampled families shifted from control to treatment status. The
  availability of households in the control group was significantly reduced. Hence, the outcomes reported
  for beneficiary families could not be compared with similar non-beneficiary families.



                                                                                                   Page 12 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     COVID-19 Income Support for the poor (P174197)



  Note on additional M&E related activities undertaken through parallel ASA:

        The ICR (p. 16) reported that ASA carried out by the World Bank during the project period
           informed improvements in the BF/AB program.
          An analysis of international experience in financial incentives to stimulate education outcomes led
           to the incorporation of financial rewards to low-income students with extraordinary achievements
           in the AB Law 2021.
          A study on mobility and exit patterns of families in BF informed the review of exit rules for the new
           AB benefit.
          A study on patterns in the use of financial instruments by BF families informed parts of the AB
           legislation that included financial education as an objective of complementary activities for
           beneficiaries, and opened space to design a precautionary saving instrument for graduates of AB
           who entered in a formal job (World Bank 2021).
          Simulations of the impact of BF reforms on poverty, equity, and targeting were carried out ahead
           of the AB reform (Morgandi et al. 2019).
          A study on AE experience informed an internal agenda of modernization of verification of income
           declarations of AB beneficiaries (Morgandi et al. 2021).
          A Policy Note benchmarked Brazil with other countries in adaptive social protection and is
           currently informing a dialogue with the Ministry of Social Development to review its protocols to
           intervene in disaster-affected areas (Malin, Ed; Gonzalez, Alejandro; and Ferreira, Renata. 2023.
           Climate Change and the Role of Social Protection in Brazil. Washington, DC: World Bank).




c. M&E Utilization
  M&E findings were used for regular project monitoring, and the findings were shared among
  stakeholders. In addition, the government used the wealth of data produced by the registry of
  beneficiaries and the management information system to make decisions for refining the design and
  implementation of the cash transfer program. For instance, the reform of AB was simulated with the
  social registry data to examine impact, and the World Bank used its own methodologies to complement
  MOC estimates of poverty incidence. The social registry data were used to contribute to the identification
  of potential challenges related to the introduction of new education conditionalities for the age groups
  below 6 and above 18 years.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project prepared an Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP) setting out measures and
   actions that would ensure implementation in accordance with World Bank Environmental and Social

                                                                                                      Page 13 of 16
        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
        COVID-19 Income Support for the poor (P174197)



   Standards (ESSs). Implementation of actions set out in the ESCP were to be monitored and reported to the
   World Bank by the Borrower, as required by ESCP and the legal agreement, and the Bank would assess
   related progress throughout the implementation period.

   The ICR (p. 18) reported that the project complied with the five applicable Standards: ESS1: Assessment
   and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts; ESS2: Labor and Working Conditions;
   ESS4: Community Health and Safety; ESS7: Indigenous Peoples; and ESS10: Stakeholder Engagement
   and Information Disclosure. The PIU monitored compliance with ESCP while concurrently reporting to
   specific authorities responsible for each ESS. No issues were identified during implementation, and all
   associated reporting obligations were completed and delivered on time. Overall, ESS performance was
   satisfactory, as also recorded in the Operations Portal.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   The project benefited from existing and well-established financial management regulations and
   arrangements (PAD, p. 34). The government had an agreement with the Federal Savings Bank, the public
   agency in charge of payments of transfers, specifying the reporting requirements for financial
   management. Payment of transfers through the Federal Savings Bank has been long used, including in
   previous World Bank operations, with adequate transparency, internal controls, and audit arrangements.
   The BF had a budget line that defined the scope of audits. The government appointed an additional
   financial management specialist at MOC. World Bank staff provided further training on Bank guidelines and
   procedures. All donor agencies supporting social protection agreed on common reporting, financial
   statements, and auditing arrangements.

   The ICR (p. 19) reported that the project complied with all fiduciary requirements. Since there were no
   procurement activities under the project, fiduciary requirements covered solely financial management,
   which was rated as Satisfactory throughout the duration of the project. All IFRs were satisfactory, with
   occasional minor delays. Audit reports were unqualified by the auditors and acceptable to the World Bank.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None reported.



d. Other
   --



11. Ratings


                                                                                                Page 14 of 16
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       COVID-19 Income Support for the poor (P174197)



                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                    IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                          Satisfactory           Satisfactory

Bank Performance                 Satisfactory           Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                   Substantial            Substantial

Quality of ICR                   ---                    High


12. Lessons

The ICR (pp. 21-22) offered several lessons and recommendations, including the following lessons
re-stated by IEG Review:

Anticipating institutional changes and incorporating pertinent provisions in the financing
agreement to accommodate such changes facilitate the continuity of project implementation
and prevent time-consuming restructurings. The World Bank Task Team anticipated that
changes in the Bolsa Familia Program could occur during project implementation, and the Team
incorporated an assessment and approval mechanism within the Loan Agreement. When the
change occurred, replacing Bolsa Familia with the Auxilio Brasil Program, the Team was able to
respond quickly, thus avoiding project interruptions and expending of valuable time to restructure the
project that was already planned for a short implementation period.

Close complementarity between World Bank-financed ASA, government programming, and
World Bank financing can reduce the risk to development outcomes of a project. The
diagnostics developed through ASA for analyzing benefit incentive design and monitoring of
sociodemographic characteristics of beneficiaries would continue to serve program improvements
and adaptations. Moreover, the prospect of receiving high-quality and tailored technical assistance
can be a contributing factor to a government’s preference to seek development support from the
World Bank.

Prior investments in a robust social protection delivery system reduce the cost and time
needed to roll out effective responses during crises. The existence of a well-established Bolsa
Familia Program and its far-reaching network allowed a quick scale-up of cash transfers to help the
poor and the most vulnerable.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR




                                                                                                    Page 15 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      COVID-19 Income Support for the poor (P174197)



The ICR was tightly and clearly written. It was candid and internally consistent, and it presented a complete
critique of the project. It was focused on results and aligned with development objectives. The well-illustrated
theory of change was simple and logical. There was a clear link between the narrative, the ratings, and the
evidence. The quality of evidence was adequate overall. The quality of the ICR’s analysis was high. It excelled
in explaining to the reader the context of institutional changes and their ramifications on the Bolsa Familia
Program and its transition to the Auxílio Brasil Program. The lessons were specific, directly derived from project
experience, and underpinned by evidence presented in the ICR, and they should be useful for other similar
operations in social protection. The ICR was very concise and followed guidelines.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      High




                                                                                                    Page 16 of 16
