     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Sustainable Agriculture Transformation (P145055)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0023523

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P145055                                     Sustainable Agriculture Transformation

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Vietnam                                     Agriculture and Food


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-57040                                   31-Dec-2020                                        211,749,049.51

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 30-Jun-2015                                 30-Jun-2022

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           238,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                            222,600,002.20                                               0.00

 Actual                                        211,751,895.06                                               0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Samjhana Thapa              J. W. van Holst               Avjeet Singh                   IEGSD (Unit 4)
                             Pellekaan




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   As per the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, 2015) and Loan Agreement (FA, 2015), the Project
   Development Objective (PDO) of the Vietnam Agriculture Transformation Project was “to improve farming
   practices and value chains in the targeted project areas and promote institutional strengthening of
   relevant public agencies to effectively support implementation of the Agricultural Restructuring Plan”.




                                                                                                   Page 1 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Sustainable Agriculture Transformation (P145055)



   For this review, the PDO will be divided into three parts, and will be assessed in Section 4 as Objectives 1, 2
   and 3 as follows:

   Objective 1: To improve farming practices for rice and coffee production in the targeted project areas.

   Objective 2: To improve rice and coffee value chains in the targeted project areas.

   Objective 3: To strengthen public agencies to effectively support implementation of the Agricultural
   Restructuring Plan.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Component A: Institutional Strengthening to Support Agricultural Transformation (Appraisal cost:
   US$6.3 million; of which US$5.0 million IDA; Actual cost: US$2.7 million, of which US$1.74 million of
   IDA and US$0.9 million from the Government). Under this component, three activities would be financed:
   (a) Support to the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development (MARD) to enhance their capacity to
   develop, implement and monitor sustainability programs under the Agriculture Restructuring Plan, human
   resource development and capacity strengthening on results-based planning, public expenditure
   management and policy analysis; (b) Support to Departments of Agriculture and Rural Development
   (DARDs) at the provincial level in pilot provinces to improve their services, and on implementation of
   reforms led by the MARD’s Department of Planning; and (c) Support to develop capacity of value chain
   partners in rice and coffee sectors, and to establish/manage the planned public private partnership (PPP)
   secretariat.

   Component B: Supporting Sustainable Rice-Based Systems (Appraisal cost: US$182.6 million; of
   which US$140.4 million IDA; Actual cost: US$176.92 million, of which US$96.43 million of IDA,
   US$13.69 million from the Government, and US$66.8 million from private sector financing). Under
   this component, support would be provided to around 30 key rice-producing districts in eight provinces. Key
   activities would include: (a) program on improved agronomic practices and management to MARD and
   participating provinces through technical support from the International Rice Research Institute; (b) private
   sector investments in processing technology through provision of loans via commercial banks; and (c)
   extension services, seed production and certification.

   Component C: Supporting Sustainable Coffee Production and Rejuvenation (Appraisal cost:
   US$98.7 million, of which US$83.0 million IDA; Actual cost: US$184.0 million, of which US$107.2
   million of IDA, US$7.9 million from Government and US$68.9 million from private sector financing).
   Under this component, support would be focused on promoting adoption of sustainable production practices
   in the coffee sector, which would include: (a) program on improved agronomic practices through farmer field
   school training and matching grants to farmers; (b) line of credit would be provided from financial institutions
   for coffee rejuvenation/replanting on cost-share basis as well as support to strengthening private nurseries



                                                                                                      Page 2 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Sustainable Agriculture Transformation (P145055)



   for seedlings and buds; and (c) improve public services through participatory planning, promotion of
   integrated landscape management, nursery certification, testing etc.

   Component D: Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation (Appraisal Cost: US$13.4 million, of
   which US$9.6 million IDA; actual: US$12.7 million, of which US$5.95 million of IDA, US$6.7 million
   from the Government). Under this component, support would be provided to project implementing
   agencies for project management, implementation and supervision, as well as establishing and
   implementing a project M&E system.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project costs: The total project cost at approval was US$314.00 million (ICR, Data sheet). The actual cost
   at closing was US$376.73 million. According to the ICR, the difference between the cost at appraisal and
   closing was due to the exchange rates used in the client’s project accounting system which were slightly
   different from those used by the Bank (ICR, Annex 3).

   Financing: Per the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, 2015), IDA credit (Credit No.:5704-VN) of US$238
   million was estimated to finance the project. At project closing, Bank financing amounted to
   US$211.75 million.

   Borrower Contribution: Borrower contribution during appraisal was estimated to be US$12 million. At
   project closing, it amounted to US$29.3 million.

   Dates: The project was approved on June 30, 2015, and became effective on December 03, 2015. The
   Mid-term Review (MTR) was conducted on December 03, 2018. The original closing date was December
   31, 2020, but with extension, it closed on June 30, 2022.

   Restructurings: The project was implemented over a period of 6.5 years and went through one level 2
   restructuring on November 19, 2020. The restructuring was done to: (a) extend the project closing date of
   December 31, 2020 to June 30, 2022; and (b) cancel an amount (US$15.4 million) earmarked to establish a
   Cooperative Fund to on-lend to cooperatives in the rice and coffee value chains. As noted in the ICR
   (paragraph 19), the restructuring was required based on the following justifications:

         Late budget allocation to the project in 2019 and the earlier years led to delays in the project,
          particularly in implementing infrastructure subprojects and in building capacity of farmers.
         One of the key planned activities of the project was to establish a Cooperative on-lending facility to
          Farmer Organizations and Cooperatives. But, on May 25,2020, a new Overseas Development
          Assistance Decree was approved, which did not allow group lending as an eligible activity to be
          financed by ODA loans. Instead, it had to be financed through public resources. This led to the
          cancellation of US$15.4 million IDA credit.




3. Relevance of Objectives




                                                                                                      Page 3 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Sustainable Agriculture Transformation (P145055)



Rationale
Country and Sector Context. Vietnam’s achievements on economic growth and poverty reduction have
been remarkable. The twenty-year period prior to project appraisal saw impressive GDP growth, along with
a large reduction in the incidence of extreme poverty from 64% to 3%. From a net importer, the country had
transitioned into one of the developing countries’ largest and diversified exporters of agricultural goods,
emerging as the world’s second largest exporter of rice and coffee (PAD, paragraph 1). Despite this
impressive growth, at the time of project preparation, the sustainability of this growth had become
concerning with mixed results on product quality, food safety, low value addition, significant post-harvest
loss, limited technology adoptions among farmers etc. (ICR, paragraph 21). These challenges were
specifically affecting the livelihood of people who were engaged on agriculture and lived in rural areas.

The sector was also facing other broader challenges, such as competition for resources such as land,
water, labor from cities, industry and services (PAD, paragraph 5). Further, production practices and input
application of fertilizer, seed, water for rice was not sustainably managed in Vietnam’s Mekong region
(which accounted 90 percent of its rice exports and 55 percent of national rice production). This resulted
into increased cost of production and caused higher environmental costs such as land and water pollution,
emissions of GHGs. There was also less economies of scale in the absence of collective efforts of farmers
that are important for value addition and improved linkages to the market.

Government Strategy. Recognizing these challenges, in 2013, the Government of Vietnam introduced an
Agricultural Restructuring Plan (ARP) which called for a shift in sectoral goals beyond physical (output or
trade) targets to include a broader set of indicators related to sustainable development. The plan also
focused in promoting a market-led development for the sector and shifting the role of the State/Government
as a facilitator of investments and services to be delivered by the private sector and other relevant
organizations. The project was conceived to support the Government implement this plan, particularly one
of its strategic pillars that focused on ‘generating more from less’ by using less natural and human capital in
agriculture production. The project was also relevant to the new MARD Sustainable Agriculture and Rural
Development Strategy for 2021-2030 which promoted sustainable, climate-resilient and low carbon
agriculture (ICR, paragraph 22).

Bank Strategy. During project appraisal and at the project’s close, relevant Bank strategies for the project
were: (a) FY2012-2016 Vietnam Country Partnership Strategy; and (b) FY2018-2022 Vietnam Country
Partnership Framework. Under the FY2012-2016 strategy, the project was well-aligned with several pillars
and outcome areas. In particular, the project contributed to the strategy’s pillar on “competitiveness” by
developing capacity for innovation and value addition for the agriculture sector (Outcome 1.3). Under
sustainability, the project’s activities contributed towards improved management of natural resources,
including water resources management (Outcome 2.1) and strengthened environmental protection and
management (Outcome 2.2). Additional cross cutting areas related to governance and resilience were
addressed and relevant. The project continued to be relevant to the subsequent CPF (FY2018-2022),
specifically responding to the following two out of its three focus areas, namely: (a) Enable inclusive growth
and private sector participation; and (b) Ensure environmental sustainability and resilience. Under Focus
area (a), the project contributed towards promoting private sector and agri-business development
(Objective 2). Under Focus area (b), objectives related to promotion of low carbon energy and reduction of
GHG emissions (Objective 9), increased climate resilience and disaster risk management (Objective 10)
and strengthening of natural resources management and improvements in water security (Objective 11)
were all areas of relevance for the project.



                                                                                                     Page 4 of 20
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Sustainable Agriculture Transformation (P145055)



               Prior Bank experience. The project benefited from the experience of prior World Bank projects, specifically
               from the Vietnam Agriculture Competitiveness Project. In addition to scaling up the production practices and
               technologies piloted in this project, there was evidence that some of the lessons learned were included in
               the project design. For example, the selection of two key value chains (i.e., rice and coffee) was based on
               the experience of the earlier project which had focused on wide range of commodities and technologies
               across geographical regions, which resulted into scattered ‘island’ of activities which did not reach critical
               scale or had notable impact in any major value chain (ICR, ACP; PAD, paragraph 30). There were also
               additional lessons related to the use of matching grants for collective actions and linking farmers to
               commercial banks, which the project had incorporated.

               In summary, the project’s objectives were relevant and well aligned with both the Government and World
               Bank strategies. The PDO and targets set were realistic and based on the Bank’s prior experience in the
               country. The project’s interventions were also relevant to the challenges faced by the sector identified
               during appraisal. Thus, the Relevance of this project’s objectives to Government and World Bank strategies
               in Vietnam at appraisal and at the project's closing were rated by this review as High.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To improve farming practices for rice and coffee production in the targeted project areas.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change (ToC). The ICR provided a retrospective Theory of Change (ToC) for the project (page
                             7). To achieve this objective, farmers and farmer organizations (FOs) would be trained on improved
                             agronomic and management practices in rice and coffee production. For irrigated rice, two technology
                             packages (3R3G and 1M5R, described in Box 1 of the ICR) would be promoted. Along with training,
                             demonstration models and support to farmer field schools would help farmers learn and adopt new
                             technologies. Promotion of sustainable practices for rice would focus on reducing use of inputs (seed,
                             fertilizer, insecticide). Similarly, for coffee, use of less inputs, and use of organic fertilizer and water-saving
                             technologies would be promoted, along with the certification of nurseries. These interventions would increase
                             farm areas under sustainable farming practices and technologies, which would be expected to lead to
                             increased productivity, improved quality of crops and reduced input use, potentially resulting in increased
                             farmers’ incomes and profits.

                             Outputs

                             To meet the objective to improve sustainable farming practices for rice production in the targeted project
                             areas, the project reduced inputs (e.g., fertilizer and pesticides use) in more than 200,000 ha of farming area

                                                                                                                                  Page 5 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Sustainable Agriculture Transformation (P145055)



(139 percent of target). In the coffee sector, sustainable practices were also promoted through reduced input
use on a total of 71,438 ha (surpassed targets for both existing plantations and for rejuvenation). In addition,
farmers in a coffee area of 57,868 ha adopted advanced water-saving irrigation technologies that reduced
water use by 20 percent.

Outcome

Based on the outputs referenced above, the following outcomes were achieved by the project:

      Farming areas under sustainable farming practices (rice production, ha): 184,643 (123% of target)
      Farming areas under sustainable farming practices (coffee production, ha): 70,446 (141% of target)
      Reduction in GHG emissions from rice farming in the project areas (tons): 1,582,299 (158% of target)

Adoption of sustainable farming practices for rice. The project achieved this outcome and surpassed all
its output targets. The two sustainable farming practices for rice: Three reductions, three gains (3R3G) and
One Must Do, Five Reductions (1M5R) that were supported by the project were well tested in the country and
were scaled up in the project area of Mekong Delta (MKD). Based on the project’s M&E data, there was
evidence that there was an increase in areas of rice farming with reduced pesticides and fertilizer use (one of
the intermediate indicators). According to the ICR (footnote 7), adoption of these farming practices was
measured from the recordings in the farmers’ books that were collected seasonally from a sample of farmers
which were then validated through interviews and joint field observations by the Bank and project team.
Certain minimum thresholds qualifying farmers as having adopted the farming practices were established for
each criterion (for example, less than 100 kg seeds per ha, less than 120 kg nitrogen per ha, less
than five pesticides applications for winter crop/less than three applications for autumn crop, and good
recording practice). The sample size was proportional to the number of registered areas in each of the
provinces.

Further, one of the production practices (i.e., 1M5R), not only enhanced use of improved seed, but it also
introduced innovative approaches such as the practice of alternate wetting and drying (AWD) which would
help reduce flooding and water pumping. The results from the project’s M&E were supplemented through field
studies conducted by IRRI researchers and other independent studies (Connor et al 2021; Wehmeyer et al
2021; Tuan et al 2021). As per the ICR (paragraph 30), one of the studies assessed adoption of 1M5R by
farmers in two provinces and there was evidence that the farmers had reduced their input use (seed, fertilizer,
pesticides etc.) though inputs were not all reduced uniformly and that there was less adoption of technology
on water. The second study conducted a comparative analysis from survey data collected in 2014 and 2019
based on treatment and control groups, which found that the adoption among treatment groups was higher.
However, as the ICR stated (paragraph 31), there were large spillovers found between the control and
treatment groups over the 5-year period. While both the studies are credible and provide evidence on
farmers’ adoption of sustainable farming practices for rice, the first study’s findings were limited in fully
attributing project activities to outcomes given that there did not appear to be baseline data on the actual
amount of the various inputs used by farmers under the study prior to project intervention.

Reductions in GHG emissions from rice farming in the project areas. Given that rice accounts for nearly
50 percent of the agriculture sector GHG emissions (and more than 75 percent of methane emissions), this
indicator was critical in assessing the impacts of low-carbon agriculture promoted through adoption of
technology packages. With reduced seeding rates, along with reduced pesticides and fertilizer use, and
application of irrigation technologies such as AWD the project was able to reduce GHG emissions by 1.5
million tons annually (158 percent more than target). According to the ICR (paragraph 35 and footnote 14),

                                                                                                   Page 6 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Sustainable Agriculture Transformation (P145055)



the calculation of GHG reductions was based on number of farmers who adopted improved farming practices
and the volume of GHG emissions reduction per ha. The methodology used was piloted in an earlier Bank
financed project (Agriculture Competitiveness Project) which was elaborated in detail in the ICR (Annex 8).

Adoption of sustainable farming practices for coffee. The project achieved this outcome and surpassed
all its output targets. The farming practices for coffee included less use of inputs (fertilizer and pesticides),
increased use of organic fertilizer, use of water-saving technologies, and inter-cropping with shade (fruit
trees). In addition, for rejuvenation of coffee plantation, certified seedlings were used. As per the project’s
regular monitoring surveys that were based on information collected from farmers that managed logbooks to
document their field activities and yields (ICR, paragraph 96), adoption rates among existing plantations were
84 percent coffee production and 82 percent for coffee rejuvenation. The ICR also states that there was an
increase in yields, improvements were found in the quality of coffee, and production costs were reduced
although the ICR provides no evidence that these results were measured, though increase in profits were
measured under Objective 2.

In summary, the project met (and surpassed) all its targets for outputs and outcomes. The evidence provided
was adequate. Given that the production practices and technologies (particularly for rice) were already tested
in an earlier project supported by the Bank and was also part of the Government’s national program, the
indicators on adoption of sustainable practices measured by the project could have been more ambitious
using outcome-focused indicators, such as those that measured crop yields, adoption of technologies by
individual farmers, in addition to the project’s current measurement of farming areas under sustainable
practices only. Nonetheless, crop yields and adoption among farmers are monitored in the project and are
discussed under Objective 2. The efficacy with which Objective 1 was achieved is therefore rated as High.

Rating
High


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To improve rice and coffee value chains in the targeted project areas.

Rationale
Theory of Change. To achieve the objective of improvements in rice and coffee value chains, matching
grants would be provided to Farmer Organizations (FOs) to upgrade quality of production, post-harvest
technologies and collective infrastructures such feeder roads, irrigation canals, temporary warehouses for
rice, coffee drying yards etc. Loans would be provided to upgrade rice processing technology and facilities,
and investments would be made in coffee rejuvenation/replanting. FOs and cooperatives’ capacities would be
strengthened, and farmers would be linked to markets through contract farming arrangements.

Outputs

To meet the objective of improving the rice value chain, the project reduced water use (by 30 percent) and
postharvest losses in a total area of 135,247 ha (180 percent of target). Under contract farming
arrangements, the project linked farmers with agribusinesses in the rice sector on about 74,234 ha of land
(148 percent of target). Access to finance were promoted through credit lines to the value of US$97.31 million



                                                                                                   Page 7 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Sustainable Agriculture Transformation (P145055)



(US$61.9 million from commercial banks, US$33.3 million from IDA credit and US$2.1 million from
contributions from borrowers and Revolving Fund).

Outcome

      Increase in net profits per hectare among targeted farmers (rice production, %): 32 (107% of target)
      Increase in net profits per hectare among targeted farmers (coffee production, %): 22.4 (112% of
       target; 50% women)

Increase in net profits (rice). The project met (and surpassed) all output indicators and achieved the
outcome of increased average profit per hectare for rice farmers (32 percent in comparison to non-target
group). As per the ICR (paragraph 42), the following interventions contributed towards meeting this outcome:

    1. Support to capacity building of FOs and cooperatives (establishment and consolidation of 308 FOs,
       265 cooperatives) led to increased profits through: (i) reduced seed use (83 percent of farmers used
       seeding rate below 100 kg per ha); (ii) reduced fertilizer use (93 percent of farmers followed this
       practice that helped reduce on average fertilizer cost by 35 percent); (iii) reduced pesticides use
       (around 99 percent of farmers adopted this practice leading to decreased pesticides cost by 48
       percent); (iv) increase in productivity (average yields for rice increased to 7.5-7.8 percent which was 5-
       10 percent higher than traditional farming; (v) reduced irrigation water (99 percent of farmers applied
       AWD irrigation techniques which helped reduce irrigation amount by 30 percent); and (vi) reduced
       post-harvest losses by 30 percent through investments in equipment such as dryers and storage
       facilities.
    2. Support for processing and marketing:

      Credit disbursements of US$97.3 million (referred under outputs) to ten rice milling/processing
       companies for capital investment for medium to long-term to purchase and process rice.
      Matching grants were provided to FOs to purchase machinery, equipment and in building
       infrastructure. There was more success in investing in infrastructure as there was a challenge for
       farmers to secure funding contributions for machinery and equipment. This challenge could have been
       possibly addressed through group lending to farmers, which was not feasible due to the policy shift of
       the Government (discussed earlier under Section 2.e). Instead, during implementation, the ratios for
       investment were revised which led to investments on feeder roads, electricity lines, irrigation canals,
       bridges, rice storage warehouses etc.
      Contract farming arrangements were facilitated between farmers, FOs and companies for around
       74,234 ha of land area. As per the ICR, one of the companies under the rice value chain supported by
       the project received award of the World’s Best Rice Contest in 2019 and 2020 (ICR, paragraph 47).

Increase in net profits (coffee). The project met (and surpassed) all output indicators and achieved the
outcome of increased average profit per hectare for coffee farmers (22.4 percent in comparison to non-target
group). As per the ICR (paragraph 48), the following interventions contributed towards meeting this outcome:

    1. Support to establishment and capacity building of FOs (202 FOs, 265 cooperatives) that led to
       increased profits through: (i) reduced use of fertilizer and pesticides (80 percent of farmers managed
       to save VND 1.51 million per ha from using less fertilizer and additional VND 1.6 million per ha from
       pesticides); (ii) use of water-saving irrigation (190 ha of drip irrigation demonstration models and 349


                                                                                                   Page 8 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Sustainable Agriculture Transformation (P145055)



       ha of sprinkler irrigation) and additional manual water-saving techniques; and (iii) reduced operating
       cost in 44 HH through pilot application of smart irrigation Internet of Things (IOT) technology.
    2. Support for upgradation of coffee seedling nurseries: As part of coffee rejuvenation, 11 State nurseries
       and 21 private nurseries produced 12.6 million seedlings for the farmers to rejuvenate 12,000 ha of
       coffee leading to a total of 22,271 ha of areas replanted with quality seedlings.
    3. Support for processing and marketing:

        Credit line of US$89.14 million (which included US$71.73 million from the project and US$17.41
         million from the revolving fund) were disbursed which financed coffee plantation and rejuvenation in a
         total area of 11,932 ha. The credit line leveraged an additional US$48.5 million of private financing
         from PFIs and end-borrowers.
        Matching grants supported 42 coffee FOs out of 202 participating FOs. In addition, 85 km of access
         roads, were built, along with 36 coffee warehouses, dryers, drying yards, power lines, processing
         machines etc. During project extension, 233 km of rural roads were upgraded, and 2 km canals were
         built.
        Contract farming arrangements were facilitated for an area covering 14,700 ha.

The ICR provided adequate evidence on factors that contributed towards meeting the PDO indicator of
increased average profit per ha for rice and coffee farmers. However, as noted by the ICR, this indicator “did
not capture the ‘value chain improvement’ which required product, process, and functional upgrading of both
the value chains” (ICR, paragraph 94). To better measure this objective, changes in amount (and value) of
rice and coffee that were sold by the farmers or FOs to agribusinesses would have been appropriate. Further,
the ICR stated that contract farming arrangements were increased and data on area coverage are reported.
As an alternative, data on number of farmers and agribusinesses engaged in contract farming and
volume/value of transactions from these arrangements would have been a better indicator in reporting
achievements.

In summary, considering that the project met and surpassed all its targets for outputs and outcomes in
improving the rice and coffee value chains, the efficacy with which Objective 2 was achieved is rated as High.




Rating
High


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
To strengthen public agencies to effectively support implementation of the Agricultural Restructuring Plan
(ARP).

Rationale
Theory of Change. To achieve this objective, the project would support MARD and DARD through targeted
reviews and studies in subsectors, assessments would be made of regulation and policy needs and reforms
would be proposed. Capacity would be strengthened of central and provincial agencies through workshops


                                                                                                  Page 9 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Sustainable Agriculture Transformation (P145055)



and consultations, and training on budgeting processes (i.e., medium-term expenditure framework), human
resources development. Credit officers of financial institutions and organizations in the value chain would also
be trained. These activities would result into laws and decrees being enacted or revised, master plans
prepared, and service delivery capacity of central and provincial institutions improved.

Outputs

      Improved performance in budget execution by MARD measured by a reduction in the discrepancy
       between budget allocations and end-of-year budget out-turns (%): 30.6 (153% of target)
      An MTEF (Medium-term expenditure framework) covering MARD’s investment and recurrent
       expenditure and MTEFs for DARDs: 3 (100% of target)
      Adoption of improved subsector ARPs in select MARD departments: 7 (233% of target)
      Number of pilot coffee-based landscape management plans developed in project areas (plan): 5
       (100% of plan)

Outcomes

      Improved quality of service delivery by MARD (departments) in support of project implementation as
       measured by performance scorecard: 4 (100% of target)
      Improved quality of service delivery by DARDs (provinces) in support of project implementation as
       measured by performance scorecard: 10 (100% of target)

Improved quality of service delivery by MARD and DARDs in project implementation (measured
through a performance scorecard). To achieve this PDO indicator, the following support were provided:

      MARD’s capacity was strengthened on policy reforms that led to development of plans on market
         linkages between cooperatives and enterprises, livestock development, sustainable and climate
         resilience program, food safety, laws on fisheries, crop production and livestock development etc.
        DARD capacity was strengthened through 33 training courses that reached 1,800 participants (90%
         satisfied with the quality and relevance of the training)
        Human resources development support focused in organizing a total of 45 conferences, workshops
         and trainings for MARD and DARD staff.
        Budgeting process was strengthened that helped to produce a Medium-term investment framework
         (MTEF) for MARD and two pilot provinces. Budget execution was improved based on the reduced
         differences between budget allocations and actual expenditure.
        Value chain partners capacity was built, particularly through BIDV that provided training and technical
         support to 188 credit officers of partner banks. Market and value chain studies were conducted for the
         coffee sector and improved public-private engagement was promoted within advisory bodies like the
         Vietnam Coffee Coordination Board that consisted of public and private sector representatives.

The project met (and surpassed) all its outputs and outcomes relevant to Objective 3. To measure the
outcome of improved service delivery of MARD and DARD, an independent study was conducted which
measured performances of four MARD departments and DARD services in 10 pilot provinces based on the
scorecard that had been developed. The scorecard measured visibility, reliability, responsiveness, assurance,
and sympathy (ICR, Box 2). A document (provided by the project team separately to IEG which summarized
the results of the independent study), showed that there were improvements in service delivery of MARD and


                                                                                                  Page 10 of 20
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               Sustainable Agriculture Transformation (P145055)



                            DARDs based on reduced number of administrative procedures, improvements in digitization of information,
                            agricultural extension services etc. However, one area of minor shortcoming as mentioned in the ICR
                            (paragraph 61) was that some key parameters that were part of the support of the project such as on
                            budgeting, financial management, oversight, and governance issues were not measured by the scorecard. It
                            is not clear though whether the inclusion of these missing items would have changed the overall conclusion of
                            the independent study given measurement challenges particularly of capacity building activities.

                            In conclusion, this review rates the efficacy with which Objective 3 was met as High with very minor
                            shortcomings.



                            Rating
                            High


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The project was successful in increasing the share of targeted project farming areas under sustainable
                            farming practices for rice and coffee (PDO indicator #1) by 123 percent and 141 percent respectively.
                            Through sustainable practices in rice production, the project reduced GHG emissions (PDO indicator #2) and
                            surpassed its target by 158 percent. The project increased net profits per hectare among targeted farmers
                            (PAD indicator #3) and surpassed the targets (rice: 107 percent; coffee: 112 percent). Quality of service
                            delivery by MARD and DARDs were also improved based on performance scorecards (PDO indicator #4).
                            The review concludes that the overall efficacy with which the project's objectives were achieved was High.




                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            High



    5. Efficiency
   At the time of appraisal, ex-ante economic analysis was conducted using a cost-benefit analysis. The main
   benefits were derived from project’s components B and C that would support rice and coffee production
   systems. Component B and C would increase incomes of rice and coffee farmers, enhance the competitiveness
   of the sub-sectors, and reduce negative environmental impacts. The benefits that were quantified for rice were
   through: (a) adoption of 3R3G and 1M5R rice production among farmers that would reduce water and inputs use
   resulting in reduced production cost; (b) harvest and post-harvest equipment use for rice cooperatives that
   would reduce losses during harvest, milling and storage; (c) rice contract farming for value additions coming



                                                                                                                            Page 11 of 20
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Sustainable Agriculture Transformation (P145055)



from higher quality rice; and (d) upgrading rice processing through improved conversion from paddy to rice
which would improve quality and receive better price.

For the coffee sector, the following benefits were quantified: (a) adoption of sustainable practices from farm
management to increase productivity and profitability, and reduce water use; (b) coffee rejuvenation would lead
to increased productivity and profitability; and (c) community-level production of infrastructure (i.e., irrigation
canals, on-farm roads, drying machines) would lead to increased price due to improved quality, reduce post-
harvest losses etc. (PAD, table 1). The economic analysis was carried out for a 20-year period, discounted at a
rate of 12 percent. This resulted into a net present value (NPV) of US$223 million, and EIRR for the overall
project was expected to be 23.9 percent.

 At project closing, an ex-post economic analysis was undertaken using the same methodology as at appraisal.
There were some revisions and adjustments on the benefits quantified. For example, in the ex-ante analysis,
reduced GHG emissions from rice farming in the project areas was not included but it was quantified under the
ex-post analysis. As per the ICR (Annex 4, paragraph 13), major sources used of quantifiable benefits were from
the project’s activities that improved resource use efficiency such as water, and inputs such as fertilizer, seed
under the 3R3G and 1M5R practices. Further, benefits from the rice mill investments were also included.
Several other benefits related to improved public service quality, land value due to irrigation expansion, reduced
negative impacts on water and soil etc. were not included. The analysis was based on data from project’s M&E
which measured changes in revenue among farmers who adopted sustainable practices for rice and coffee.

The EIRRs for each component as well as regions were calculated (ICR, Table 4.5). Based on the analysis, the
overall project EIRR was 27.9 percent without the rice mill investments and 28.3 percent with the rice mill
investments, in comparison to the EIRR at appraisal of 24 percent. The NPV of the project (with rice mills) was
US$426.2 million and the benefit-cost ratio (with rice mills) was 6.1. The EFA also analyzed the economic
benefits by monetizing the GHG emissions in rice production for the scenario without rice mill investments. This
resulted into an overall project IRR of 57 percent under low carbon price scenario and 96 percent under a high
carbon price scenario (Annex 4, paragraph 24)

Administrative and Operational Efficiency: The project was implemented over a 6.5-year period and included
one restructuring. During implementation, the project faced delays some of which were related to design issues
that affected timely implementation of infrastructure subprojects (discussed in Section 8 of the review). Further,
during 2017 and 2019, there were delays with budget allocations by the Government of ODA funds (affected all
other projects in the Bank portfolio) which resulted into slow disbursements for project activities in the provinces.
Despite these challenges, the project completed most of its activities within the extended implementation period
of 1.5 years and the project’s administrative cost of 3 percent was reasonable.

In summary, the project was found to be economically viable with a high EIRR which was higher when GHG
emissions were included. This project’s efficiency is therefore rated as High.


Efficiency Rating
High


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:

                                                                                                       Page 12 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Sustainable Agriculture Transformation (P145055)




                               Rate Available?              Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      0
Appraisal                                                   23.90
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      0
ICR Estimate                                                28.30
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The project’s objectives were relevant and well aligned with both the Government and World Bank Strategies.
The PDO was clear and project interventions addressed the key challenges in promoting sustainability in the
sector, particularly in the two value chains selected. The relevance of Objectives was therefore rated high for
this project. The overall Efficacy of the project was also rated High. The project met (or surpassed) targets for all
its PDO indicators and intermediate indicators. The project’s efficiency was rated high with a high ERR (28.3
percent; much higher when GHG emissions were monetized) and despite the delays during the early phase of
the project, the administrative cost of 3 percent that the project incurred was reasonable.

In summary, this review concludes that the project’s efficacy of its overall outcome is Highly Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Highly Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The ICR (Section D) discussed the following risks that may impact the project’s development outcome:

    1. Government ownership/ commitment: Government’s commitment to implementation of the
       Agriculture Restructuring Plan (ARP), and its support for sustainable agriculture will be critical for
       maintaining the achievements of the project. At the project closing workshop, the Government
       assured that this would be a priority and the achievements of the project would contribute to
       Government’s plan to develop a national 1 million-hectare low-carbon rice program being designed
       by MARD with technical assistance from the World Bank (ICR, paragraph 109).
    2. Technical risks: The Government’s Public Investment Law limits use of ODA to fund activities such
       as training, capacity building. If new investments on technology adoption are made for the crops,
       without the needed resources for training and capacity-building activities, the results will not be
       optimal.
    3. Institutional risks: The project worked with FOs although many are still in nascent stage in terms of
       their capacity. Without continuous support and monitoring, either from the Government or
       international agencies, the potential of FOs to be effective sustained local institutions of farmers
       facilitating changed behaviors on technology adoption and for market linkages may not be achieved.



                                                                                                      Page 13 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Sustainable Agriculture Transformation (P145055)




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project was well aligned with the Government’s sectoral priorities and Bank strategy. In particular,
  the emphasis of the project on promoting sustainable transformation of the agriculture sector was
  important and timely since the sector was faced with resource challenges due to its vulnerability to
  impacts of climate change.

  The project’s preparation was based on relevant analytics and experiences of prior Bank-funded project
  (i.e., Agriculture Competitiveness Project) that had focused on technology adoption and promotion of
  agronomic practices for growing rice. The project’s collaboration with the International Rice Research
  Institute (IRRI) was laudable, and technologies included for scaling up were well tested and piloted in the
  country by the Government and other partners. The focus of the project on two key crops – rice and
  coffee – in a contiguous geographical area was an effective delivery model not only for technology
  adoption but also for value chain development and in promoting market linkages.

  The project’s M&E system was well designed, and the Results Framework was found to be sound though
  there were some very minor shortcomings related to the choice of the indicators (discussed under
  Section 9). Further, there were clear institutional arrangements for the supervision and implementation of
  project activities (MARD – component A), including for M&E.

  While the project was well designed, this ICR review endorses a few minor gaps related to design issues
  identified by the ICR (ICR, paragraph 85). For example, the decision of 50/50 ratio of matching grants
  allocated to infrastructure vis-à-vis goods and equipment which, when followed rigidly, led to delays in
  project implementation due to higher demand for infrastructure than equipment. The ICR noted that the
  lower demand for machinery among farmers was due to their limited ability to financially contribute
  towards cost sharing. Also, the restrictive list of equipment for FOs excluded certain equipment such as
  transplanters and straw balers that were in high demand from FOs.

  This review concludes that Quality at Entry was rated as Satisfactory with minor shortcomings.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 According to the ICR, the Bank conducted regular and timely supervision missions. Most of the task team,
 including the task team leader, were based in the country and therefore able to provide continuous support
 to MARD and the Project Management Units.

 The project went through several challenges over the implementation period such as interruptions of IDA
 allocations to the provinces, late allocation of annual budgets for financing FO sub projects, slow uptake of


                                                                                                   Page 14 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Sustainable Agriculture Transformation (P145055)



 the credit line, limited capacity, COVID -19 pandemic (discussed in detail in the ICR, paragraphs 87-92).
 Despite these implementation challenges, key actions taken by the Bank helped the project achieve its
 objectives and related targets, and complete most of the activities planned. For example, regarding the
 credit lines for rice and coffee value chains, decision of the MTR to provide flexibility for allocation of IDA
 funds between the two crops to respond to market demands was appropriate and timely. According to the
 ICR (paragraph 90), this led to amendments in the on-lending loan agreement that merged the amounts of
 IDA credit allocated for rice and coffee. As a result, there was an increase in the flow of funds to support
 the coffee sub-sector which was favored by the producers.

 In addition, another key action taken by the Bank to undertake a level 2 restructuring in 2020 was valid and
 justified. Due to periodic late allocation of budget, project activities particularly those financing infrastructure
 subprojects were delayed. Under the restructuring, closing date of the project was extended which allowed
 the project to complete its activities. The additional time helped further strengthen the capacity of the
 farmer organizations and cooperatives.

 Overall, despite the various challenges the project faced as referred to above, the Bank’s close and timely
 support, along with key actions made during implementation that helped the project meet its objectives and
 targets were noteworthy. Thus, this review rates the quality of Bank Supervision to be Highly Satisfactory
 with no shortcomings.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Highly Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The project had a sound Results Framework which as per the ICR (paragraph 93) included the following
 three key elements: “(a) strengthening the performance of (mainly) public agricultural institutions at the
 national and provincial levels; (b) developing rice-based and coffee-based production systems through
 scaling up the adoption of improved farm-based production and management technologies, plus the
 organization of FOs, and providing them with matching grants to improve access to collective harvesting
 and primary processing equipment; and (c) providing access to credit to upgrade rice processing
 technologies and facilities and rejuvenate coffee plantations to promote the performance of the value
 chain”. The results from these activities were measured by five PDO level indicators, and eleven
 component-wise intermediate-level indicators. While none of the PDO level or intermediate-level indicators
 were revised during implementation, some indicators could have been made more ambitious, or revised
 during implementation to make them more outcome focused (as discussed earlier under Section 4,
 Objective 1).

 On the selection of the PDO indicators, the ICR made a critical observation about the comprehensiveness
 of PDO Indicator 3 and PDO Indicator 5, with which this ICR review concurs. The PDO indicator 3

                                                                                                         Page 15 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Sustainable Agriculture Transformation (P145055)



 measured net profits per hectare among targeted farmers in the rice and coffee value chains. Increased
 profits for farmers are important, but profit is only one measure that would capture the intended objective of
 improvements in the various processes of a value chain. On the PDO indicator 5, the ICR notes a
 shortcoming in the methodology (i.e., performance measures of the scorecard). As stated earlier (Section
 4, Objective 2), relevant parameters that were part of the project support such as on budgeting, financial
 management, oversight and governance issues were not included in the scorecard and therefore not
 measured.

 Other than this, the M&E System was well designed to collect, verify and report M&E data. There were
 dedicated staff in place in the Central Project management Unit (CPMU) in Hanoi and additional M&E staff
 in provincial PMUs. For measuring specialized indicators such as GHG emission measures, an external
 agency was contracted. Finally, the M&E design planned for independent assessments on farmer adoption
 of production practices and technologies were commissioned to be done by external consulting firms.




b. M&E Implementation
  The project prepared an M&E manual that laid our roles and responsibilities on monitoring, collecting,
  and consolidating data, undertaking reviews, studies etc. This manual included details on the definition
  and measurement of the indicators. Based on this information, semi-annual progress reports were
  prepared.

  At the field level, technology adoption was monitored through logbooks in which farmers were required to
  document all activities and yields (ICR, paragraph 96). Semiannual sample surveys of farmers collected
  information of farmers’ technology adoption.



c. M&E Utilization
  The M&E system, along with action plans were used to regularly monitor progress of the project
  activities. The project strictly followed the project operational manual but as noted in the ICR (paragraph
  97), the rigidness of this approach was found to be “a missed for capturing experiences of local farmers
  and extension works during project implementation”.

  In summary, M&E is rated as Substantial. The project’s M&E system was well designed, and the
  Results Framework which only had minor shortcomings included relevant objectives for the project with
  achievable targets. As per the M&E plan, M&E activities were implemented without major problems and
  project activities and objectives were adequately monitored, along with timely reporting on the project’s
  progress.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

                                                                                                    Page 16 of 20
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Sustainable Agriculture Transformation (P145055)




a. Safeguards
  The project was classified as a Category B (partial assessment) project under World Bank safeguard
  policies. At appraisal, the following three environmental and two social safeguard policies were triggered:
  Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01), Pest Management (OP 4.09), Physical Cultural Resources (OP 4.11,
  Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12), and Indigenous Peoples (OP 4.10).

  Environmental Safeguards: According to the PAD (Section VI F), the project would have positive
  environmental impacts. The possible negative impacts included: (a) improper use and management of agro-
  chemicals; (b) ineffective management and improper treatment of agricultural waste and by-products; and
  (c) civil works impacts during construction of infrastructures or rehabilitation of construction facilities (PAD,
  paragraph 71). To address the negative impacts, during appraisal, the project prepared Environmental and
  Social Management Frameworks (ESMFs) for non-credit and credit activities supported by the project.
  During project implementation, the ESMFs guided the project and all infrastructure subprojects identified
  and proposed by local beneficiaries were screened. Environmental Code of Practices (ECOPs) were
  prepared in compliance with World Bank procedures to ensure that negative construction or rehabilitation
  work related impacts were mitigated. Besides screening, efforts were made to communicate the benefits of
  Good Agricultural Practices (GAP) to rice and coffee farmers. For credit related activities, trainings were
  provided to staff of participating financial Intermediaries (PFIs). During project implementation, there were
  no environmental risks or negative impacts reported.

  Social Safeguards. During project appraisal, as per the social safeguards requirement of the Bank, the
  project had prepared a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) and Ethnic Minority Policy Framework
  (EMDF), both in line with the country’s regulations. The RPF specified the steps to be taken during
  implementation to prepare, review and clear Resettlement Action Plans for sub-projects to be financed by
  the project. Similarly, the EMDF would also guide the preparation of Ethnic Minority Development Plans.
  During project implementation, land acquisition of subprojects financed were minimal which were mainly of
  public land, and as a result, there was no displacement of people. As per the ICR (paragraph 102), the
  project complied with the need to communicate with local beneficiaries and project-affected people, both
  men and women, including ethnic minorities about the project’s activities and its compensation policies.
  There were no negative reactions or responses about project’s land acquisition activities.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management. During implementation, financial management reviews found the project to have
  the necessary capacity of FM staff. The project accounts as well as internal controls were managed well
  with adequate documentation kept on the project's financials. Financial and audited reports were submitted
  but according to the ICR (paragraph 104), they were usually late. During project period, the FM was mostly
  rated as ‘Moderately Satisfactory’ and the project did not encounter any major financial management
  issues. The project was audited by independent auditors on an annual basis, which were supplemented by
  internal audits conducted by the MARD’s Agricultural Project Management Board in all project
  implementing agencies.

  Procurement. The project did not face any major procurement issues except that during the initial phase
  of the project, there were procurement delays. The ICR (paragraph 103) identified the procurement


                                                                                                    Page 17 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Sustainable Agriculture Transformation (P145055)



   activities of the project under two phases, with the first phase (2015-2020) engaged on activities that were
   mainly on engaging consultants and preparing bidding and procurement activities for small packages of
   goods and services of Farmer Organizations (FO). The latter phase (2021-22) focuses on large packages
   of investments on infrastructure activities. Despite the tight timeframe, the project was able to complete all
   contracts under the second phase, and the procurement performance of the project was found to be
   satisfactory.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                     IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Highly Satisfactory     Highly Satisfactory

Bank Performance                Satisfactory            Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                  Substantial             Substantial

Quality of ICR                  ---                     High


12. Lessons

The ICR included five lessons, out of which this review has highlighted (with some adaptation in
language) the following four lessons that had broad applicability to Bank operations. One additional
lesson is also noted based on the research (Tuan et al. 2021) that was highlighted in the report
which was relevant based on the project's experience.

    1. A project’s direct link to a national program brings strong ownership and commitment
       from the Government. The project was well-aligned with the Agriculture Restructuring Plan
       (ARP) and new MARD Sustainable Agriculture and Rural Development Strategy for 2021-
       2030. The project activities contributed and supported the implementation of the
       Government’s plans and strategies with a renewed focus on sustainable and low carbon
       agriculture.
    2. A project’s intervention on promoting low carbon technologies that is profitable to
       farmers encourages adoption. The project focused on building the capacity and knowledge
       of farmers on low-carbon cultivation technologies through training, technical assistance, as

                                                                                                     Page 18 of 20
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Sustainable Agriculture Transformation (P145055)



        well as supported them with access to credit, infrastructure development, and improved
        service delivery etc. These comprehensive set of interventions of the project led to reduced
        production costs and higher profits for farmers, which were key factors encouraging the
        adoption of low carbon technologies.
     3. A focus on a few key value chains in contiguous areas connected farmers to markets
        and resulted in efficiency gains for the project. The project focused on two key crops –
        rice and coffee – and implemented a clustered approach in implementing project activities.
        This approach allowed the project to develop infrastructures related to processing and
        logistics for the relevant value chains in key project areas, which not only helped improve
        farmers’ linkages to markets but also brought efficiencies to project investments.
     4. A wholesale banking model for access to finance helped mobilize private sector
        financing. The project’s wholesale bank (BIDV) was not only able to manage and coordinate
        credit lines, but this arrangement also helped bring additional financial resources from private
        banks and end-borrowers. This ‘apex’ institution played a key role in helping the Government
        understand the market for credit which then enabled the Government to introduce relevant
        policy adjustments.

The fifth lesson which the ICR noted in paragraph 34 is the following based on independent
research in the project area:

5. Factors that determine technology adoption go beyond farm characteristics or previous
experiences of farmers. As per the study (Tuan et al 2021) in project areas, there are several other
drivers of adoption such as educational status of farmers, farm size, adopter categories (innovators,
early adopters, early majority etc.), interests, and other motivations. Due to these diverse factors or
drivers of technology adoption, there is a need to be open to undertaking a differentiated approach
in disseminating technologies based on their locations and socioeconomic context (ICR, paragraph
34)




13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR was a well-written document, internally consistent, and structured according to OPCS guidelines. The
project’s achievements and shortcomings were reported based on good quality evidence drawn from the
project’s M&E, supplemented by findings of independent studies which helped triangulate evidence. The
document also provided examples of beneficiary feedback although most was through officials of the
implementing agencies and limited feedback directly from farmers.




                                                                                                    Page 19 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Sustainable Agriculture Transformation (P145055)



The ICR summarized and analyzed well the various activities implemented by the project, and provided
adequate discussion on the outputs and intermediate results and on how they informed the achievement of the
PDO.

The lessons learned included in the ICR were based on the project’s experience and most had broader
applicability for similar projects.

Finally, the ICR was candid in acknowledging minor shortcomings of the project’s M&E design.

Overall, the Quality of the ICR is rated High.




  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      High




                                                                                               Page 20 of 20
