     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     AO -Smallholder Agr. Dev. (P154447)



                                                                                   Report Number: ICRR0023623

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P154447                                     AO -Smallholder Agr. Dev.

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Angola                                      Agriculture and Food


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-86260                                  31-Dec-2021                                          68,302,517.74

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 05-Jul-2016                                 31-Dec-2022

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            70,000,000.00                                                0.00

 Revised Commitment                             70,000,000.00                                                0.00

 Actual                                         68,302,517.74                                                0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Shashidhara Laxman          Vibecke Dixon                 Avjeet Singh                   IEGSD (Unit 4)
 Kolavalli




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The project development objective (PDO) in the project Appraisal Document (PAD, p. 6) and in the financing
   agreement (FA, p. 5) aimed to:

   “increase smallholder agriculture productivity, production and marketing for selected crops in the project
   areas.”



                                                                                                    Page 1 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     AO -Smallholder Agr. Dev. (P154447)



   For the analysis in this ICRR, the PDO will be parsed as follows:

        1. To increase smallholder agricultural productivity of selected crops in the project areas;
        2. To increase smallholder agricultural production of selected crops in the project areas; and
        3. To increase smallholder agricultural marketing for selected crops in the project areas.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project had 3 components:

   Component 1. Capacity Building and Institutional Development (Appraisal cost: US$43 million – IBRD
   US$23 million and Government of Angola US$20 million; Actual cost: US$43.50 million).

   It had three subcomponents:

        a. Strengthening the capacity of smallholder farmers and farmers’ organizations in critical aspects of
           agriculture through farmers’ fields schools (FFS), including (a) supporting the establishment of
           smallholder farmers’ organizations; (b) strengthening the knowledge of farmers on agricultural
           practices, technology, inputs and marketing; (c) strengthening the functional literacy and numeracy;
           (d) improving household nutrition; (e) improving soil fertility and integrated nutrient management
           practices; (f) promoting conservation agriculture; and (g) building the capacity of relevant
           government staff at municipal level to implement a farmer field school program.
        b. Strengthening the institutional capacity of local, provincial, and national units of the Ministry of
           agriculture in the areas of irrigation, extension, market information, statistics and policy analysis to
           improve provision of services to smallholder farmers at the farm level investments; and (b)
           rehabilitating and constructing agricultural extension facilities at the local level of the Ministry of
           Agriculture, including offices and residential complexes for agriculture extension staff.
        c. Strengthening the capacity of agricultural research systems to enhance access to innovations and
           technologies for increasing farm productivity and production, including: (a) supporting the
           multiplication of seeds and planting material; (b) developing technology packages for selected crops;
           (c) improving soil diagnostics services; (d) building the technical capacity of the national research
           and extension systems; and (e) increased field testing and demonstration of improved technologies.

   Component 2. Support for Increased Production and Commercialization (Appraisal cost: US$42 million –
   IBRD US$ 37 million, Local Beneficiaries US$ 5 million; Actual cost US$:33.93 million). It had two
   subcomponents.

        a. Providing support in preparing proposals for subprojects and in implementing selected subprojects
          under component 2.2 of the project.
        b. Carrying out subprojects in participating provinces, and providing matching grants to beneficiaries
          for carrying out the subprojects, in the following areas: (a) rehabilitation and construction of small

                                                                                                      Page 2 of 19
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    AO -Smallholder Agr. Dev. (P154447)



         scale irrigation and drainage schemes; (b) agricultural production and productivity improvements;
         and (c) post-harvest management and value addition.

  Component 3: Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation (Appraisal cost:US$10 million, actual cost:
  US$17.40 million). It had two subcomponents.

      a. Project management:
              i. Strengthening the capacity of the PIU for project management, coordination, monitoring and
                  evaluation, including fiduciary (i.e. financial and procurement management), environmental
                  and social safeguards compliance, audits and reporting support; and
              ii. Strengthening the capacity of the PPIUs to assist in project management, coordination,
                  monitoring and evaluation at the provincial level, including fiduciary (i.e. financial and
                  procurement management), environmental and social safeguards compliance and reporting.

      b. Project monitoring and evaluation: Establishing and implementing a monitoring and evaluation
         systems for the project, including establishing a management information system within the PIU.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project cost: Appraised costs were US$95 million. According to ICR (Annex 3), actual project costs were
  US$93.83 million, representing 99.98% of the appraised costs.

  Responding to two requests from the Ministry of Finance, the first dated July 20, 2010, seeking reallocation
  and financing for the preparation of additional financing (AF) to respond to drought in the southern part of
  the country; the second dated August 19, 2021, seeking an extension of the closing date, funds were
  reallocated among project categories. The reallocations accommodated i) budgetary shortfalls in the civil
  works for house construction, ii) preparation for possible Additional Financing, and iii) additional operational
  costs of extending the project and the covered area. The project included 13 communes in 8 municipalities
  to the initially targeted 80 communes in 26 municipalities in the three selected provinces of Bie, Huambo,
  and Malanje.

  A total of US$ 10.475 million was moved out of subcomponents 1.3, 2.1, and 2.2. Of this, US$ 2.9 million
  was allocated to subcomponent 1.2 to meet the higher than planned construction costs of residences and
  offices. The remaining US$ 7.575 million was moved to component 3. Of which, US$ 0.5 million was used
  to prepare an AF. After significant work, it was spun off as a separate operation because it needed to
  address different geographical areas focusing on livestock, which required different sets of skills and
  entailed an environmental and social safeguards framework. The remaining US$7.075 million was used to
  meet additional operating costs from extending project life and expanded coverage. According to the bank
  team (discussed in a meeting on September 13, 2023), administration required additional funds for
  intensified support and supervision to bring the project to a “satisfactory” state before closure.

  The reallocations did not significantly affect the theory of change or the delivery of outputs. Reduced
  support to research (1.3) was compensated by resources from the Agricultural Productivity Program for
  Southern Africa – Angola & Lesotho (APPSA, P164486). Reduced funding to subprojects (2.2) did not come
  in the way of achieving the objective because i) the planned TA to be sourced internally was sourced locally
  at lower costs (2.1), and ii) the costs of subprojects were significantly lower than planned. For example,


                                                                                                     Page 3 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     AO -Smallholder Agr. Dev. (P154447)



   hermetic storage bags that became available were cheaper than the planned alternatives. However,
   because of cost escalations, only 18 technician residences were built against the planned 40.

   Financing: US$ 70 million of the project costs were from an IBRD loan. There were no other co-financiers.

   Borrower contribution: The Government of Angola contributed US$ 20 million as envisaged at appraisal
   (p44). About US$ 7 million equivalent was in cash, and the remaining approximately US$ 13 million in kind.

   Dates: The project was approved on July 5, 2016, became effective on December 28, 2016, and the MTR
   was conducted on June 4, 2019. The original closing date was December 31, 2021. The project was
   restructured on September 10, 2021. The project was extended once for 12 months, and the actual closing
   date was December 31, 2022. The extension was necessary because of i) delays in initiating training under
   farmer field schools, ii) time needed to complete technical studies, environmental impact assessments, and
   procurement processes for irrigation activities, and iii) delays caused by the government’s COVID-19
   related restrictions (ICR, para 14).




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country context

At appraisal, Angola was highly dependent on the oil sector, which accounted for 30 percent of GDP.
Dependent on oil, the country faced a fiscal crisis when oil prices fell by 72 percent between March 2014
and March 2016. It prompted the government to accelerate its efforts to diversify the economy. Although
agriculture contributed only 5.5 percent to GDP, it accounted for 44 percent of national employment; about
46 percent of the households were still in agriculture. Poverty and inequality were also problems. Poverty
rates had been reduced from 62 percent in 2001 to 37 percent in 2009 but remained at 58 percent in rural
areas.

Although agricultural production had increased gradually since the end of the war in 2002, crop yields were
low compared to other countries in Sub-Saharan Africa. Nearly 80 percent of the farmers, who were
smallholders, produced nearly 90 percent of the national agricultural products. They faced many
constraints: limited knowledge of improved agricultural practices, poor access to extension services, limited
access to modern inputs such as seeds and fertilizers, inadequate market information, and post-harvest
losses. The capacity of the institutions in the agriculture sector was weak, particularly relating to irrigation
development, policy analysis, and agricultural statistics.

Previous World Bank Experience in the Sector and Country

The Bank’s previous project, the Market Oriented Smallholder Agricultural Project (SADCP), was approved
in July 2008 and closed in 2016. It was designed to increase agricultural production by providing
smallholders with improved agricultural services and investment support. In addition to building capacity,
the project contributed to increased agricultural production and the adoption of improved technologies for
maize, beans, cassava, and Irish potatoes in the project areas. Building on lessons learned from MOSAP,


                                                                                                      Page 4 of 19
                       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                       AO -Smallholder Agr. Dev. (P154447)



SADCP was designed as a scaled-up version with more activities and targeting farmers in more
communes.

Alignment with National Policies, Strategies, and Plans

The PDO is consistent with the Long-Term Development Strategy for Angola (2025) of 2007, which called
for revitalizing and diversifying the rural economy to increase food security. Its National Development Plan
(NDP) 2013-2017 highlighted agriculture and rural development as priority areas to reduce reliance on food
imports, revitalize the rural economy, reduce rural poverty, and achieve food security. The government's
program, the Agricultural Development Plan (ADP) (2010-2017), aimed to transform agriculture from a
move from subsistence to a commercial orientation.

Alignment with World Bank Strategies

The PDO was consistent with the World Bank’s Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) (2014-2016, extended
up to 2020), which highlighted the need to revitalize the rural economy and develop agriculture by
increasing productivity and improving market linkages to generate growth, create employment, and reduce
poverty. The World Bank’s CPS was responding to continued high levels of poverty, inequality, and
structural problems of a natural resource-dominated economy despite a decade of high growth. CPS’s
overarching strategy was to promote more inclusive development, the first pillar of which was to support
diversification.

The World Bank’s Performance and Learning Review (PLR) extended the CPS (2014-2016). It reformulated
the objectives of CPS to respond to macroeconomic challenges emerging from the decline in oil prices
while retaining economic diversification as a key objective. The PDO is also consistent with the World
Bank’s Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD) (December 2018), which notes that a flourishing agricultural
sector would diversify the economy to make Angola more resilient against future shocks. The SCD also
stresses the need to reduce dependence on food imports.

On June 16, the Board approved a new project, the Smallholder Agricultural Transformation Project (SATP,
P177305), with similar broad objectives suggesting their continued relevance. Thus, SADCP is one of a
series of projects to increase the productivity and production of Angola’s smallholder agriculture.

The level of the PDO

In addition to being consistent with country and World Bank strategies, the PDOs were pitched
appropriately to address a development problem. Increases in yields, production, and the share of
production marketed are contributors to and indicators of growth in agriculture and its commercialization,
which would have the potential to reduce poverty among smallholders.

Overall, the relevance is high because the objectives were consistent with the strategies of the government
and the World Bank at appraisal and closing, and the PDO was pitched at an appropriate level.


Rating Relevance TBL




Rating
High



                                                                                                   Page 5 of 19
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  AO -Smallholder Agr. Dev. (P154447)



   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               To increase smallholder agriculture productivity of selected crops in the project areas.

               Rationale
               Theory of Change (ToC)

               A single ToC is relevant for achieving the three PDOs because all the outputs of the project contribute to all
               the objectives.

               The theory of change outlines that inputs such as: (1) strengthening the knowledge of improved agricultural
               practices among smallholder farmers by having them participate in FFS; (2) strengthening the capacity of
               relevant government institutions to provide farmers with the necessary services; (3) Enabling the research
               institutions to develop and demonstrate improved agricultural practices or technologies; (4) Helping a subset
               of the trained farmers with matching grants to implement projects that give them greater access to inputs,
               irrigated lands, and access to markets, and (5) technically supporting them develop and implement the sub-
               projects effectively.

               would lead to the following outputs: 1) Farmers trained in improved practices through FFS; 2) MINAGRI staff
               trained; 3) New technologies released; 4) Farmers supported with subprojects and; 5) Farmers technically
               supported.

               These outputs were expected to motivate farmers to change their production practices to lead to the following
               outcomes: 1) Increased yields; 2) Increased production; and 3) Higher share of production marketed.

               The key assumptions that needed to be held for the theory to work were: (1) the promoted improved practices
               translated into higher productivity, and (2) the farmers found them significantly beneficial and capable of
               adopting them.

               The ToC was clear and convincing. The outcomes could be attributed to project outputs, depending on how
               detailed the M&E and the impact study were. The ToC in the ICR, however, did not explicitly state the
               pathways through which outputs would contribute to achieving the PDOs. Hence, the changes in the area
               cultivated by farmers have not been tracked in the Results Framework.

               Outputs

               Capacity building

                     A total of 159,071 farmers (target of 150,000, target achieved) benefited from a total of 5,229 FFS, of
                      which 634 were established by the previous MOSAP project. The project aimed to put the farmers
                      through at least one cycle of the complete FFS cycle including cycle 1 (basic crops), cycle 2
                      (diversification), and cycle 3 (consolidation) (PAD, p. 43). Nearly 92 percent of them were in the
                      second or the third cycle or had finished the complete cycle. The training days offered were

                                                                                                                  Page 6 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   AO -Smallholder Agr. Dev. (P154447)



       5,442,564, almost double the target of 3,000,000. Women benefited from 50% of those days as
       targeted.
      628 MINAGRIF staff were trained, exceeding the target of 600. Of them, 480 directly supported
       SACDP by providing technical assistance to project beneficiaries.
      16 technologies were demonstrated in the project area, not achieving the target of 20.

The following additional achievements related to capacity building (not listed in the results framework) were
reported in the ICR:

      More than 40 technicians were trained in managing irrigation systems.
      Rehabilitated/constructed and equipped 18 residential houses for more than 100 extension workers
         and 11 offices for agricultural development stations (EDA) and other facilities.
      Provided Agrarian Development Institute (IDA) with FFS training manuals developed by FAO to
         strengthen its capacity to continue organizing FFSs.
      Computerized the Studies, planning, and Statistics Office (GEPE) in MINGRIF to enable them to
         collect data, analyze and report more quickly.
        Facilitated the institute of agricultural research (IIA) in the multiplication of basic seed and in the
         development, production, and dissemination of virus-resistant cassava cuttings.
        Improved the diagnostic and research services by IIA by rehabilitating and improving its facilities and
         working conditions; it included rehabilitation of soil, plant health, and biophysics laboratories, an office
         in Chianga, and acquisition of vehicles and machinery.
        Supported the Mazozo Technology Transfer Centre to introduce virus resistant cassava varieties from
         IITA, improved sweet potato varieties from CIP, improved maize varieties from CYMMIT and provided
         it with new equipment to build its capabilities to test and demonstrate new technologies.
        Supported training of farmer organizations to improve their management.

Support for increased production

      711 ha of the land were developed for irrigation and drainage, falling short of the target of 1,000, Only
       350 of the ha could be irrigated during the dry season because of insufficient water. (Poorly conducted
       feasibility studies had not accurately analyzed the seasonal water flows).
      13 operational water user associations were created or strengthened, not achieving the target of 32.
      179 post-harvest management and value-addition subprojects were financed, almost achieving the
       target of 200.
      1,076 subprojects under investment in production were supported, achieving the target of 1,000.

These additional achievements related to increased production, not included in the results framework, were
reported in the ICR:

      The project supported 1,586 small pedal pumps capable of irrigating 240 ha, which brought the total
         area that could be irrigated during the dry season to 590 ha.
      Enabled 23 farmer organizations to link with markets.
      Constructed 13 warehouses at agricultural services centers that enabled producers to aggregate their
         outputs.



                                                                                                       Page 7 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   AO -Smallholder Agr. Dev. (P154447)




      Introduced block farming which concentrated production making it easier to foster market linkages
       between traders and farmer organizations.

According to the Final Evaluation Report, the project met the targets for increasing the productivity of four
crops out of the six selected. The project targeted near doubling of the baseline yields. The yields in tons per
ha were as follows: Tomato: 21.40 (falling short of the target of 25.30); cassava: 21.40 (exceeding the target
of 18.20); beans: 0.63 (exceeding the target of 0.53); Irish potato: 10.58 (exceeding the target of 8.00);
cabbage: 24.10 (exceeding the target of 20.80); and Maize: 1.69 (almost achieving the target of 1.70).

The impact assessment survey suggested that factors beyond the control of the project – late arrival of rainfall
and dry spells – affected the yields in 2020/21. However some of the factors cited for lower than expected
tomato yields, such as low quality of seeds, inadequate fertilizers used, and pests and diseases were within
the control of the project.

Overall, the project improved crop productivity significantly. An analysis using the “difference in difference
approach” showed that all the crops outperformed the fields of project participants compared to non-project
counterparts. Yields obtained by project participants in tons per ha compared to yields obtained by non-
participants in control areas in parentheses were as follows: Maize: 1.69 (1.06); cassava: 22.75 (13.27);
beans: 0.70 (0.50); potato: 10.79 (6.50); tomato: 20.78 (13.27) and cabbage: 22.75 (9.91).

Productivity increase, however, varied among the beneficiaries depending on the extent to which they
benefited from the activities of the project. The beneficiaries could be put into three categories: category 1,
who participated in FFS only made up two-thirds or 66.6% of the beneficiaries; category 2, who in addition to
participating in FFS received inputs (fertilizers and seeds), but did not have access to irrigation made up less
than a third or 31.7% of the beneficiaries; and category 3, who participated in FFS, received input support and
had access to irrigation made up 1.7% of the beneficiaries.

Category 1 farmers harvested yields that were 43.13% higher than yields obtained by non-participants. A
2020 survey showed that they selectively adopted components of the technology package promoted: seed
selection by 76.7%; plant spacing by 66.7%; crop rotation by 64.9%; soil cover practices by 42%; and fertilizer
application by only 26 percent. There isn’t information to suggest the relative contribution of the adoption of
various practices to yields. Seed selection, which would have included the adoption of newer varieties,
adopted by three-quarters of the farmers appears to have been a key contributor.

Category 2 farmers harvest yields that were 80.96% higher than the control group, a yield increment nearly
double that achieved by category one farmers. Their use of seeds and fertilizers would have enabled them to
significantly increase their yields – the ICR does not offer information on the extent of their fertilizer use.

Less than 2 percent of the beneficiaries who fell into category 3 harvested yields that were more than double
(112.02%) the yields of non-participants. Irrigation is likely to have enabled them to add another 30 percent to
the yields.

The project trained more than the targeted number of farmers. It almost met the target for demonstrating the
technologies. It supported the beneficiaries with more than planned subprojects to increase production,
irrigation, and post-harvest processes, but because of poor technical support, the area that could be irrigated
during summer was less than planned. The outcome target to nearly double yields was ambitious although it
would only take them closer to SSA yields. The final evaluation reports that farmers adopted the technologies
to various degrees. The project met the objective of increasing smallholder agriculture productivity of selected

                                                                                                   Page 8 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   AO -Smallholder Agr. Dev. (P154447)



crops in the project areas, except for narrowly missing the target yields of two crops. The rating, therefore, is
Substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To increase smallholder agricultural production of selected crops in the project areas.

Rationale
The ToC presented for the first PDO holds good for this objective as well. Smallholders can produce more by
harvesting larger yields or increasing the area they cultivate. All of the outputs of the project contribute to
increasing yields. With the knowledge of practices and availability of technologies they would adopt yield-
enhancing improved practices, but their limited access to resources may limit them from adopting to the level
they consider desirable. When supported to gain access to inputs, irrigated land, and access to markets, they
would adopt the practices even to a greater degree and increase the area they cultivate.

Outputs

As indicated earlier, the project met or nearly met the output targets: exceeded the number of farmers and
ministry staff trained; nearly met the number of technologies demonstrated; supported more subprojects than
intended although they fell short of the target for developing land for irrigation and drainage.

Outcomes

The production of three principal crops (cassava, maize and beans) exceeded the targets. Actual production
achieved against targets in tons were as follows: cassava: 564,400 (505,000); maize: 163,567 (105,811); and
beans: 28,038 (21,059). The project targeted to increase the production of cassava by 31%, the production
of maize by 73%, and the production of beans by 31%. They exceeded the target, as production of cassava,
maize and beans increased by 46%, 167%, and 74% respectively.

There is also evidence that increased production increased the income of smallholders, enabling them to
save and invest. According to the livelihood assessment in the Final evaluation report (PCR para 39), the
increase in income enabled project beneficiaries to invest in assets: 52 percent invested in improving their
housing; 23 percent invested in means of transport (ox carts, bicycles and motorbikes); 35.8 percent invested
in factors of production (report doesn’t make clear what they are); and 62 percent invested in livestock. The
report does not provide comparable statistics for the control group. It also reports that increasing agriculture
production improved nutrition and food security without offering any metrics.

The project met or nearly met the output targets. The financing of subprojects that supported production,
including the land developed for irrigation and drainage, would have been particularly relevant for increasing
production. Targets for increasing smallholder production were exceeded. The objective to increase



                                                                                                    Page 9 of 19
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                AO -Smallholder Agr. Dev. (P154447)



                            smallholder agricultural production of selected crops in the project areas was thus substantially achieved. The
                            rating is therefore Substantial.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


                            OBJECTIVE 3
                            Objective
                            To increase the share of production marketed in the project areas.

                            Rationale
                            The ToC presented earlier holds for this objective as well. Smallholders would sell a greater portion of what
                            they produce when they produce more (from either higher yields or cultivating over a larger area) and or when
                            their market access improves (from their ability to store or transform what they have produced or established
                            links with traders, for example).

                            Outputs

                            All the outputs contribute to achieving this objective. Benefitting from post-harvest subprojects would be
                            particularly relevant, but the ICR does not offer adequate information to attribute the changes to post-harvest
                            subprojects.

                            Outcomes

                            The project delivered the outputs as targeted. The project targeted to increase the share marketed from 17%
                            to 57%. The beneficiaries increased the share of production they marketed to 69.2 percent, exceeding the
                            target.

                            The achievement of the first two objectives, increasing yields and production, along with subprojects that
                            supported post-harvest management and value addition, would have enabled smallholders to market a
                            greater share of their production. The rating, therefore, is substantial.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The project trained more than the targeted number of farmers. It supported the beneficiaries with more than
                            planned subprojects to increase production, irrigation and post-harvest processes, but because of poor


                                                                                                                             Page 10 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      AO -Smallholder Agr. Dev. (P154447)



  technical support, the area that could be irrigated during summer was less than planned. Two of the targets
  were ambitious, to nearly double yields and to increase the share marketed from 17 to 57 percent. The
  targets to increase production were modest except for maize. The project met the objectives except for
  narrowly missing the target yields of two crops. Efficacy ratings for all the objectives are substantial. The
  overall efficacy rating therefore is Substantial.



  Overall Efficacy Rating
  Substantial



5. Efficiency
Economic and financial efficiency

Ex ante:

A cost – benefit analysis was done using “with” and “without project” scenarios. At appraisal, MOSAP baseline
study from 2012 and yields from 2013/14 were used for the “without project” scenario. A distinction was made
between the beneficiaries who go through only FFS and those who receive investment support in addition. The
first group was expected to achieve only 25 percent increase in yields, and the 50,000 receiving input support
were expected to achieve higher yields.

At appraisal, the analysis estimated that the project would increase production of vegetable crops by an
estimated 118 to 193 percent and food crops by 31 to 78 percent. From the fifth year onwards, the estimated an
incremental production were 44,000 tons of maize, 118,000 tons of cassava, 12,000 tons of Irish potato, 5,000
tons of beans, 383 tons of soybean, 80,000 tons of tomato and 5,000 tons of cabbage.

Over a 20 year period, an Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR) of 19 percent was expected, and a Net
Present Value of US$50 million with discounting at 10 percent.

Ex post:

The ICR repeated the cost-benefit exercise. The model showed that net household income increased from
about US$ 558 per year without the project scenarios to about US$ 709 per year with only FFS training and to
about US$ 1,139 with investment support as well.

The project yielded an updated EIRR of 25 percent compared to the appraisal estimate of 19 percent. The
updated NPV is US$ 84.1 with a discounting of 10 percent as done previously (US$ 150.2 million at 6 percent
discount as recommended now.)

Administrative efficiency

Many shortcomings in planning and implementation affected efficiency: i) there were considerable delays in
procurement related to farmer training, construction and supporting farmers with investment in production and
marketing – this resulted in a 12 month extension of the project; ii) only 350 ha could be irrigated during summer


                                                                                                    Page 11 of 19
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       AO -Smallholder Agr. Dev. (P154447)



against the planned 1,000 ha because of poorly conducted hydrological studies that did not model the water flow
properly; and iii) there were cost overruns in housing and office construction.

Several aspects of planning and implementation contributed positively to efficiency: 1) to organize FFS, the
project partnered with Food and Agricultural Organization of the United Nations (FAO), which had done the
same for the previous project; this familiarity offset the consequences of delay in onboarding FAO; ii) project
was built on a good technical grounding by collaborating with institutions with vast experience, such as, Brazilian
Agricultural Research Corporation (EMBRAPA),International Institute of Tropical Agriculture (IITA), (International
potato centre (CIP), and International Maize and Wheat Improvement centre (CYMMIT) to acquire improved
planting material and to test them locally; iii) staff continuity in project preparation helped in ensuring the lessons
of MOSAP being incorporated into SADCP; iv)) the government supported the project preparation as it was
consistent with its policies and plans; v) extensive consultations were held with the government and other
development partners.

The project design was informed by sector and institutional risk analysis, but it failed to anticipate or adequately
mitigate capacity challenges that it later faced with regard to procurement and irrigation development.

The project reallocated funds as necessary and drew on resources from other projects to achieve the project
objectives. However, the reallocation resulted in a 70% increase in operation costs, an increase that cannot be
justified by a year increase in project life and a modest increase in the number of communes served. The
estimated returns were higher than anticipated. Efficiency overall is rated Substantial with some moderate
shortcomings.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                 Rate Available?              Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                        0
 Appraisal                                                   19.00
                                                                                         Not Applicable
                                                                                        0
 ICR Estimate                                                25.00
                                                                                         Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The objectives of the project were highly relevant and consistent with the strategies of the government and the
World Bank to assist the government. The PDOs were pitched at the appropriate level to address the
development problem. The project achieved the PDOs. The efficacy was rated substantial. The estimated



                                                                                                        Page 12 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      AO -Smallholder Agr. Dev. (P154447)



returns from the project were higher than anticipated. Efficiency was rated substantial. The outcome of the
project, therefore, is rated as satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The risks of development outcomes achieved by this project not being maintained relate to whether i) the
understanding of good agricultural practices farmers obtained through FFS is adequate – and public
institutions continue to supply technologies and train them – for them to continue improving production
practices, to maintain yields and incomes, ii) farmers continue to have access to two critical inputs,
seeds/planting materials and fertilizers, iii) farmers will continue to have access to markets and demand for
their outputs, and iv) farmers to can adapt to climate changes.

Technical risks:

      The project’s impact survey showed that FFS participants had learned the skills and practices
       promoted under the project, relating to cultural practices, integrated pest management, and post-
       harvest handling. But they mainly benefitted from cycle one of training, which included the basics.
       The ICR also notes that the cycle one training may have included aspects the participants were
       familiar with. It is unclear whether the smallholders developed an understanding of principles that will
       enable them to adopt the new practices as conditions change because they may not continue
       receiving technical support at the same level in the future. For example, the cash that the government
       contributed to the project was used to hire 480 technicians to achieve the desired ratio between
       extension workers and farmers. Still, because of budgetary limitations, only 248 of them were
       retained.
      The demand for food will remain high in Angola, and elsewhere, the tastes and consumption patterns
       of urban consumers are likely to change, with an emphasis on food safety and increasing demand for
       fresh fruits and vegetables. While the project’s focus on food safety and vegetable production may
       help the trained in diversifying to meet the changing consumer demand – the project impact
       assessment offered anecdotal evidence to suggest that producers may already be moving away from
       producing cassava -- they would need to keep production and marketing costs low and improve
       quality to compete with imports.

Government ownership risks:

      According to the impact survey, the farmers who received input support achieved higher yields than
       those who received only training, presumably by applying more fertilizers. Aware that without support,
       the demand for fertilizer may decline, the government allocated US$ 1.5 million in 2023, after the
       project’s closing, to continue to support such activities. The prospects for continued fertilizer use by
       farmers will depend on how global fertilizer prices will change relative to domestic output prices and
       the extent to which the government could intervene to keep its use profitable.
      The project laid the foundation to give farmers greater access to improved seeds: development of
       seeds and planting materials by the research institutions; their multiplication by the private sector; and

                                                                                                     Page 13 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     AO -Smallholder Agr. Dev. (P154447)



       farmers’ ability to access them through their organizations with the help of NGOs. Even during the
       project's life, the seeds supplied by the research system may not have been adequate. According to
       the report, they supplied 15 tons of corn seeds and 1.5 million cassava cuttings, which would have
       been adequate only for 600 ha of corn and 1,200 ha of cassava. The domestic multiplication and
       distribution systems are still nascent, and their development will depend on how well the public
       institutions perform. The supply of planting material may remain a challenge in the short to medium
       term without continued support from public institutions.

Environmental risk: Climate change will continue to be a threat because rainfed agriculture is practiced in
nearly 100 percent of the project area. Several CSA practices the project promoted should help farmers
adapt, but whether they were among the practices farmers adopted is unclear.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The objectives of the project were fully consistent with the priority placed on food security and agricultural
  productivity growth by the government’s national development plan and the agricultural development plan
  for 2014 to 2016. It was based on an underlying theory of change (although not articulated then) that was
  reasonable, with expected outputs and outcomes that would plausibly contribute to meeting the
  objectives. It drew lessons from a previous project in which a main component, FSS, had proven to be
  effective. Given the project’s focus on promoting improved technologies, the project collaborated with
  FAO, which organized farmer field schools, and research institutions such as EMBRAPA, CIP, IITA, and
  CYMMIT. The financial and economic analysis showed high benefits and that the project would benefit
  women as well, with its focus on gender. The project developed adequate social and environmental
  frameworks and it disclosed them as required.

  Project management was housed in the Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries which had implemented the
  previous project. The risk assessment was thorough and noted that institutional and fiduciary capacities
  were weak and that the project would likely experience weak procurement and fiduciary management
  (PAD, p. 23). It also suggested that the risks of weak capacity would be overcome by recruiting the
  needed skilled personnel on a “need-basis,” thus postponing remedial action until a critical shortfall was
  noticed. The appraisal also underestimated the cost of construction although some of the cost increases
  were due to the unanticipated COVID-19 pandemic.

  The quality at entry was only moderately satisfactory because although the project was well designed
  and it followed the implementation of a similar but smaller project, an effective plan was not put in place
  to address the risks the project anticipated.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory




                                                                                                     Page 14 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     AO -Smallholder Agr. Dev. (P154447)




b. Quality of supervision
 An average of two annual formal implementation support missions were conducted as planned, i.e.,
 13, supervision missions were conducted in total. During the COVID restrictions, the team interacted
 virtually with the project team. The implementation support team included all the expertise needed to
 support the project activities and meet the fiduciary requirements except for the social and environmental
 safeguards specialists, who joined only at the end of 2019. The project team interacted with the Luanda
 World Bank office continuously to resolve implementation issues as they arose. The ICR reports that the
 project benefited from clear action plans offered by candid mission aide memoirs, but the ICR offers little
 information on how supervision missions addressed: i) whether projects outputs were contributing to
 achieving the objectives, ii) the procurement delays that the project faced and iii) the failure to meet social
 and environmental safeguards. The ICR (para 57) notes that 'the team could have been a bit more
 proactive in monitoring compliance of environmental and social safeguards in particular.

 The quality of supervision is rated as moderately satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The ToC was clear in assuming that the project outputs would contribute to achieving the PDOs. The
 indicators selected were specific, measurable, relevant and time bound. Multiple pathways, in the form of
 behavioral responses of farmers or intermediate outcomes, would lead to achieving the project objectives.
 The results framework kept track annually of the delivery of outputs and the extent to which objectives are
 met. The ToC in the ICR, however, did not explicitly state the pathways through which outputs would
 contribute to achieving the PDOs, such as the changes in the area cultivated by farmers have not been
 tracked in the Results Framework. The monitoring plan included the commissioning of two evaluations, one
 at mid-term and one at project closure.



b. M&E Implementation
  The M&E was housed in the PIU with an officer hired to implement it. The project expected to make use
  of existing sources of information, regular data collection and special surveys. A baseline survey was
  conducted in 2017 and the ICR reports that they were followed by annual surveys although no data from
  the annual surveys is presented.




                                                                                                      Page 15 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     AO -Smallholder Agr. Dev. (P154447)



c. M&E Utilization
  Apart from the information on project outputs delivered, most of the information in the ICR comes from a
  final impact survey. The ICR notes that midway through the project, M&E data was used to update the
  economic analysis to ascertain the project’s feasibility. It also notes that data on physical progress in
  expansion of cropped areas was used to calibrate the support for land preparation and field support
  activities. Data from annual post-harvest surveys was used to gauge the performance of the FFS
  training and inform the content of the training program.

  The overall quality of M&E is rated as Substantial with some moderate shortcomings. The impact
  assessment done at the end of the project provided robust evidence.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was rated Category B with the triggering of four operational safeguards: environmental
   assessment OP/BP 4.01, pest management 4.09, involuntary settlement OP/BP 4.12, and safety of dams
   OP/BP 4.37. The project prepared the requisite frameworks and disclosed them. The PIU disregarded the
   requirements. (P51).

   The government prepared an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF). MINAGRI
   prepared an Integrated Pest Management Framework (IPMF) with guidelines on the use of agrochemicals.
   The safety of dams was triggered only as a precautionary measure. The Government prepared a
   Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) to prepare site-specific resettlement action plans (RAP). They were
   publicly disclosed in December 2015.

   Environmental clearance

   There were major shortcomings in the implementation of the frameworks. The project’s Environmental and
   Social level of compliance conducted before the project closure noted that the PIU systematically
   disregarded the requirement to subject subprojects to environmental and social screening. The compliance
   evaluation exercise identified further gaps: (i) poor quality of the Environmental and Social instruments
   prepared for the subprojects throughout project implementation – in some cases not preparing them (ii)
   failure to have several Environmental and Social instruments reviewed and cleared by the Bank Team
   (especially during the Covid-19 pandemic) in addition to not informing the Bank’s Environmental and Social
   Specialists about the implementation of some activities beforehand (iii) lack of regular reporting from the
   PIU regarding the Project’s ESHS performance; (iv) lack of ESHS specialist in the PIU team during some
   periods throughout project implementation, due to significant turnover of these specialists, and the lack of a
   dedicated Social Safeguards Specialist. However, the team of consultants that did the project impact
   assessment in October 2022 noted that despite these shortcomings and non-compliance with the policy,
   there did not seem to be significant environmental damage based on the sites they visited.




                                                                                                   Page 16 of 19
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    AO -Smallholder Agr. Dev. (P154447)



  Social Compliance

  There was no individual staff in the PCU dedicated to monitoring social compliance. The team of
  consultants referred to above observed some social safeguards compliance issues while they were in the
  field including: (i) incomplete implementation of compensation measures for loss of property or access to
  land without an approved Resettlement Action Plan (ii) the lack of implementation, mainly in 2020, of the
  Grievance Redress Mechanism; and (iii) delays in paying project workers’ wages. These issues were
  resolved by the time the project closed in December 2022.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Procurement

  The project failed to comply with the World Bank procurement guidelines, characterized by incomplete
  document filing and signing and extension of contracts without the Bank’s no-objection. When these
  shortcomings were brought to light in May 2021, they were retroactively rectified, including through
  procurement post review (PPR) of four contracts worth US$ 1.0 million, which was done almost at the end
  of the project. The last support mission rated procurement performance as unsatisfactory.

  Procurement was also delayed by lengthy procurement reviews of high-value contracts by the
  government’s Account Tribunal.

  Financial Management

  Limitations in preparing realistic work plans and following proper procedures characterized the Project's
  first two years of implementation. Significant improvements were made from Year 3 onwards. The Project
  complied with the monthly production of IFRs and the reconciling of project accounts on a quarterly basis.
  Five independent audits from 2017 to 2021 found all material matters satisfactory. The 2022 audit was still
  ongoing when writing the ICR report. By the project’s closing, Financial Management was rated as
  Moderately Satisfactory.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  By October 2021, 240 credit and savings groups had emerged with estimated savings of US$ 500,000 to
  offer credit to their members to buy services or invest in small enterprises. It is not clear from the ICR
  whether the farmer organizations that the project had established turned themselves into credit and
  savings groups as well.




d. Other


                                                                                                 Page 17 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     AO -Smallholder Agr. Dev. (P154447)



   The project targeted to ensure that 50 percent of the beneficiaries of its activities would be women. It came
   close to meeting all the targets, exceeding in some activities:

         Of the 6,839 (target 6,000) farmers that participated in literacy programs, 70 percent were women.
         Women’s share was 49 percent in i) the number of direct beneficiaries, ii) farmers benefitting from
          FFS training, iii) client days of training received, and iv) the number of beneficiaries of subprojects.
         The Final Evaluation Report found no statistically significant difference between the yields obtained
          by men and women farmers. And women obtained marginally higher vegetable yields.

    However, the report noted that few women took leadership positions in FFS, except that they held the
   treasurer position on par with men, while men held 80 percent of other positions.



11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                     IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Satisfactory           Satisfactory
                                Moderately
Bank Performance                                       Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                  Substantial            Substantial

Quality of ICR                  ---                    Substantial


12. Lessons

The following lessons are derived from the ICR with some modification of language.

Several lessons emerged from the experience of organizing Farmer Field Schools.

      Calibrating training to build on participants' knowledge by assessing what they
       already know can help in more effective use of training resources. During the early
       post-war years, Angolan farmers had limited skills. Therefore, the training dealt with the
       basics and was sufficiently long. However, as the knowledge of basics became more
       widespread among farmers, the FFS training wasn’t suitably modified and shortened to
       enable many more farmers to complete basic training to graduate to advanced issues.
      Paying attention to building in-house capabilities while using a third party to provide
       training can increase the chances of sustaining training activities beyond the life of a
       project. FAO provided technical support for organizing FFS, which included training the
       trainers in the ministry. IEG was informed by the Bank team (09.13.23) that the government
       staff established 600 FFS on their own as part of the training. As a result, the government
       can now organize FFS in the follow-up project without the support of FAO.
      Complementing training of farmers in improved agricultural practices with
       interventions that help them gain access to inputs can improve their chances of
       adopting the practices they have learned about. The farmers who benefited from only

                                                                                                      Page 18 of 19
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       AO -Smallholder Agr. Dev. (P154447)



         training raised their yields by about 40 percent. But those that received support harvested
         nearly 80 percent higher yields.

In low-capacity environments where the absence of required skills is anticipated, an upfront
investment to address them can reduce or eliminate the risks of implementation delays. In
this project, delays were expected because of a shortage of specific skills, but a decision was made
to address them as they arose. The strategy failed. An upfront investment, which might have proven
unnecessary, would have paid off through the timely execution of project activities and compliance
with the needed safeguards.

Where technical capacity within institutions is weak, implementing small-scale, low-tech
options, if available, is superior to embarking on more extensive, complex options that
demand institutional capacity. Supporting small-scale irrigation investments such as in pedal
pumps that farmers managed individually worked fine. Building larger systems requiring data
analytical capacity and involving contracts to build and maintain was less successful.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provided a good overview of the rationale for the project, the activities, and the outcomes. The ICR is
candid and consistent with the guidelines. The impact assessment done at the end of the project offers
substantive evidence of PDOs being achieved. The analysis could have been improved to offer greater insights
into whether the theory of change held and more details and clarity on outputs, particularly on participation in
FFS and the nature of subprojects supported.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                       Page 19 of 19
