     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     AR Chronic Conditions and Injuries (P133193)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0023573

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P133193                                     AR Chronic Conditions and Injuries

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Argentina                                   Health, Nutrition & Population


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-85080                                 31-Dec-2020                                         302,352,189.50

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 11-Jun-2015                                30-Nov-2022

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           350,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                            303,815,513.00                                               0.00

 Actual                                        303,815,513.00                                               0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Judith Hahn Gaubatz         Salim J. Habayeb             Eduardo Fernandez               IEGHC (Unit 2)
                                                          Maldonado




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Loan Agreement (page 5) and the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, page 5), the project
   objectives were as follows:




                                                                                                   Page 1 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     AR Chronic Conditions and Injuries (P133193)



         To contribute to (i) improving the readiness of public health facilities to deliver higher quality non-
          communicable disease (NCD) services for vulnerable population groups and expanding the scope of
          selected services; and (ii) protecting vulnerable population groups against prevalent NCD risk factors.

   Key outcome targets were revised during the project restructuring in June 2019; however, as these
   were upward revisions, a split evaluation is not required.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Note: The appraised component costs below are for the total project cost (IBRD loan and Borrower
   contribution); however, as the borrower subsequently changed its contribution modalities, the revised and
   actual component costs are unknown, therefore only the Loan portion is reported).

   Component 1: Improving the readiness of public health care facilities to provide higher quality services for
   NCDs for vulnerable population groups and expanding the scope of selected services (Appraisal: US$
   189.0 million; Revised: US$ 239.3 million; Actual: US$ 193.1 million): This component aimed to finance
   payments under Eligible Expenditure Programs (EEPs) to implement changes in the model of primary care
   to provide detection and control of NCDs for vulnerable populations. Activities included: training of health
   personnel on early detection and control of NCDs; development of clinical guidelines on NCDs; adoption of
   electronic medical records system; increased coordination among primary care facilities and hospitals to
   ensure integration and continuity of services; and development of self-care education modules.

   Component 2: Protecting vulnerable population groups against prevalent NCD risk factors (Appraisal: US$
   73.0 million; Revised: US$ 38.2 million; Actual: US$ 38.7 million): This component aimed to implement
   population-based multisectoral interventions focused on healthy diets, physical activity, and tobacco control,
   with a focus on vulnerable population groups. Activities included: developing local spaces for physical
   activity; promotion of healthy diets (including sodium and trans fat reduction, promoting fruits and
   vegetables); and implementation of tobacco control policies.

   For components 1 and 2, project resources were to be transferred from the National Ministry of Health to
   the provincial Ministries of Health to reimburse eligible expenditures, subject to the achievement of targets
   defined as transfer-linked indicators (TLIs).

   Component 3: Supporting the National and Provincial Ministries of Health to improve surveillance,
   monitoring, promotion, prevention, and control of NCDs, injuries, and their risk factors (Appraisal: US$
   175.5 million; Revised: US$ 25.6 million; Actual: US$ 71.2 million): This component supported



                                                                                                       Page 2 of 15
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    AR Chronic Conditions and Injuries (P133193)



  strengthening capacity of the National Ministry of Health and provincial Ministries of Health and related
  agencies to design and implement policies on NCDs and health promotion.

  Due to additional available resources (peso depreciation and government's decision to finance a substantial
  share of the goods and consultancy services under component 3 with domestic funding) and changes to the
  government strategy on NCDs (including a shift away from actions at the municipal level to focus solely at
  the provincial level), the following revisions were made to the components at the project restructuring in
  June 2019:

        Definition of Areas of Service Responsibility (ASRs) for each primary health care facility and active
          enrollment of population within the ASR.
        Reformulation of several TLIs to better track actions to improve management of NCDs.
        Inclusion of a National Eligible Expenditure Program (NEEP) with similar features as the EEPs,
         which included the financing of NCD essential drugs, cancer and immunosuppressive drugs, and the
         training of health staff in family and community health and NCDs.
        Measures to strengthen actions to prevent childhood obesity and enhance tobacco control.
        Research studies to generate evidence on interventions that reduce NCDs and risk factors.




e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project cost

        The estimated project cost at appraisal was US$ 437.5 million. As the sources of borrower
          contribution changed during the project period, the actual amount of borrower contribution is
          unknown and therefore the actual project cost is also unknown.

  Financing

        The project was financed by an IBRD loan of US$ 350.0 million, of which US$ 303.8 million
         disbursed.
        US$ 46.2 million of the loan was cancelled given the resources freed up from the depreciation of the
         Argentinean Peso and the decision to finance several activities under Component 3 using domestic
         resources.

  Borrower contribution

        The estimated Borrower contribution was US$ 87.5 million. As noted above, the actual Borrower
          contribution is unknown.

  Dates

        June 11, 2015: Project approval.
        November 20, 2015: Project effectiveness.
        July 6, 2018: Mid-term Review.

                                                                                                   Page 3 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     AR Chronic Conditions and Injuries (P133193)



         June 28, 2019: The project was restructured to include additional activities which reflected a shift in
          the government NCD strategy. Also, additional transfer-linked and intermediate indicators were
          added to better measure actions to reduce tobacco use and to account for new activities in
          childhood obesity. The project closing date was extended from December 2020 to December
          2021. Several targets were revised upward to account for the one-year project extension.
         September 30, 2021: The closing date was extended from December 2021 to October 2022 to allow
          for completion of activities.
         October 11, 2022: The closing date was extended from October 2022 to November 2022 to allow for
          completion of activities.
         November 30, 2022: Project closing.



3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Argentina has seen a significant reduction in poverty and inequality in recent decades (extreme poverty was
4.7% in 2013; the proportion of the population with unmet basic needs was 12.5% in 2010; the middle class
represented 53.7% of the population in 2012). However, access to services remains unequal, with 38% of
the population not covered by social or private health insurance (2010). This vulnerable segment of the
population is more likely to be poor, since it lacks formal employment and is also less likely to receive
priority health services. Non-communicable diseases (NCDs) generate a heavy health and economic
burden for the poor, as they tend to receive fewer screening and control services for NCDs. In 2010, NCDs
were responsible for 81% of all deaths and 62% of the years of potential life lost in the country, with
cardiovascular diseases causing a third of all deaths, cancer causing 22%, and chronic respiratory diseases
about 9%.

Public primary health care facilities in Argentina have traditionally focused on maternal-child health
interventions and have not completely adapted to the changing needs of the aging vulnerable population,
namely related to NCDs. Shortcomings in the management of NCDs include the absence of adult outpatient
medical records, nominalized patient records, and clinical guidelines; lack of access to scheduled attention
and a clinical information system that accounts for the quality of care; poor coordination across different
levels of care; inadequate follow-up of patients; and unsuitable professional profiles.

In 2009, the government developed the National Strategy for the Prevention and Control of NCDs. Other
more recent health sector strategies included the aim to achieve Universal Health Coverage and to
implement the primary health care strategy which includes a care model for NCDs. The National Health
Care Quality Plan 2021-2024 introduced an additional change in primary health care that centered around
individuals, families, and the community.

The Bank's Country Partnership Strategy for FY 2015-18 included achieving universal health coverage with
a focus on the nine poorest provinces as a key results area, noting the inclusion of non-communicable
diseases in the health sector approach. The more recent Country Partnership Framework for FY 2019-22
identified Improving the service delivery model for effective health services as an Objective Area, although
not specifying any particular NCD-related indicators or interventions.



                                                                                                     Page 4 of 15
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      AR Chronic Conditions and Injuries (P133193)




               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To contribute to improving the readiness of public health facilities to deliver higher quality non-communicable
                             disease (NCD) services for vulnerable population groups and expanding the scope of selected services

                             Rationale
                             The theory of change was clear. The main intervention was the improvement and expansion of publicly
                             provided NCD health care services, in order to reduce the health and economic burden of NCDs. This
                             outcome was likely to be achieved by supporting the implementation of the new model for NCD Care (Modelo
                             de Atención de Personas con Enfermedades Crónicas - MAPEC) which includes the development of NCD-
                             specific skills among health personnel; clinical guides and service delivery protocols; NCD care networks and
                             equipment; health information systems; and the promotion of self-care among patients.

                             The project specifically focused on vulnerable people, defined as those not covered by a social security
                             scheme or private insurance, and therefore receiving health services free of charge from public providers
                             at Centros de Atención Primaria de Salud – CAPSs . According to the 2010 Census, about a third of the
                             Argentine population was uninsured, with those in the highest risk age bracket (40–64 years) comprising
                             approximately 3.2 million people. 1671 CAPS were selected for participation in the project.

                             This component financed the transfer of resources from the National Ministry of Health (NMOH) to the
                             Provincial Ministries of Health (PMOHs) to reimburse eligible expenditure programs (EEPs)
                             upon achievement of targets defined as transfer-linked indicators (TLIs). The expenditures included in the
                             selected EEPs were personnel salaries, logistical services needed to implement these activities, such as
                             utilities (i.e., water and electricity), communications, transport, and per diems, essential drugs for treatment of
                             NCDs, and treatments for oncological diseases and transplants.

                             Outputs

                                        Implementation of the MAPEC model of NCD primary care, which focused on providing continuous
                                          and programmed care to patients and supporting patients' self-care. Progress towards the adoption of
                                          MAPEC was monitored through the application of a certification instrument (according to the PAD
                                          (page 34), this instrument monitored whether the following features were present: (i) evidence-based
                                          clinical guidelines in use; (ii) trained health care personnel in the interpretation and use of these
                                          guidelines; (iii) developed health care networks of increasing complexity to ensure the continuity of
                                          care of patients with NCDs; (iv) developed health information systems that would allow patient follow-
                                          up among different providers, support their self-care, and provide support for clinical decision making
                                          (e.g., electronic medical records); (v) capacity to support patient self-care; and others). 71.5% of

                                                                                                                                   Page 5 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   AR Chronic Conditions and Injuries (P133193)



         CAPS were evaluated regarding progress in implementing MAPEC (original target: 60%; revised
         target: 65%). Moreover, 630 CAPS are implementing improvement processes for the provision of
         quality NCD health services.
        Development and implementation of clinical guidelines at CAPS and hospitals.
        Training of 4,828 health personnel on early detection and control of NCDs, self-care, family and
         community health (original target: 3,000; revised target: 3,500). 932 CAPS had at least 10% of health
         team members trained in MAPEC implementation, and 722 had at least 25%.
        Assignment of the population located within the catchment area of a CAPS to Family and Community
         Health Teams (FCHTs), including actions such as digitalized personal identification, address
         georeferencing, and in-person contact with CAPS staff. 431 CAPS enrolled at least 50% of their
         service population. Health agents conducted active searches to identify people with NCDs among
         their designated ASRs; 528 CAPSs had conducted searches for people with high cardiovascular
         risk, 795 CAPSs for people with high blood pressure, 767 CAPSs for people with diabetes, and 548
         for people with chronic respiratory diseases. The ICR (page 20) noted that this activity was a
         particularly notable contribution to increase demand for NCD services and served as a critical
         cornerstone to expand access to routine preventative, control, and treatment health services of the
         population and to enhance accountability at the CAPS level.
        Reorganization of provincial health networks to ensure continuity and coordination of services. 431
         CAPSs implemented a referral-counter referral system that included standardized documents for
         referrals to a higher level of care and counter-referrals from higher to lower levels of care, and results
         of the consultation with the specialist.
        Development of standards for the electronic medical records system (EMRS), including provision of
         computers. Staff from 455 CAPS received training on the implementation of EMRS. CAPSs have
         also implemented additional functionalities, including: an electronic drug prescription repository in 371
         CAPSs, so that prescriptions made by professionals are registered in the EMRS; and an additional 28
         CAPSs have also implemented procedures to inform the National Health Supplies Monitoring System
         of the dispensing of medicines. The project also provided support for the implementation of the
         National Digital Health Strategy 2018-2024, which established the conceptual guidelines for the
         design and development of interoperable health information systems at the primary care level.

The ICR (page 24) noted that disbursements under the four Disbursement-Linked Indicators (DLIs) that were
added under the 2019 restructuring were significantly lower than anticipated, resulting in a reallocation of
resources to other categories under the 2021 restructuring. The main factor was the delay in procurement
processes for drug purchases due to tight budgetary restrictions as well as the lower than anticipated cost of
training activities due to the peso devaluation. Despite the lower disbursements, training activities were still
completed and NCD drugs were subsequently purchased by provinces.

Outcomes

      69.8% of CAPS were certified to provide quality services for the detection and control of NCDs,
       surpassing the original target of 50% and the revised target of 60%.
      877 CAPS were providing new services for early detection of colon cancer, surpassing the original
       target of 700 and achieving the revised target of 850.
      CAPSs were implementing protocols for the regular monitoring, control, and managements of NDCs,
       as reflected by assessments of cardiovascular risk in 938 CAPSs, high blood pressure in 1,052
       CAPSs, diabetes in 1,056 CAPS, and chronic respiratory diseases in 1,031 CAPS.


                                                                                                     Page 6 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   AR Chronic Conditions and Injuries (P133193)




        803 CAPS were providing self-management education to NCD patients; 394 CAPS offered intensive
         programs to promote health lifestyles, and 1,058 CAPS were utilizing brochures/ posters for the self-
         management of NCDs and risk factors.
        448 CAPSs implemented an electronic medical records system (EMRS).
        466 CAPS have implemented an electronic appointment system to support programmed care using
         the Provincial Master Patient Index, which in turn is connected to the National Digital Health Network.
        1,029 CAPSs were maintaining a registry of patients with high cardiovascular risk, 1,059 CAPSs with
         patients with diabetes and hypertension, 1,020 CAPSs with patients with chronic respiratory
         diseases. With regards to health outcomes:

With regards to health outcomes among vulnerable groups in project CAPs,

        The percentage of diabetes patients with a HbA1c lower than 9% increased from 7.1% in 2020 to
         11.5% in 2021.
        The percentage of hypertension patients with arterial pressure lower than 140/90 increased from 6.1%
         in 2020 to 8% in 2021.
        While the above figures capture only a short time frame, it should be noted that: (i) no data existed
         prior to 2020; and (ii) the increase was achieved despite the drop in the demand for NCD care during
         the COVID-19 pandemic.

Achievement is rated High, as intended outcomes were achieved and some targets were exceeded.



Rating
High


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To contribute to protecting vulnerable population groups against prevalent NCD risk factors.

Rationale
The theory of change was clear. The activities centered on promoting healthy habits among the population to
address the risk factors underlying NCDs, including tobacco use, sodium and trans fat consumption, poor
nutrition, and lack of physical activity. Activities to increase public knowledge on risk factors, incentivize
behavior change, and increase surveillance of NCDs and the risk factors were likely to contribute to the
outcome to protect vulnerable groups from NCDs. As with Component 1, results-based financing in the form
of Transfer-Linked Indicators (TLIs) was the primary financing mechanism at the provincial and community
health levels.

Outputs

        Formation of multi-sectoral working tables in 24 provinces, with the participation of government, civil
         associations, and NGOs (original target: 15; revised target: 19). 23 of the provinces developed an
         NCD Plan (target: 22). In addition to helping align the actions of actors at the national, provincial,
         municipal, and CAPS levels, the project also helped align and coordinate the actions of a wide array of

                                                                                                     Page 7 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   AR Chronic Conditions and Injuries (P133193)



         actors (e.g., government actors, private sector representatives, civil associations, and
         NGOs). According to the ICR, these roundtables have been highly instrumental in generating wider
         alliances of advocacy and support for the enactment of provincial laws and regulations aimed at
         reducing the prevalence of NCD risk factors, including tobacco control and the promotion of healthy
         school environments.
        Establishment of NCD surveillance units in 23 provinces. In addition, the project financed the
         following national NCD surveillance instruments: (i) Fourth National Survey of NCD Risk Factors
         (2018); (ii) World School Health Survey (2018); (iii) Global Youth Tobacco Survey (2018); (iv) Second
         National Nutrition and Health Survey (2018-2019); (v) Phone Survey of NCD Risk Factors in 2019
         and 2021. 17 provinces were able to present comprehensive reports on NCDs, injuries and risk
         factors in 2017, increasing to 19 provinces in 2019.
        Implementation of recommended actions for tobacco control (in line with National Law N°26.687) in 18
         provinces (target: 22). Seven provinces implemented changes to the regulatory standards regarding
         the advertisements and sponsorships for tobacco products (target: 6). 79 municipalities presented
         action plans and ordinances for 100% smoke-free environments and carried out communication
         campaigns.
        Implementation of recommended actions to reduce population sodium consumption (in line with
         National Law N° 26.905) in 21 provinces (target: 22). 78 municipalities presented action plans and
         ordinances for healthy sodium intake and carried out communication campaigns.
        Implementation of regulations to prevent childhood obesity in school environments in 14 provinces
         (target: 8). 104 municipalities presented action plans and implemented actions to promote physical
         activity.
        Due to changes in the national priorities, the originally planned activity of strengthening the capacity of
         the National Food Institute was not carried out.
        The ICR did not report on whether the planned research studies to generate evidence on interventions
         that reduce NCD risk factors were conducted.

Note: The 2019 restructuring introduced significant changes to the strategy to address NCD risk factors, the
most significant of which was shifting away from actions at the municipal level to focus more narrowly on
actions at the provincial level, resulting in more coordinated interventions. This shift was illustrated by less
emphasis on the promotion of physical activity and healthy nutrition in selected municipalities to the promotion
of healthier school environments in partnership with provincial ministries of education.

Outcomes

      Tobacco use among vulnerable groups decreased from 33% to 24.2% during the project period,
       surpassing the target of 31%. As acknowledged by the ICR, this impact can be attributed to a
       multiplicity of factors not just this project, as reflected by a decrease in prevalence of tobacco
       consumption among the total adult population from 27% to 17.4%.
      Sodium consumption among vulnerable groups decreased from 29% to 19.9% during the project
       period, falling short of the target of 16%.
      The prevalence of "low" physical activity was 44.2% in 2018, compared to 54.7% in 2013.
      Only 6% of the population complied with the recommendation to consume at least five daily servings
       of fruits or vegetables each day, no change from 2013.




                                                                                                      Page 8 of 15
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                AR Chronic Conditions and Injuries (P133193)



                            Achievement is rated Substantial due to implementation of numerous actions to increase knowledge about
                            risks and promote health behavior, with some evidence of actual behavior change.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Overall Efficacy is rated Substantial due to High achievement for the first objective and Substantial
                            achievement for the second objective.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   At appraisal (PAD, Annex 6), the economic analysis discussed the economic burden of NCDs, in terms of costs
   for the health system, firms, and individuals. In the absence of adequate prevention and early detection, these
   costs are high for individuals due to the resulting treatment, surgical operations, and medications; moreover, the
   patient’s productive life is shortened. For the health system, the main NCDs cost at least US$1.5 billion per
   year. However, the project is expected to generate benefits in terms of potential life years gained. The direct
   benefits are associated with savings in the health system resulting from avoided hospitalizations, medical
   consultations, and treatment for the population exposed to risk factors, and lower (nonmedical) expenses paid
   by the families for care and services for family members with NCDs. The indirect benefits are associated with
   productivity gains in the labor market as a result of a reduction in the number of premature deaths
   and disabilities and better quality of life for the population. A cost-benefit analysis was conducted, assuming an
   average health cost of US$1,730 for each NCD event (hospitalization), an average age of NCD-related mortality
   of 55 years, and an average productivity loss (or gain) per premature death of US$19,857 per year. The net
   present value (NPV) of the project’s benefits over a 10-year implementation period, using an 8% discount rate,
   is positive by more than US$156.0 million, which represents an internal rate of return (IRR) of 19.0%.

   At completion (ICR, Annex 4), the cost-benefit analysis was updated with actual figures. Project data estimated
   that 1,015 deaths were prevented and approximately 37,004 Disability Adjusted Life Years (DALYs)
   avoided. This amounts to over US$98.5 million in savings in health care, including: (i) US$11.9 million in
   savings from 6,687 averted hospitalizations; and (ii) US$96.2 million in medical supplies and drugs, including
   oncological drugs, and an estimated IRR of 55.4% and a NPV of US$79.4 million.

   In terms of implementation efficiency, the activities central to the achievement of objectives were mostly
   implemented as planned. However, there were several delays that led to a project extension of almost two

                                                                                                                               Page 9 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      AR Chronic Conditions and Injuries (P133193)



years. These delays were largely due to factors beyond the project team's control, including the COVID-19
pandemic (which affected both supply and demand of health services, with the use of health resources being
prioritized for the health emergency and a sharp drop in demand at due to mobility constrains and fear of
contagious at health care centers); and procurement delays due to the tight fiscal constraints in 2018-2019. As
noted by the ICR (page 50), these delays are not considered to have significantly affected implementation, as
provincial governments used some of the resources received under the operation’s TLIs for the purchase of
needed inputs and procurement processes sped up during the last year and were fully completed by the revised
closing date of November 30, 2022.



Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                    100.00
 Appraisal                                                19.00
                                                                                     Not Applicable
                                                                                    100.00
 ICR Estimate                                             55.00
                                                                                     Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance is rated High due to strong alignment with country conditions, government health sector strategies,
and Bank country strategies. Efficacy is rated Substantial, as project objectives were almost fully achieved.
Efficiency is rated Substantial due to favorable cost-benefit calculations with some moderate inefficiencies in
implementation.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The project supported the adoption of a model of care for NCDs that was technically sound. Trained staff,
institutional networks, and information systems are in place to sustain project interventions. The
implementation of the MAPEC model and actions to reduce NCD risk factors remain high priorities in the
health sector for the national government, as reflected by the relevant laws and regulations. At the provincial
level, there was also wide support for addressing NCDs, as reflected by the participation of all 24 provincial

                                                                                                    Page 10 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      AR Chronic Conditions and Injuries (P133193)



jurisdictions. Two provinces had initially declined to participate but subsequently joined the operation,
indicating the positive demonstration effect. Lastly, the activities financed under the operation appear to be
fiscally sustainable, representing only a marginal additional expenditure for the Ministries of Health.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project design drew upon important lessons from previous experience, including the importance of
  strengthening the supply side of NCD detection and control and the effectiveness of performance-based
  financing rather than traditional financing of inputs. The project also built upon the progress made under
  previous Bank operations, which strengthened the public health system at the national and provincial
  levels. This included the deep experience of the task team members from those projects and the similar
  Uruguay NCD project (P050716) and the existing M&E systems for the health sector that included
  developing robust systems at the provincial level.

  Implementation arrangements were well-aligned with the decentralized structure of the country's health
  system, including the mechanisms to implement a results-based financing approach. The overall risk was
  assessed as Substantial due to significant risk in the areas of stakeholder and project design, given the
  new areas being introduced to the health system and the behavioral changes required - both by
  vulnerable population groups and health providers - to realize impact. Mitigation measures included
  rigorous coordinating mechanisms for implementation and use of incentives to promote behavior
  change. The M&E design was also well-formulated to ensure rigorous monitoring and controls.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Highly Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The Bank team demonstrated a high level of responsiveness and flexibility during the project period,
 particularly as external contexts drastically affected implementation. The COVID-19 pandemic
 shifted health sector priorities and resources toward health emergency response, as well as significantly
 reduced the demand for health services at CAPS (as reflected by a 26% drop in general outpatient
 consultations during the first quarter of 2020). The pandemic also resulted in significant implementation
 delays, contributing to the need to extend the project closing date on multiple occasions. In addition, the
 country experienced an economic recession and severe fiscal constraints in 2018 and 2019, halting TLI
 transfers to provinces in mid-2018. While the halt in transfers did not interrupt implementation at the
 provincial level, it generated a gap between the actual achievement of TLI-targets and the operation’s
 financial execution, which persisted until early 2019. There were also import restrictions which affected the
 delivery of vaccines and drugs purchased under the operation in early 2022, requiring an additional one-
 month extension to the operation’s closing date and intense supervision on the part of the Bank Team to



                                                                                                    Page 11 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     AR Chronic Conditions and Injuries (P133193)



 ensure their timely delivery. The Bank team utilized the project restructurings to address these challenges,
 including adjusting the results framework and targets accordingly.

 Project performance ratings were candid, including a brief period of downgrades to moderately
 unsatisfactory to reflect the disbursement challenges faced by the government. The ICR (page 28) noted
 that the task team also made an effective use of the implementation ratings to signal to the Borrower those
 areas that needed improvement. Monitoring compliance with safeguards and fiduciary performance was
 satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Highly Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Highly Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The outcome and intermediate indicators were clear and measurable, including baseline and targets. The
 M&E arrangements utilized the existing national Ministry of Health monitoring system, some of which had
 been developed under prior Bank operations. The M&E design collected further information in the new
 NCD areas and also provided support to further develop the surveillance tools, the interoperable digital
 information system and electronic medical records, all of which were key to achieving the project's
 objectives. Monitoring arrangements also included an external operational auditor whose role was to verify
 TLI achievements.



b. M&E Implementation
  The M&E system was effective in collecting information from the CAPS and provincial levels and
  consolidating the information to measure progress towards TLI milestones. The project restructurings
  were well-utilized to adjust the results framework and also to include further M&E-related activities
  (digitalization and georeferencing of ASRs, the nominalization of the corresponding service population
  and the implementation of electronic systems to support CAPS basic functions). Project support for the
  adoption of basic interoperability standards contributed to the standardization of information flows, which
  was a critical step toward overcoming the fragmentation of health information systems within and across
  provinces. The external auditor validated TLI achievements and also provided hands-on training.

  Surveillance tools were developed and implemented, including the following: Fourth National Survey of
  NCD Risk Factors (2018), the World School Health Survey (2018), the Global Youth Tobacco Survey
  (2018), the Second National Nutrition and Health Survey (2018-2019) and the First and Second Phone
  Surveys of NCD Risk Factors (2019, 2021).




                                                                                                   Page 12 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     AR Chronic Conditions and Injuries (P133193)




c. M&E Utilization
  The project results framework, particularly related to TLIs, adequately tracked progress in
  implementation and the achievement of outcomes and intermediate results. The surveillance data
  provided important information on NCDs and risk factors.



  M&E Quality Rating
  High

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as an Environmental Category "B" project. The project triggered safeguard
   policies on Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01), due to the generation of health care waste, and
   Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10), due to the presence of indigenous peoples in 23 out of the 24 provinces.

   The environmental risk was considered to be Low, and an Environmental and Social Management
   Framework (ESMF) was developed, which incorporated capacity building and institutional measures for
   preparation, supervision, and monitoring of the project on environmental and social concerns. Each
   province designated a point person on Health and Environment who was responsible for the implementation
   of the Provincial Action Plans and the training of the relevant key actors regarding mitigation measures in
   health facilities. The ICR noted the implementation of healthcare waste management matrices at the CAPS
   level utilizing an online self-diagnosis tool, although increased support would be needed on the part of
   provincial authorities for achieving wider improvement in healthcare waste management, which so far has
   been ad hoc. Implementation performance was deemed satisfactory throughout the project period.

   An Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF) was designed to help ensure that IPs
   were incorporated into the operation in a culturally appropriate way and benefitted from it. An Indigenous
   peoples variable was incorporated into provincial electronic medical record systems to enhance
   epidemiological information on IPs health. NCD surveillance surveys, however, still lack the capability of
   collecting data on the prevalence of NCD risk factors among IPs. The NMoH also provided technical
   support to provincial teams for the development of communication materials on NCD prevention in different
   indigenous languages, and an instrument for assessing the quality of services at the primary level was
   applied to the 237 participating CAPS with IPs within their referenced population. The ICR (page 26)
   reported that results identified several challenges limiting IP participation, intercultural adaptation of the
   services, and the use of the ethnic identifier in the heath records. Although all provinces developed their
   Indigenous Peoples Plans, overall social safeguards performance was considered Moderately Satisfactory
   to reflect the uneven capacity for IPP implementation among provinces.




                                                                                                    Page 13 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     AR Chronic Conditions and Injuries (P133193)



b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial management: Project financial management arrangements drew upon existing experience of the
   MOH with other Bank health sector operations. Overall performance was rated in the satisfactory range
   throughout the project period. Moderate shortcomings identified during various supervision
   missions included delays in the submission of Interim Financial Reports (IFRs) and audited financial
   statements. Despite the delays, audit reports were reviewed by the Bank and found acceptable with no
   qualifications identified.

   Procurement: Procurement processes were successfully completed as planned, although some challenges
   were encountered throughout the project period. There was high turnover in procurement staff and, as
   noted previously, the overall fiscal and macroeconomic environment had a direct negative impact on the
   timely procurement of goods. The Bank fiduciary team responded to these challenges with procurement
   supervision with regular prior- and post-reviews, targeted training for procurement staff, and the
   identification of fit-for-purpose procurement approaches under the prevailing market environment. In
   particular, the development of framework agreements (“Acuerdos Marco”) in the procurement of
   NCD medications helped to generate significant price and time reductions. Likewise, the implementation of
   framework agreements for the joint procurement of IT equipment under two different World Bank-financed
   projects also generated similar gains in efficiency.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                   Reason for
Ratings                           ICR                    IEG
                                                                                   Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                           Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Bank Performance                  Highly Satisfactory   Highly Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                    High                  High

Quality of ICR                    ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

Lessons drawn from the ICR (pages 29-20), adapted by IEG:

      A well-designed system of incentives can help promote cooperation in a federal,
         decentralized health care system. In the case of this project, TLIs provided attractive results-
         based financial incentives for provinces, municipalities, and CAPs to align their actions with
         the strategic priorities of the national ministry. This promoted the adoption of an integrated

                                                                                                      Page 14 of 15
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       AR Chronic Conditions and Injuries (P133193)



         approach toward NCDs and their risk factors at the provincial level, as well as the
         homogenization of standards of NCD care throughout the country. TLIs also helped foster
         intersectoral cooperation within provinces to address the challenges posed by NCD risk
         factors (i.e. health and education sectors).
        A solid M&E system along with external control mechanisms can help to create
         effective accountability and transparency, and thereby support achievement of outcomes. In
         the case of this project, the sophistication of the M&E system had been developed
         incrementally over almost two decades, thus the institutional capacity was in place to support
         a complex operation. External controls such as certification instruments at the CAPS level
         and third-party verification of provincial level outputs helped to ensure the effectiveness
         of TLIs. In some cases, these were even multiple layers of control mechanisms, with the
         certification of CAPS achievements reported by provinces in turn being externally verified.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR quality was overall satisfactory. It was concise and the narrative and analysis were consistent with
ratings. It was consistent with guidelines and had a strong results-orientation (consistent with the results-based
financing approach that was a hallmark of the project). The quality of evidence was strong; the quality of
analysis could have been strengthened with more discussion/ explanation of the results (and their relevant
outputs) rather than simply providing tables with figures on the TLIs.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                    Page 15 of 15
