     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Malawi CAT-DDO (P165056)



                                                                               Report Number: ICRR0023577

1. Operation Information



 Operation ID                             Operation Name
 P165056                                  Malawi CAT-DDO

 Country                                  Practice Area (Lead)
 Malawi                                   Urban, Resilience and Land



 Non-Programmatic DPF

 L/C/TF Number(s)                         Closing Date (Original)                  Total Financing (USD)
 IDA-D4880,IDA-D4890                      31-Jul-2022                                          69,745,488.84

 Bank Approval Date                       Closing Date (Actual)
 06-Jun-2019                              21-Jun-2022

                                          IBRD/IDA (USD)                              Co-financing (USD)

 Original Commitment                          70,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                           70,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Actual                                       69,745,488.84                                              0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                 ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Dimitri Tsarouhas          Fernando Manibog            Avjeet Singh                   IEGSD




2. Program Objectives and Pillars/Policy Areas
DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives

The program development objective of the disaster risk management DPF with a Catastrophe Deferred
Drawdown Option (CAT DDO) was to “strengthen the institutional and financial capacity of the Government of
Malawi (GoM) for multi-sectoral disaster and climate risk management.” (Program Document or PD, p.5).



                                                                                                Page 1 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Malawi CAT-DDO (P165056)



The achievement of the PDO was to be supported by three pillars:

Pillar A – Strengthening the institutional framework and coordination mechanisms for the implementation of
the national disaster and climate resilience agenda;

Pillar B – Increasing climate and disaster resilience in physical developments and infrastructure;

Pillar C – Strengthening adaptive social protection mechanisms and government financial capacity to respond
to disasters.

For the purpose of this ICRR, the objectives of the operation (against which outcomes will be assessed) are
taken to be the following:

Objective 1: to strengthen the institutional capacity of the Government of Malawi (GoM) for multi-sectoral
disaster and climate risk management;

Objective 2: to strengthen the financial capacity of the Government of Malawi (GoM) for multi-sectoral disaster
and climate risk management.

Pillar A (strengthening the institutional framework and coordination mechanisms for the implementation of the
national disaster and climate resilience agenda) and Pillar B (increasing climate and disaster resilience in
physical developments and infrastructure) supported Objective 1, while Pillar C (strengthening adaptive social
protection mechanisms and government financial capacity to respond to disasters) supported Objective 2.




b. Pillars/Policy Areas
The program was structured around three pillars encompassing the operation’s objectives. These were the
following:

Pillar 1: Strengthen the institutional framework and coordination mechanisms for the implementation of the
national disaster and climate resilience agenda;

Pillar 2: Increase climate and disaster resilience in physical developments and infrastructure;

Pillar 3 Strengthen adaptive social protection mechanisms and government financial capacity to respond to
disasters.

Neither the PDO nor the pillars were changed during the program.


c. Comments on Program Cost, Financing and Dates

The approved program cost totaled US$70 million, which comprised the MALAWI-Disaster Risk Management
DPF, an IDA grant at a cost of US$40 million (IDA-D4880), and the Catastrophe Deferred Drawdown Option



                                                                                                     Page 2 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Malawi CAT-DDO (P165056)



(CAT DDO), a second, contingent financing IDA grant worth US$30 million (IDA-D4890). The full amount
disbursed was fully disbursed.

The DPF was approved on 6 June 2019 and closed on 21 June 2022, 40 days ahead of the originally envisaged
closing date. The US$40 million IDA grant was released on June 28, 2019 and the US$30 million Cat DDO was
made available to the government of Malawi on April 10, 2020 following the outbreak of COVID-19.


3. Relevance of Design

a. Relevance of Objectives

 The two objectives of the program were relevant to the country situation, the government’s reform program,
 and the Bank’s Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD) for Malawi.

 Relevance to country context

 Malawi is a landlocked, non-resource rich country in sub-Saharan Africa (SSA), which has one of the highest
 poverty levels in the world. The absence of economic diversification and rapid population growth soon
 established a pattern of low growth and cyclical macroeconomic problems leading to short-term fiscal
 consolidation efforts and high levels of dependency on international donors.

 Several challenges hinder Malawi’s attempts to achieve long-term sustainable growth and enhance citizens’
 well-being by enhancing prosperity and reducing poverty levels. First, population growth: although the total
 fertility rate dropped from 6.5 in 1995 to 4.25 in 2020, the population is still growing at 2.7 percent per year and
 is anticipated to increase from 17.2 million in 2015 to 34.4 million in 2038 (UNDESA 2015). Second, climate
 change and its effects: droughts and floods reduce total GDP by about 1.7 percent per year (GFDRR, 2009),
 and climate shocks occur more frequently and with greater intensity in recent years. Examples are flooding in
 the Southern Region in 2015 resulting in the destruction of 4 percent of Malawi’s arable land, and the 2016
 drought, which pushed 40 percent of the population into food insecurity (MVAC, 2016). In the spring of 2019,
 Tropical Cyclone Idai destroyed 109,000 hectares of crops, made 731,000 people food insecure and
 reconstruction needs were estimated at 5.8 percent of Malawi’s GDP.

 Relevance to country development strategy

 Malawi began to develop a disaster risk management (DRM) under the outdated National Disaster
 Preparedness and Relief Act (NDPRA) 1991. The relevant law established the Office of the Commissioner for
 the Department of Disaster Management Affairs (DoDMA), and the National Disaster Preparedness and Relief
 Committee. It was a forward-looking strategy that had not yet been developed further. Malawi’s Vision 2020
 strategy emphasized the need for effective DRM. The 2015 National DRM Policy (NDRMP) laid out the
 government’s vision for a comprehensive and mainstreamed approach to DRM, and included the need to
 improve public health risk management, but lacked the legal status and associated budgetary provisions for
 execution. The Third Malawi Growth and Development Strategy (MGDS III) (2017-2022) emphasized the need
 for different sectors to work together to achieve development goals. The core aim of Malawi’s Third Growth
 and Development Strategy 2017-2022 was “to move Malawi to a productive, competitive and resilient nation
 through sustainable economic growth, energy, industrial and infrastructure development while addressing
 water, climate change and environmental management and population challenges." (PD, p. 35).


                                                                                                       Page 3 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Malawi CAT-DDO (P165056)



Relevance to WBG priorities

The last Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) was for FY2013-2016 at the time of the operation. Among the
lessons teased out by the CAS was the need to strengthen institutional development and capacity building so
as to enhance the development impact of WB interventions. The SCD (2018) identified climate risks as a key
challenge affecting poor households and macroeconomic stability and recommended implementing resilience
strategies to allow for sustainable growth. The SCD also stressed that Malawi’s reaction-based response to
shocks was traditionally characterized by short-term measures that expired soon after a disaster had struck
and which relied on international donors instead of domestic fiscal adjustments. Informal rules of the game
responding to political economy imperatives continue to shape behavior and function. Building resilience to
climatic, health, and other disasters remains a priority for the government and the Country Partnership
Framework (FY21-25). The CPF’s Objective 2.2 is, “Increasing resilience in urban and rural hotspots”, with a
focus on land and flood risk management, resilient urbanization, early warnings, and disaster preparedness

The Program Development Objective was aligned with the World Bank and Country strategies and appropriate
in its ambition given the country context. The operation was also expected to complement other ongoing and
planned World Bank projects to help the government manage immediate and long-term climate and disaster
shocks.


b. Relevance of Prior Actions

Rationale

The operation was structured around three pillars: (i) strengthening the institutional framework and coordination
mechanisms for the implementation of the national disaster and climate resilience agenda, (ii) increasing
climate and disaster resilience in physical developments and infrastructure, and (iii) strengthening adaptive
social protection mechanisms and government financial capacity to respond to disasters.

The operation had 8 Prior Actions (PAs), six related to Objective 1 and two to Objective 2. There were three
PAs for the first pillar, three for the second pillar, and two for the third pillar (ICR, p. 11).

Table 1: Objectives, Pillars, and Prior Actions for the Malawi Disaster Risk Management DPF with a
Catastrophe Deferred Drawdown Option (CAT DDO)

 Objective 1: Strengthen the institutional capacity of the Government of Malawi (GoM) for
 multi-sectoral disaster and climate risk management
 Pillar 1: Strengthen the
 institutional framework and       PA1: The Recipient’s Cabinet of Ministers has approved the
 coordination mechanisms for the Malawi Disaster Risk Management (DRM) Bill that will define a
 implementation of the national shift in the institutional framework from emergency response to
 disaster and climate resilience a more holistic and comprehensive DRM approach.
 agenda
                                   PA2: The Recipient, through its Cabinet of Ministers, has
                                   approved and adopted the Malawi National Meteorology Policy
                                   (NMP), which will guide the modernization of climate and



                                                                                                   Page 4 of 21
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Malawi CAT-DDO (P165056)



                                 meteorological services central to providing quality and timely
                                 information for resilient development.

                                 PA3: The Recipient, through its Minister of Health and
                                 Population, has approved and adopted the Public Health
                                 Institute of Malawi’s Strategic Plan (2018-2022).


                                PA4: The Recipient, through its Cabinet of Ministers, has
Pillar 2: Increase climate and  approved and adopted the Malawi National Urban Policy, which
disaster resilience in physical incorporates DRM and climate change as cross-cutting topics
developments and infrastructure and facilitates the development of other policy instruments
                                needed to improve urban resilience.

                                 PA5: The Recipient, through its Cabinet of Ministers, has
                                 approved and adopted the Malawi National Transport Policy,
                                 which promotes mechanisms for resilient design, construction,
                                 and operation of transport infrastructure.

                                 PA6: The Recipient, through its Minister of Education, Science,
                                 and Technology, has approved and adopted the Safer School
                                 Construction Guidelines, which will ensure the multi-hazard
                                 resilient design and construction of public education
                                 infrastructure and outline a way forward for a safe location,
                                 selection of materials, and construction techniques for safer
                                 schools.


Objective 2: Strengthen the financial capacity of the Government of Malawi (GoM) for multi-
sectoral disaster and climate risk management

                                 PA7: The Recipient’s National Social Support Steering
Pillar 3: Strengthen adaptive
                                 Committee has approved and adopted the Malawi National
social protection mechanisms
                                 Social Support Programme II (2018-2023) and Implementation
and government financial
                                 Plan which prioritizes the development of a shock-sensitive
capacity to respond to disasters
                                 social protection system.


                                 PA8: The Recipient’s Minister of Finance, Economic Planning,
                                 and Development has approved and adopted a Disaster Risk
                                 Financing Strategy (DRFS) and Implementation Plan, outlining
                                 the Government’s strategic objectives to strengthen financial
                                 preparedness for effective and timely disaster response.



Objective 1: Strengthen the institutional capacity of the Government of Malawi (GoM) for multi-sectoral
disaster and climate risk management


                                                                                                   Page 5 of 21
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Malawi CAT-DDO (P165056)



Pillar 1: Strengthen the institutional framework and coordination mechanisms for implementing the
national disaster and climate resilience agenda. PAs 1-3.

PA1: The Recipient’s Cabinet of Ministers has approved the Malawi Disaster Risk Management (DRM) Bill that
will define a shift in the institutional framework from emergency response to a more holistic and comprehensive
DRM approach.

Malawi’s disaster risk management policy was set at baseline by the National Development Preparedness and
Relief Act (NDPRA) of 1991, an outdated and ex-post (post-disaster) with no provision for prevention and
building resilience. The 2015 National DRM Policy underlined the need for a preventative approach
mainstreamed across sectors. The DRM Bill entailed a detailed outline of the new institutional architecture that
DRM entailed, mainstreamed the policy across sectors as called for by the 2015 DRM Policy, and included
provisions for sustainable DRM financing. The PA entailed Cabinet approval, a precursor to the passage
through Parliament. However, this was the first step and required subsequent tabling for Parliament and
legislation for adoption and contribution to the institutional framework of the country’s DRM response. PA1:
Moderately Satisfactory.

PA2: The Recipient, through its Cabinet of Ministers, has approved and adopted the Malawi National
Meteorology Policy (NMP), which will guide the modernization of climate and meteorological services central to
providing quality and timely information for resilient development.

Meteorological services that are up to date, well-coordinated, and facilitate prevention are key to Malawi’s
development, not least in the context of frequent and increasing climate disasters. “Weather forecasts and
agrometeorological advisory are key, particularly in a rain-fed agricultural environment, to support farmers as
they make critical decisions in planting, sowing, fertilizing, and fumigation dates.” (PD, p.23). Adopting and
approving the NMP directly contribute to a stronger and better coordinated climate resilience agenda by
increasing financial resources for the Department of Climate Change and Meteorological Services (DCCMS),
making meteorological services user-friendly and output oriented and coordinating risk communication. PA2:
Satisfactory.

PA3: The Recipient, through its Minister of Health and Population, has approved and adopted the Public Health
Institute of Malawi’s Strategic Plan (2018-2022).

The Public Health Institute of Malawi (PHIM) was established in 2012 to lead and coordinate the multi-sectoral
surveillance, prevention, and control of health threats. Its coordinating role extended to linking DRM systems
with public health systems by introducing the National Public Health Emergencies Management Committee. Its
formal establishment did not translate into practical change since the PHIM lacked the resources, financial and
technical, to fulfill its mandate. The adoption of the 2018-2022 Strategic Plan would institutionalize the
government’s health policy framework by clarifying the roles of the PHIM, DRM institutions, and other
institutions in health risk management and allow the government to develop national capacity for addressing
public health emergencies. PA3: Moderately Satisfactory.

Pillar 2: Increase climate and disaster resilience in physical developments and infrastructure PAs 4-6.

PA4: The Recipient, through its Cabinet of Ministers, has approved and adopted the Malawi National Urban
Policy, which incorporates DRM and climate change as cross-cutting topics and facilitates the development of
other policy instruments needed to improve urban resilience.



                                                                                                   Page 6 of 21
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Malawi CAT-DDO (P165056)



The National Urban Policy constituted the first policy plan targeting urban spaces in Malawi. Urbanization has
been relatively slow in Malawi, stagnating at around 15 percent since 1999 and remaining lower than in other
SSA states. Adopting a national urban policy would establish minimum requirements for promoting urban
resilient initiatives and integrate DRM into the institutional framework of urban development. This PA also
formed part of a series of subsequent RIs to embed resilience in the policy framework of infrastructure policy,
such as setting up multi-hazard plans and using hazard-compatible building standards. PA4: Satisfactory.

PA5: The Recipient, through its Cabinet of Ministers, has approved and adopted the Malawi National Transport
Policy, which promotes mechanisms for resilient design, construction, and operation of transport infrastructure.

The MGDS III and the 2018 National Transport Master Plan (NTMP) Climate Change Action Plan of 2018 called
for reforms to improve transport resilience by adopting new standards on roads, buildings, and infrastructure
that consider the risk of climate change and natural disasters. The non-incorporation of such standards costs
Malawi dearly in terms of both physical destruction and foregone gains in growth and development, with the
damage caused by Tropical Cyclone Idai in the transport sector equaling 17 percent of all costs. PA5:
Satisfactory.

PA6: The Recipient, through its Minister of Education, Science, and Technology, has approved and adopted the
Safer School Construction Guidelines, which will ensure the multi-hazard resilient design and construction of
public education infrastructure and outline a way forward for a safe location, selection of materials, and
construction techniques for safer schools.

Schools are often funded and constructed by non-governmental organizations, with limited consultation with the
Government or the affected local communities. There is little evidence that site selection and physical planning
of the school site is undertaken, with many schools across the country located on exposed and vulnerable sites.
Recent catastrophes demonstrated the problem: the Koronga earthquake in 2009 damaged more than 100
school buildings, and Tropical Cyclone Idai affected more than 1,500 schools. Adopting the Safer School
Construction Guidelines would add to Malawi’s infrastructure resilience through detailed guidance on site
selection, designs, and construction technologies that incorporate views by experts and stakeholders. PA6:
Satisfactory.

Objective 2: Strengthen the financial capacity of the Government of Malawi (GoM) for multi-sectoral
disaster and climate risk management

Pillar 3: Strengthen adaptive social protection mechanisms and government financial capacity to respond to
disasters PAs 7-8.

PA7: The Recipient’s National Social Support Steering Committee has approved and adopted the Malawi
National Social Support Programme II (2018-2023) and Implementation Plan, which prioritizes the development
of a shock-sensitive social protection system.

The second National Social Support Programme included concrete actions for the development of a shock-
sensitive social protection system, with stronger coordination across programs and a shift of focus from
individual programs to coherence and integration across systems, including the use of a single Unified
Beneficiary Registry (UBR). The relevance of the PA is straightforward, but it is unclear why it included the
approval of a relevant Committee instead of the Cabinet. PA7: Satisfactory.




                                                                                                   Page 7 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Malawi CAT-DDO (P165056)



 PA8: The Recipient’s Minister of Finance, Economic Planning, and Development has approved and adopted a
 Disaster Risk Financing Strategy (DRFS) and Implementation Plan, outlining the Government’s strategic
 objectives to strengthen financial preparedness for effective and timely disaster response.

 Natural disasters undermine fiscal planning and often overwhelm the government’s financial capacity to
 respond, adding to fiscal pressures and reliance on international donors. The Disaster Risk Financing Strategy
 (DRFS) and Implementation Plan were designed to increase Malawi’s financial resilience to shocks through
 mutually complementary risk financing instruments, systematic data collection on disaster response, and a
 more transparent decision-making process for DRF instrument selection. Its adoption by the Ministry of Finance
 directly strengthened Malawi’s decision-making capacity in financing post-disaster response. PA8:
 Satisfactory.

 Overall, PAs were set at the right level of ambition and addressed major shortcomings in Malawi’s institutional
 capacity to deal with DRM and climate resilience challenges. The PAs were based on lessons learned from
 experience and prior analytical work. They were context-appropriate and essentially encouraged a whole
 government approach aimed at introducing a culture of prevention concerning DRM. The prior actions were
 appropriate along the results chain for realizing the intended objectives. PAs 1 to 3, under the first pillar, directly
 contributed to the PDO by reinforcing the institutional framework and the coordination capacity of Malawi
 regarding DRM capacity and preparation. Likewise, PAs 4 to 6 under Pillar were directly relevant to the
 PDO by contributing to a stronger resilience infrastructure. In contrast, PAs 7 and 8 contributed to the PDO’s
 goal of strengthening the financial capacity of Malawi to respond to the fiscal challenges associated with pre-
 and post-disaster management. Six of the eight prior actions were satisfactory, and two were moderately
 satisfactory. Overall, the relevance of the prior actions is rated as Satisfactory.



Rating

Satisfactory


4. Relevance of Results Indicators

Rationale

The results indicators (RIs) were generally placed within well-articulated results chains premised on a
theory of change that measured the likely impact of the PAs and their links to the stated objectives.

Relevance of RIs for Pillar 1: Strengthen the institutional framework and coordination mechanisms
for the implementation of the national disaster and climate resilience agenda.

RI1 (Number of Technical Sub-committees operationalizing a more comprehensive DRM approach as
established in the Malawi Disaster Risk Management Bill evidenced by an independent assessment
report) measured an important determinant of progress toward the objective of strengthening the
institutional framework that would make the DRM framework operational. In order to ensure the credibility
of reporting, an independent assessment report was specified. RI1: Satisfactory.




                                                                                                         Page 8 of 21
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Malawi CAT-DDO (P165056)



RI2 (Annual reports on NRS and/or MGDS III monitoring progress on results, budget allocations, and
expenditures on disaster risk management and social protection from Government and development
partners produced) used to measure progress regarding the implementation of the resilience agenda,
which included both the state and civil society. The publishing of the annual report enhanced the
transparency and accountability of the Government. RI2: Satisfactory.

RI3 [Number of user sectors (i.e. agricultural sector, DRM institutional system) receiving tailor-made
forecasts and early warning bulletins with the appropriate content, frequency, and communication
channels and in local languages (Chichewa, Tumbuka and Yao)] directly measured progress made in
upgrading the early warning capacity of the country in a user-friendly, tailor-made manner towards those
most in need of it. Both baselines and targets were clear and measurable. RI3: Satisfactory.

RI4 [National Public Health Emergencies Committee established and operating in accordance with the
MoU that clarifies all ministry roles and responsibilities relevant to International Health Regulations (IHR)
capacity implementation] was an indicator directly linked to PA3 on the setup of a Strategic Plan by the
Public Health Institute of Malawi, and directly measured progress towards the institutional strengthening of
the country’s national disaster agenda with regard to health-related emergencies. The target of a
Committee setup was clear but the inclusion of an MoU which did not exist at the baseline complicated
measurement. In practice, a handbook took the place of an MoU. RI4: Moderately Satisfactory.

RI5 (Number of cities with appropriate hazard maps that inform the location of public infrastructure and
physical development) was relevant to measuring progress towards the first objective of enhancing
climate and disaster resilience in urban planning, development and resilience. Both baselines and targets
were clear and directly measurable. RI5: Satisfactory.

RI6 (Number of cities and districts where stakeholders have been trained on existing standards and
building policy/regulations that incorporate multi-hazard resilience) measured progress in enhancing the
capacity of the stakeholders. The indicator was however relatively output-oriented without measuring the
effectiveness of the training provided. Also, the ICR notes that the indicator was ambiguous as to whether
only legally binding codes and regulations were sufficient, or guidelines adopted by relevant ministries
could also be used RI6: Moderately Unsatisfactory.

RI7 (Number of new national transport projects implemented by the Roads Authority that apply the new
harmonized multi-hazard resilience standards) measured progress towards mainstreaming of resilience
standards under new national transportation projects. It reflected the progress made towards the
implementation of the resilience standards even though it was earlier in the results chain. Also, defining
the target in terms of percentage compliance rather than just the new number of projects would have
helped put the achievement in perspective. RI7: Moderately Satisfactory.

RI8 (Percentage of new educational facilities constructed or rehabilitated in compliance with the technical
hazard-resilient criteria adopted by MoEST) directly measured progress made with regards to enhanced
resilience in education infrastructure and followed from PA6 pertaining to the adoption of the Safer School
Construction Guidelines. RI8: Satisfactory.

RI9 [Unified Beneficiary Registry (UBR) data sharing protocols implemented, as evidenced by the
percentage of shock-affected households identified through the UBR that are targeted for post-disaster
support] was directly measuring the extent to which social protection through the UBR was put to use to
support those affected by natural disasters. The indicator, however, could be misconstrued as targeting


                                                                                                    Page 9 of 21
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Malawi CAT-DDO (P165056)



the percentage of shock-affected households that actually received post-disaster support, rather than the
percentage of beneficiaries that were identified using the UBR as intended. RI9: Moderately
Satisfactory.

RI10 (Number of new ex-ante risk financing instruments established in alignment with the National
Disaster Risk Financing Strategy) measured the pillar’s second aspect on the government’s financial
capacity and followed PA8 on the adoption of a Risk Financing Strategy. RI10: Satisfactory.

The results indicators (RIs) were generally placed within well-articulated results chains premised on a
theory of change that measured the likely impact of the PAs and their links to the stated objectives. Six
RIs are rated Satisfactory, Three Moderately Satisfactory and One Moderately Unsatisfactory. The overall
relevance of the results indicators is rated as Moderately
Satisfactory.

Table 1

                                        Baseline       Target               Actual as
                                                                  Actual at            RI
Results Indicator Associated RI         (including (including               % to
                                                                  target               achievement
(RI)               PA(s)      relevance units and      units and            targeted
                                                                  date                 rating
                                        date)          date)                change
Objective 1: Strengthen the institutional capacity of the Government of Malawi (GoM) for multi-
sectoral disaster and climate risk management
RI1: Number of
Technical Sub-
committees
operationalizing a
more
comprehensive
                                                                            66% of
DRM approach as
                   1          S         0 (2019)       3 (2022)   2 (2022) targeted Substantial
established in the
                                                                            change
Malawi Disaster
Risk Management
Bill (evidenced by
an independent
assessment
report)
RI2: Annual        1          S         0 (2019)       3 (2022)   3 (2022) 100% of High
reports on                                                                  targeted
National                                                                    change
Resilience
Strategy (NRS)
and/or Malawi
Growth and
Development
Strategy (MGDS)
III monitoring
progress on
results, budget

                                                                                                 Page 10 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Malawi CAT-DDO (P165056)



allocations, and
expenditures on
disaster risk
management and
social protection
from Government
and development
partners
produced.
RI3: Number of
user sectors (i.e.
agricultural sector,
DRM institutional
system) receiving
tailor-made
forecasts and
early warning
                                                                       33% of
bulletins with the
                     2      S     0 (2019)    3 (2022)      1 (2022)   targeted    Modest
appropriate
                                                                       change
content,
frequency, and
communication
channels and in
local languages
(Chichewa,
Tumbuka and
Yao).
RI4: National
Public Health
Emergencies
Committee
established and
operating in
accordance with
the MoU that                                                          0% of
clarifies all        3      MS    No (2019)   Yes (2022)    No (2022) targeted     Negligible
ministry roles and                                                    change
responsibilities
relevant to
International
Health
Regulations (IHR)
capacity
implementation
RI5: Number of       4      S      0 (2019)   2 (2022)      1(2022)    50% of      Modest
cities with                                                            targeted
appropriate                                                            change
hazard maps that

                                                                                      Page 11 of 21
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Malawi CAT-DDO (P165056)



inform the location
of public
infrastructure and
physical
development
RI6: Number of
cities and districts
where
stakeholders have
                                                                           More than
been trained on
                                                                           100% of
existing standards 4         MU         0 (2019)     15 (2022)  18 (2022)            Substantial
                                                                           targeted
and new building
                                                                           change
policy/regulations
that incorporate
multi-hazard
resilience.
RI7: Number of
new national
transport projects
implemented by
                                                                           0% of
the Roads
                     5       MS         0 (2019)      3 (2022)  0 (2022) targeted Negligible
Authority that
                                                                           change
apply the new
harmonized multi-
hazard resilience
standards.
RI8: Percentage of
new educational
facilities
constructed or
                                                                           100% of
rehabilitated in
                     6       S          0 (2019)     100(2022)  100 (2022) targeted Substantial
compliance with
                                                                           change
the technical
hazard-resilient
criteria adopted by
MoEST.
Objective 2: Strengthen the financial capacity of the Government of Malawi (GoM) for multi-sectoral
disaster and climate risk management
RI9: Unified         7       MS         0 (2019)     90 (2022)  100 (2022) More than High
Beneficiary                                                                100% of
Registry (UBR)                                                             targeted
data sharing                                                               change
protocols
implemented, as
evidenced by
percentage of
shock-affected


                                                                                           Page 12 of 21
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  Malawi CAT-DDO (P165056)



          households
          identified through
          the UBR that are
          targeted for post-
          disaster support.
          RI10: Number of
          new ex-ante risk
          financing
          instruments                                                                            100% of
          established in     8               S           0 (2019)      2 (2022)       2 (2022)   targeted    High
          alignment with the                                                                     change
          National Disaster
          Risk Financing
          Strategy




   Rating

   Moderately Satisfactory

   5. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               Strengthen the institutional capacity of the Government of Malawi (GoM) for multi-sectoral disaster and
               climate risk management [PAs 1-6, RIs 1-8].

               Rationale
               Theory of Change: The ICR presented a “theory of change” (page 11, Figure 1) for each pillar, describing how
               PAs were expected to contribute to program objectives. Institutional capacity was to be strengthened by (i)
               increasing the preventative focus and coordination of DRM institutions; stakeholder access to actionable risk
               information; public health disaster risk management; and DRM monitoring, evaluation, and transparency; and
               (ii) mainstreaming DRM considerations in the policies of key exposed sectors to reduce asset losses in case
               of disasters (including risk-sensitive land-use planning, and more resilient design and construction principles
               for transport, housing, and schools Together, these were likely to boost Malawi’s institutional capacity. The
               theory of change was logical though no critical assumptions were identified.

               The targeted number of annual reports had been published by the target date and included the full spectrum
               of requirements determined by the relevant indicator. The reports’ efficacy was especially pronounced in that
               they facilitated enhanced transparency on governmental activities pertaining to DRM policy and scrutiny by
               civil society. The latter’s views were not incorporated in the reports, however, with the ICR citing “data gaps”
               (ICR, p. 21) in that respect. A workshop to raise awareness and a subsequent training-for-trainers event was
               held in the spring and summer of 2022 for 54 officials from 18 districts, who were trained on the new multi-
               hazard Safer Housing Construction Guidelines(s) (SHCGs). Further, over 400 schools benefited from new,
               rehabilitated, or reconstructed Safer Schools Construction Guidelines (SSCG) compliant facilities, and that

                                                                                                                 Page 13 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Malawi CAT-DDO (P165056)



included including 1,584 classrooms, 884 bathrooms, 384 ICT centers, laboratories, or libraries, and 142
teacher houses (ICR, p.28) Evidence to date suggests that the full adoption and implementation of SSCGs in
new educational facilities has boosted the resilience of those structures when faced with the floods arising
from Cyclones Ana and Gombe in 2022.

Two of the three Sub-Committees specified at baseline, the Early Warning System Technical Subcommittee
(EWSC) and the Joint Technical Committee on Climate Change and DRM have been formed and operate in
regular intervals since 2021 in line with their mandate. The operationalization of the new approach to DRM by
the two Committees is, however, not demonstrated by an independent assessment report, as per the
indicator’s target, but by the Committees’ terms of reference. Tailor-made warnings that enhanced resilience
by offering citizens and especially fishermen and agricultural laborers were, at completion, sent only in one
local language. The ICR mentions, however, that a few months later the broadcast and sending two more
local languages (out of Malawi’s total of 12) had been added. That fact, in combination with the fact that the
Department of Climate Change and Meteorological Services (DCCMS) has enabled user-friendly, actionable
early warnings that proved crucial for local livelihoods during the 2023 Tropical Cyclone Freddy. A hazard
map with completed flood risk analysis, which has been disseminated to stakeholders and made available on
the country’s geospatial data portal has been prepared for Lilongwe. The equivalent map for Blantyre is
scheduled to be finalized and delivered by 2024.

The foreseen National Public Health Emergencies Committee has not been established at completion, and
public health emergency responses are coordinated by the National Health Cluster. The National Public
Health Emergency Operation Centre (NPHEOC) has created a Handbook, in lieu of the foreseen
Memorandum of Understanding. Malawi’s Road Authority initiated no new national transport projects during
the project’s duration, nor were new resilience-oriented standards introduced for the road sector.

Given the shortcomings in achievement of some of the targets, the efficacy of the first objective is rated as
Moderately Satisfactory.




Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Strengthen the financial capacity of the Government of Malawi (GoM) for multi-sectoral disaster and climate
risk management [PAs 7-8, RIs 9-10].


Rationale
Theory of Change: The government’s financial capacity for disaster and climate risk management was to be
strengthened by building the financial resilience of households and the national government to disasters,
through more (i) risk-sensitive, scalable, and streamlined social protection systems such as the use of Unified



                                                                                                  Page 14 of 21
                         Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                         Malawi CAT-DDO (P165056)



                      Beneficiary Registry (UBR) sharing protocols which facilitated the streamlining of post-disaster support; and
                      (ii) establishing ex-ante financing instruments for disaster response. The theory of change was logical.

                      Following the 2020 approval of the UBR data-sharing protocols by the National UBR Coordination Committee,
                      UBR has been used for all new intake and targeting for post-disaster cash transfers. This has facilitated the
                      enrollment, payment, and case management of each beneficiary under a single Management Information
                      System. The UBR is widely used by Malawian authorities and international donors in the country. The
                      indicator, measures the percentage of beneficiaries that were identified using the UBR as intended, rather
                      than the percentage of shock-affected households that actually received post-disaster support. The project
                      met the target of establishing two risk financing instruments.. The Flexible Contingency and African Risk
                      Capacity (ARC) Group sovereign drought insurance have already made payments in response to 2020/21
                      drought conditions, financing transfers to more than 70,000 households. A Parametric Insurance instrument
                      designed to complement the Flexible Contingency is in final stages of procurement.. The government
                      obtained Sovereign Drought Insurance from the African Risk Capacity (ARC) group. This insurance makes
                      general budget payments to the government in case of qualifying localized drought conditions, evidenced by
                      subnational triggers. Under this insurance policy, ARC paid US$14.2 million in the 2021/22 season, which
                      was used to support the 2022 Lean Season cash transfers and emergency food (maize) procurement in four
                      regional clusters (northern region, central region, Shire Valley, and Blantyre southern). In addition,
                      a Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC) was also established that has been funded by the
                      IDA to increase the government’s financial readiness and resilience to shocks.

                      The efficacy of the second objective is rated as Satisfactory given the substantial achievement.




                      Rating

                      Satisfactory


OVERALL EFF TBL OLD




Overall Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
Rationale

The rationale behind each PA was adequately discussed in both the PD and the ICR. The relationship between
PAs and the intended outcomes was evident, with some exceptions. The achievement of the first objective is
rated as Moderately Satisfactory, and the second objective is rated as Satisfactory. Given the overall moderate
shortcomings in the achievement of the PDO, the overall outcome is rated as Moderately Satisfactory.



Overall Efficacy Rating
Moderately Satisfactory




                                                                                                                         Page 15 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Malawi CAT-DDO (P165056)



6. Outcome

Rationale

The Satisfactory rating for the relevance of PAs was based on their sound design to build on initiatives from
previous analytical work and country engagement. In most cases, PAs were designed as a sequence of
successive steps that could enable the achievement of appropriate PDOs and were based on an explicitly
articulated theory of change. The rationale for each action was generally well articulated and was largely based
on data points that justified the salience of each PA and how it helped get closer to the realization of the set
objective.

On the efficacy aspects, key achievements have been made in strengthening the institutional capacity for the
implementation of the national disaster and climate resilience agenda though moderate shortcomings remain.
User-friendly warnings, particularly for core sectors like agriculture and fisheries, are now operational and
available in at least three local languages. The institutional framework for disaster risk management (DRM) has
been strengthened with the publication of annual reports and the passage of the DRM Bill. Despite not being
part of the initial indicators, the passing of the DRM Bill and the restructuring of the Department of Disaster
Management Affairs indicate tangible progress in establishing a new institutional framework and enhancing
coordination among state departments. Improved coordination in addressing the link between public health
emergencies and prevention is pending due to the delay in establishing the National Public Health Emergencies
Committee. In terms of physical infrastructure, educational infrastructure vulnerability has been addressed
through the implementation of Safer Schools Construction Guidelines in relevant facilities since 2019. However,
progress has been slower in implementing hazard maps for vulnerable urban infrastructure, and resilience
standards for the road sector are yet to be put into practice. On strengthening the financial capacity aspects,
measurable progress includes the implementation of UBR data-sharing protocols and the introduction of specific
risk-financing instruments. These steps demonstrate the government's commitment to enhancing resilience in
the face of climate disasters, focusing on both social protection and fiscal sustainability.

The overall outcome of the Project is rated Moderately Satisfactory, based on the Satisfactory Relevance of the
Prior Actions and Moderately Satisfactory achievement of the Results Indicators.


a. Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

7. Risk to Development Outcome

Political Risk: The annulment of previous elections in February 2020 and the election of a new government in
the spring of 2020 ushered in a new era in the country’s political landscape. The new government has
proceeded with important changes in the state administration and personnel appointments. This is a
substantial risk regarding the sustainability of achieved reforms given how dependent progress on state
decisions is in the country context, despite the recent approval of the DRM Bill. Equally importantly,
personnel changes since 2020 have meant that reform champions during the program’s setup have exited
positions of authority and decision-making, increasing the possibility of policy reversals, especially regarding
institutional coordination and implementing the new DRM policy framework. The program was in sync with


                                                                                                    Page 16 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Malawi CAT-DDO (P165056)



the previous administration’s Growth and Development Strategy, but that inevitably enhanced the program’s
dependence on the old leadership. The PD had pointed to that risk and had foreseen mitigation measures.

Institutional Risk: the program’s comprehensive and horizontal nature affects several state departments,
agencies, and authorities and requires fine-tuned coordination across the state administration to deliver
sustainable results. Malawi’s limited human resources capacity and implementation gaps have historically
proven crucial in reversing a reformist political agenda, especially when multiple actors with diverse interests
are required to synchronize operations.

Pandemic risk: concurrent with the change in the country’s political leadership. COVID-19 naturally absorbed
the authorities’ attention. Risk about a shift away from core aspects of the program, such as the
government’s financial risk-sharing schemes, has been heightened as a result. Malawi’s long dependence on
international donors is an associated risk to the extent that a deteriorating fiscal situation will likely enhance
dependence on external financial assistance and undermine progress made in long-term fiscal adjustment.

Financial Risk: the program’s ambitious nature requires sustained financial commitment, especially when it
comes to the implementation of the new DRM approach on physical infrastructure. In closing, Malawi’s
headline inflation had reached the highest level since 2013 (Engel et al. 2023), and the country’s debt levels
were considered unsustainable through a Debt Sustainability Analysis (DSA) jointly conducted by the IMF
and the World Bank. The nature of the program through DDO-contingent funding is a default mitigation
strategy during the program’s operation and worked well. Still, it does not remove the uncertainty of future
implementation, given limited fiscal space.


8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Bank Performance – Design

Rationale


The DPF was underpinned by strong analytical underpinnings. The rationale for each policy action was
well documented based on prior analytical work by the World Bank, the United Nations, the World
Meteorological Organization, and the Government of Malawi (PD, pages 31-33, Table 5). The project team
also included TA work carried out during program implementation (PD, Table 5). The first pillar was
supported by the 2015 Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015-2030, the 2015 World
Meteorological Organization Guidelines on Multi-Hazard, Impact-based Forecast and Warning Services,
and the 2017 WB Diagnostic on Multi-Sector Investment Framework for Climate and DRM. The second
pillar was supported by the 2015 WB Report on Moving Toward Climate-Resilient Transport, the 2016 WB
Malawi Urbanization Review and the 2018 joint report by the World Bank, the Global Facility for Disaster
Reduction and Recovery, and ARUP on a Roadmap for Safer Schools. The third pillar drew from the 2016
post-disaster needs assessment (PDNA) for Malawi, the 2017 World Bank report entitled Unbreakable:
Building the Resilience of the Poor in the Face of Natural Disasters. Climate Change and Development
and the 2018 Malawi Country Economic Memorandum.

The program document rightly assessed the overall risk to the program as high, given that political,
macroeconomic, institutional and fiduciary risks were all classified as high, and that multiple policy sectors


                                                                                                      Page 17 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Malawi CAT-DDO (P165056)



would be involved in implementation. Sectoral, technical and social and environmental risks were identified
as moderate. While sectoral and technical risk were correctly identified, environmental and social risks
proved higher during implementation, and contributed to the non-implementation of the targets on road
transport as per RI7 and according to the ICR’s own assessment (p. 35). Mitigation strategies on political
risks included TA and policy dialogue to achieve buy-in by the new authorities as well as M&E incentives,
whereby CAT-DDO disbursement became subject to achieving a Moderately Satisfactory progress on RIs.
Swift disbursement of funds prior to the inauguration of the new government assisted mitigation of
macroeconomic risk, especially as the onset of the pandemic made liquidity more important. Fiduciary
mitigation entailed the hiring of external independent auditors to monitor financing flows and ensure
compliance with IDA rules on disbursement. Institutional risks were correctly identified ex ante and the core
mitigation strategy was to focus on priority areas agreed with the government and international donors.

Following the CAT-DDO request by the government in 2018, the Bank engaged in extensive consultation
with the Ministry of Finance (coordinating the program), sectoral ministries and agencies as well as
development partners. A total of six preparation and one virtual appraisal missions were conducted in that
context (ICR, p. 33). There was also extensive coordination with development partners, ranging from the
IMF on the agreed EFF with the government of Malawi on the fiscal front to the UN on designing an urban
policy framework for Malawi and leveraging the Red Cross and FAO to disseminate early warning systems
to targeted segments of the population.



Rating

Satisfactory

b. Bank Performance – Implementation

Rationale

The Bank engaged in extensive monitoring of operations by use of extensive technical support during the
program, and strong local presence made up of staff and consultants. In-house presence and close
coordination with the government became especially significant for implementation after the 2020 election and
the onset of the pandemic. The program was coordinated with various development partners that had been
present in Malawi before the start of operations, and the results chain reflected that coordination in terms of
targets set on early warning systems disseminated with the help of the Food and Agriculture Organization
(FAO) as well as the Red Cross, support extended by the African Development Bank for the purchase of
drought insurance and cooperation with the UN Habitat program on urban policy.

The Bank was proactive in adapting to the changing circumstances. The delays in the passage of the DRM Bill
led the Bank to intensify its engagement with government authorities and strengthen collaboration in a cross-
sectoral manner as it engaged with Bank teams operating on social support and emergency relief support
during that time. The inclusion of a potential health disaster as an eligible trigger allowed for an adequate
response to COVID-19 without the need to restructure operations, which was particularly significant in the
country context.




                                                                                                   Page 18 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Malawi CAT-DDO (P165056)




Rating

Satisfactory

c. Overall Bank Performance

Rationale

Given that the Bank performance at design and supervision are rated as Satisfactory, the overall Bank
Performance is rated as Satisfactory..


Overall Bank Performance Rating

Satisfactory

9. Other Impacts

a. Social and Poverty

The ICR referred to the positive impact expected from the operation in a general way. Malawi’s poor are
disproportionately exposed and vulnerable to natural hazards. The operation was therefore focused on a key
driver of poverty (disaster vulnerability). The operation also strengthened social protection systems targeting the
most vulnerable (Pillar C); improved early warning systems (Pillar A) for low-income farmers, fishers, and
households to protect their lives, assets, and livelihoods during disasters; made rural schools more resilient
(Pillar B); and strengthened the foundations for more resilient low-income housing in urban and rural areas
(Pillar B),



b. Environmental

There is no concrete evidence on the environmental impact of the program, but it is expected that better urban
flood risk information, hazard-informed planning, and early warnings may have positive environmental spillovers,
such as reducing pollution from urban solid and liquid waste during floods. The revised National Building Policy
and Regulations also aim to reduce the environmental footprint of buildings throughout their lifecycle



c. Gender

The operation was not designed to have any specific gender effects.




                                                                                                    Page 19 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Malawi CAT-DDO (P165056)



d. Other

---

10. Quality of ICR

Rationale

The ICR is overall well-written and comprehensive. The ICR is candid, and internally consistent. The ICR
evidence is generally of high quality. It provides a clear rationale for the selected prior actions and clearly
illustrates the causal links between the prior actions, the results indicators, and the intended outcomes. The
theory of change in the ICR could have been elaborated further, and also include any critical assumptions. The
ICR draws relevant lessons from the experience of implementing this operation.




a. Rating

Substantial

11. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
 Ratings                        ICR                   IEG
                                                                                Disagreement/Comments
                                Moderately
 Outcome                                              Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
 Bank Performance               Satisfactory          Satisfactory
 Relevance of Results
                                ---                   Moderately Satisfactory
 Indicators
 Quality of ICR                 ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR draws the following main lessons from the design and implementation of the program.

IEG agrees with the ICR on the need to ensure that the ambition of DPF and Cat DDO reform agendas should
be matched with adequate resources for Technical Assistance in the execution of the program. This proved
important in the project context, as fiscal constraints intensified during implementation, making reliance on
external financial assistance necessary to sustain reform momentum. Also, exploiting synergies with ongoing
IPFs in design and implementation could be considered.




                                                                                                  Page 20 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Malawi CAT-DDO (P165056)



A second lesson is regarding the usefulness of designing flexible triggers to enable efficient responses to
different types of disaster: The operation was able to support the COVID-19 response without restructuring due
to the inclusion of health disasters among eligible triggers.


13. Project Performance Assessment Report (PPAR) Recommended?

No




                                                                                                 Page 21 of 21
