     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Somalia Recurrent Cost (P154875)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0023449

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P154875                                    Somalia Recurrent Cost

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Somalia                                    Governance


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)                 Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-D3780,TF-A0534,TF-A6971,TF-           30-Jun-2022                                          168,691,340.02
 A8244

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 25-Jun-2015                               30-Jun-2022

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                       Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                          118,000,000.00                                   118,000,000.00

 Revised Commitment                           118,000,000.00                                   110,899,990.27

 Actual                                       111,112,902.27                                   110,899,990.27




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator           Group
 Mees Daniel van der        Clay Wescott                 Jennifer L. Keller               IEGEC (Unit 1)
 Werf




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) for the Somalia Recurrent Cost & Reform Financing Project -
   Phase 2 was stated in the Financing Agreement as "to support the Recipient to provide credible and
   sustainable payroll, and to establish the foundation for efficient budget execution and payment systems for the
   non-security sectors in the Federal Government States (FGS), Eligible Federal Member States and Interim
   and Emerging Administrations."


                                                                                                   Page 1 of 29
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Somalia Recurrent Cost (P154875)



  This project was the second project in a Series of Projects (SOP), which had the objective to "enable the
  Somali Government to achieve reliable and transparent financing of critical civil service operations to help
  strengthen the legitimacy of the state." The Somalia Recurrent Cost and Reform Financing Project – Phase 2
  (RCRF II) came after RCRF I, whose project development objective (PDO) was to finance and support an
  operational payroll and payment system for the non-security sectors. RCRF II is followed by RCRF III, whose
  objective is to support the Federal Government of Somalia and Eligible Federal Member States to strengthen
  resource management systems, the inter-governmental fiscal framework, and service delivery systems in
  health and education.

  RCRF II made use of the flexibility of the IPF instrument by taking advantage of reasonable restructuring to
  provide fiscal space and stabilize the federal state. With the FGS facing a fiscal and security crisis, the Bank
  restructured the project in 2018 to include additional financing (AF), strengthen eligibility criteria, added
  Disbursement Linked Indicators (DLIs), made changes to the PDO and project components, and extended
  project closing to June 2022.

  The new PDO simplified the desired outcomes and brought service delivery to the fore. The restructuring and
  AF strengthened inter-governmental fiscal transfers and provided foundational support for education and
  health services. The PDO was revised to " support the Federal Government of Somalia and Eligible Federal
  Member States to strengthen resource management systems, the inter-governmental fiscal framework, and
  service delivery systems in health and education."

  Objective: For this review, the PDO will be parsed into three objectives that will be referred to as Objectives
  1, 2, and 3, as follows:

         Objective 1: support the Federal Government of Somalia and Eligible Federal Member States to
          strengthen resource management systems
         Objective 2: support the Federal Government of Somalia and Eligible Federal Member States to
          strengthen the inter-governmental fiscal framework
         Objective 3: support the Federal Government of Somalia and Eligible Federal Member States to
          strengthen service delivery systems in health and education

  Split rating: A split evaluation was considered due to the dropping of the word ‘sustainable’ of the PDO
  and the downward revision of some of the outcome targets, which constituted a reduced ambition for those
  aspects of the project. However, since the project substantially achieved its original targets, the split
  evaluation would not have any implications on the rating. Hence, and in the interest of clarity, no split rating
  has been applied.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  22-Nov-2021


                                                                                                     Page 2 of 29
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Somalia Recurrent Cost (P154875)



c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Component 1: Support to core government functions of ministries, departments and agencies in
   FGS (Appraisal US$81.0 million, Actual US$ 99.41 million). The primary objective of this component was to
   cover the salaries of qualified civil servants in non-security sectors, the costs associated with staff hired
   through the Capacity Injection Mechanism (CIM), and other operational expenses not related to salaries.

   Sub-Component 1:1: Financing eligible civil service salaries in non-security sectors in the Federal
   Government of Somalia (FGS) (US$49.0 million). This sub-component aimed to fund the salaries of civil
   servants in non-security sectors from fiscal years 2015 to 2020, to phase out this financial support by the
   project's end. An independent agent would thoroughly review civil service salary expenditures to ensure
   compliance with agreed-upon procurement and control procedures, including processing through the
   Somalia Financial Management Information System (SFMIS). Starting in January 2016, salary payments
   would transition from cash to direct bank deposits. The project would also support the Central Bank of
   Somalia (CBS) to establish the necessary payment systems.

   Sub-Component 1:2: Financing salaries and allowances to government staff and young graduates recruited
   under the capacity injection mechanism (CIM) in FGS (US$17.0 million). This sub-component would finance
   the salaries and allowances of 525 critical advisory, managerial, and technical staff to fill urgent staffing
   gaps identified by the FGS through the CIM. This includes salaries and allowances of several young
   graduates expected to become part of the civil service. The government would make all salary payments for
   government contracts through the regular payroll process and directly to the staff's bank accounts.

   Sub-Component 1:3: Financing eligible non-salary recurrent costs in MDA in the FGS (US$15.0 million).
   This sub-component would allocate funds for essential non-salary operational costs required for the efficient
   functioning of Ministries, Departments, and Agencies (MDAs). These costs include rent, fuel, maintenance
   of vehicles and equipment, office supplies, civil servant travel, and utilities.

   Component 2: Inter-governmental fiscal transfers to core government functions of eligible federal
   member states and interim and emerging administrations (Appraisal US$34.0 million, Actual US$ 99.41
   million). RCRF sub-national financing would reward accountable and transparent government in line with
   RCRF's broader principles with matching funds for targeted service delivery expansion. To receive
   financing, interim and emerging states would need to comply with clearly defined readiness criteria, which
   would be reviewed and updated on an annual basis to ensure adaptation to the country context and to
   balance delivering basic public services against maintaining minimum fiscal and fiduciary management
   practices and systems in recipient governments. Essentially, these criteria serve as the foundation for fiscal
   transfers under the project. Financing would be through an inter-governmental fiscal transfer, reflected in
   the FGS budget appropriation.

   Sub-Component 2:1: Transfers to interim and emerging states for core government functions (US33.0
   million). The sub-component through the transfer grants from FGS to Puntland, Jubbaland, and other
   interim and emerging states will finance (i) reforms to meet the readiness criteria, (ii) a pilot program of
   financing salaries and allowances of civil servants (excluding elected officials) in selected MDA; salaries
   and allowances to government staff and young graduates recruited under the CIM in interim and emerging




                                                                                                    Page 3 of 29
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  Somalia Recurrent Cost (P154875)



states; (iii) systems-strengthening and the establishment of basic accountability systems; and, (iv) eligible
non-salary recurrent costs for these selected MDA.

Sub-Component 2:2: Inter-governmental fora on transfers and information exchanges (US$1.0 million). This
sub-component supports the government in establishing a framework for inter-governmental discussions
and corresponding resource transfers. The aim is to enhance trust between different government levels and
ultimately create fiscal arrangements that encourage a more equitable distribution of resources among
federal and sub-national entities.

Component 3: Support of recurrent costs in health and education sectors in FGS and eligible
member states, interim and emerging administrations (Appraisal US$20.0 million, Actual US$ 16.77
million). The project would support the FGS, Puntland and Jubbaland to expand their service delivery
systems by improving accountability systems and supporting recurrent costs in the education and health
sectors. The specific activities include financing: (i) the establishment of basic accountability systems in
both sectors (US$1.5 million); (ii) eligible salaries and allowances for teachers and health workers from
2015 to 2020 (US$15.0 million); and (iii) eligible non-salary recurrent costs in the sectors (US$0.5 million).
The project would finance the salaries and allowances of eligible health workers and support strengthening
the payroll system. In addition to financing salaries in the education sector, the project would support efforts
to strengthen the public education delivery system to strengthen access, equity and quality. In addition, the
project would support the implementation of key steps, including preparing a teacher recruitment,
remuneration, and career progression policy in line with the Education Sector Strategic Plan, linking the
system strengthening with the financing of salary recurring costs. This would ensure that all new teachers
are recruited based on criteria defined in the policy. The project would also provide technical assistance to
strengthen the Education Management Information System in Puntland and Jubbaland.

Component 4: Project management and coordination (Appraisal US$9.0 million, Actual US$ 8.90
million). This component supported various administrative functions such as coordination, communication,
management, procurement, monitoring and evaluation (M&E), impact assessment, auditing, and the
dissemination of project activities across the FGS, Puntland, and Jubbaland.

Restructurings:

The project underwent 6 level two restructurings, with the most significant restructuring in August
2018, when FGS accessed US$60 million in IDA financing for the first time. This restructuring to
include AF strengthened eligibility criteria and DLIs, changed the PDO and project components, and
extended project closing by two years to June 2022. This restructuring aimed to simplify the PDO and
prioritize service delivery. It also fortified inter-governmental fiscal transfers and laid the groundwork for
improvements in education and health services. Seven new DLIs replaced the previous performance
benchmarks in alignment with existing UK and EU supported operations and close coordination with the
IMF. The revised components were as follows:

Under Component 1, the component was renamed "Recurrent Cost Finance to reform resource
management systems." Reform-minded DLIs were introduced in addition to input financing and included a
benchmark for NSRC at FGS and discontinued NSRC input financing at FGS.

Under Component 2, now called "Strengthening Inter-Governmental Fiscal Relations," this component
introduced forums for fiscal, health, and education sectors. All activities related to core government
functions moved to Component 3.


                                                                                                   Page 4 of 29
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Somalia Recurrent Cost (P154875)



   Under Component 3, renamed "Transfer for core government functions and foundational education and
   health service delivery," saw a significant expansion in scope and funding for foundational education and
   health services. In education, the project helped set up basic accountability systems to include teacher
   assessment, education recurrent costs, and systems strengthening, and in health, the component now
   covered the development of a cadre of female health workers, foundational health service delivery
   mechanisms, and strengthening government capability for contract management, monitoring, and
   coordination.

   Under Component 4, the allocated budget for this component was reduced.

   In subsequent restructurings, the Bank introduced additional DLIs (8-15) to bolster Human Resource
   Management reforms, wage bill management, fiscal reporting, and service delivery. In 2021, when five
   Disbursement Linked Results (DLRs) under DLIs 1 and 6 were not met, they were cancelled and their funds
   worth US$5.7 million were reallocated to cover civil servant salaries. By the project's end, US$60 million
   from IDA and US$118 million from trust funds had been committed, resulting in an estimated total project
   cost of US$178 million, of which US$168.69 million was disbursed. A split evaluation is not called for
   because the revised PDO targets and DLIs were more ambitious.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project Cost: The Project's original cost at appraisal was US$ 144 million, to be committed through the
   Somalia Multi-Partner Fund. However, the project cost was revised to US$ 178 Million following a
   restructuring that facilitated an additional financing of US$ 60 million from IDA with an actual commitment of
   US$ 118 million from the Multi-Partner Fund. The Bank disbursed US$ 59.2 million, and US$ 107.11 million
   was disbursed by the Multi-Partner Trust Fund. Actual project cost at closure was US$ 168.69 million.

   Financing: An IDA credit of SDR 42,800,000 million (equivalent to US$60.0 million as additional financing)
   and a US$ 118 million commitment from Somalia Multi-Partner Trust Funds financed the project.

   Borrower Contribution: The Federal Government of Somalia did not contribute financially to the project.

   Dates: The Bank approved the Project on June 25, 2015, and became effective on July 2, 2015. The
   original closing date was June 30, 2020; however, this was revised, and the project closing date was
   extended by two years to June 30, 2022. The Project Mid-term Review was completed on November 27,
   2017. The extension was due to the additional financing from the World Bank and project restructuring.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The ability to pay civil servants' salaries and provide health and education services would address
the need of the Somali government to build legitimacy among its people. The Somali Government's
PFM systems were rudimentary, and intergovernmental fiscal transfers were non-existent; salaries were
paid in cash, and monthly payroll processing involved submitting physical pay lists, with each submission
subject to multiple manual checks. Budget control by individual ministries was also inadequate, and risks of

                                                                                                    Page 5 of 29
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Somalia Recurrent Cost (P154875)



corruption were omnipresent as the government lacked the mechanisms to investigate or detect fraud.
Complicating matters, at appraisal, revenues, and expenditures were de facto highly devolved in Somalia,
and de jure revenue and expenditure assignments were unclear. Both the FGS and subnational authorities
collected taxes simultaneously. Most federal member states (FMS) were heavily reliant on taxes collected
at ports and airports. The power-sharing arrangements put in place in 2012 were fragile and contested and
posed significant challenges to the institution-building process. Informed by the Somalia Risk and
Resilience Assessment and Systematic Country Diagnostic, the theory of change emphasized that strong
PFM systems for staff salaries would boost state credibility and create the space for service provision, and
the focus on inter-governmental fiscal transfers would boost the legitimacy of and incentives for a federal
system. The project would also support platforms for dialogue between ministers of finance at FGS and
FMS levels and, most importantly, the sector-specific platforms for health and education.

The Project Development Objectives, both at appraisal and after the 2018 restructuring, were highly
relevant and well-aligned with WB-supported strategies. The FY2014-2016 Interim Strategy Note (ISN)
focused on two areas: (i) strengthening core economic institutions and (ii) expanding economic opportunity.
RCRF II's focus on stabilizing the budget through salary payment and the establishment of a core payroll
system to provide a financial and institutional platform for the government corresponded with Strategic
Objective I and was included in the ISN. The project contributed to the Somalia Multi-Partner Fund's
objective of fostering socio-economic recovery and stabilization by supporting the payment of civil service
salaries and the running costs of government institutions, financing technical assistance, and supporting the
building blocks of larger public investment programs across a range of sectors. The FY2019-23 Country
Partnership Framework (CPF), launched when the project was active, included a 'Strengthening Institutions
to Delivery Services' focus area, reflecting the increased focus on service delivery reflected in the revised
PDO indicators. RCRF II contributes to and is mentioned under pillar 1.1. Improve public finance
management and institutional effectiveness, pillar 1.2. Enhance domestic revenue mobilization and
resource sharing and pilar 1.3. Establish basic delivery systems for more inclusive social services.
Additionally, the strengthening of the Somali state that the project would deliver is a crucial contribution to
addressing the drivers of conflict and Somalia's main development constraints as identified by the SCD and
RRA.

DLIs incentivized reforms impacting RCRF II as well as other projects in the portfolio, including CIP,
PFMCSP II, EU, and UK-supported projects, and the IMF Staff Monitored Program. For FGS and FMS
to continue to receive financing under the project they needed to meet certain eligibility criteria. These DLIs,
later Performance Based Conditions (PBCs) in accordance with IPF regulations, promoted basic system
strengthening such as inter-governmental relations, fiscal transparency, and basic payroll and PFM
controls. They focused on areas needed to reach the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) Decision
Point. DLIs added in 2021 were primarily focused on ensuring robust and transparent FMS and FGS human
resource management systems, and inter-government fiscal transfers. These DLIs promoted system
building and strengthening. The DLIs provided a guaranteed advance and payment despite the declining
scale of the recurrent cost financing. This incentivized continued reform and anchored the project’s results
chain across all three components. This was particularly important given the documented capacity
constraints in Somalia. Introduced across two restructurings, the DLIs disbursed US$50 million of the
project’s commitments. In 2021, when five Disbursement Linked Results (DLRs) under DLIs 1 and 7 were
not met, they were canceled and their funds worth US$5.7 million were reallocated. When additional DLIs
under DLI 8 to 15 were not met, their money was returned. IEG agrees with the justification provided for the
choice of instrument as the IPF provided the right set of incentives to support the achievement of the




                                                                                                     Page 6 of 29
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Somalia Recurrent Cost (P154875)



               desired outcomes, although additional technical assistance would have been warranted and an opportunity
               was missed to address revenue generation through the DLIs.

               The project was consistent with the Somalia National Development Plan 2017-2019 priority of
               effective and efficient institutions. The NDP recognized the need for further engagements in the re-
               organizing/streamlining of public sector structures as well as the re-building of the operational effectiveness
               and capacities through reforms of PFM, revenue generation, and Human Resource Management. The
               RCRF II was therefore designed with an adaptive approach of supporting and incentivizing reform
               processes associated with establishing core government functions, providing inter-governmental fiscal
               transfers, and developing the foundational mechanisms for service delivery in health and education.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To strengthen resource management systems

                             Rationale
                             Theory of change: The overall theory of change (TOC) was that increased funding through Financial
                             Management Systems will increase confidence in all levels of government, increase the cohesion of the
                             federal system, and provide more predictable financing for service delivery.

                             Intermediate results and outputs

                                        Increased the monthly payroll reports published on the Ministry of Finance (MoF) website from 4 to 12,
                                           achieving the target of 12.
                                          Integrated the 570 cadres recruited under CIM to support 10 MDAs (office of the prime minister,
                                           finance, the Central Bank of Somalia, planning, agriculture, and labor) on the SFMIS for transparent
                                           payment of staff.
                                          Electronic payroll systems for payment of salaries and vendors established.
                                          Established payment systems by the Central Bank of Somalia/ Dahabshiil International Bank.
                                          Capacity of staff at central regional and district level in FMS developed and feedback from the
                                           Monitoring Agent.
                                          Operations manual – more specificity on procedures updated and improved.

                             DLIs

                              DLI 1: Strengthen customs administration as per customs reform Action Plan

                                                                                                                                    Page 7 of 29
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Somalia Recurrent Cost (P154875)




Activity                                       Complete Comments
1.1: Customs modernization roadmap &                    Successfully completed within the specified time
                                               Yes
action plan                                             frame
1.2: Implementation of interim IT systems at
                                               No       Cancelled
Mogadishu, Kismayo & Bosaso Ports
1.3: Functional specifications for the new              Successfully completed within the specified time
                                               Yes
customs IT system                                       frame
DLI 2: Strengthen Tax Administration systems & staffing
2.1: TIN & TCC mandatory when bidding                   Successfully completed within the specified time
                                               Yes
for government contracts                                frame
2.2: Review existing business processes &               Successfully completed within the specified time
                                               Yes
adopt common practices                                  frame
                                                        Cancelled. Will be supported through the Somalia
2.3: Targeted Automation of Tax collection
                                               No       Enhancing Resource Management Project
(Excise duty, sales tax, road tax)
                                                        (177298)
DLI 3: Strengthen cash management & TSA
3.1: SFMIS to incorporate end-of-day
                                                        Successfully completed within the specified time
balances of all TSA accounts & monthly         Yes
                                                        frame
balances of all MDA accounts
3.2: SFMIS incorporates end-of-day
                                                        Successfully completed. Currently awaiting
reconciled balances & all outstanding          Yes
                                                        disbursement only.
commitments made
                                                        Currently underway. Addressing challenges in
3.3: SFMIS incorporates cash forecasting
                                               No       developing the cash planning system & the new
model
                                                        CoA to be implemented.
DLI 4: Strengthen payment process for operational expenditures
4.1: Reduce cash advances to MDA’s for
                                                        Successfully completed within the specified time
non-salary recurrent costs from 56.4% to Yes
                                                        frame
26.4%
4.2: Reduce cash advances to MDA’s for
                                                        Successfully completed within the specified time
non-salary recurrent costs from 56.4% to Yes
                                                        frame
16.4%
4.3: All government payments for salaries &
                                                        Successfully completed within the specified time
capital expenditures to be paid directly to Yes
                                                        frame
vendor accounts
DLI 8: Reforming Civil Service Legislation
8.1: The cabinet has endorsed the first set
                                                        Successfully completed within the specified time
of the admin regulations for the civil service Yes
                                                        frame
bill
8.2.1: Federal parliament has enacted the
                                               No       Unable to complete within specified time frame.
Civil Service Law
8.2.2.: The cabinet has endorsed the
                                                        Successfully completed within the specified time
second set of the admin regulations for the Yes
                                                        frame
civil service bill



                                                                                            Page 8 of 29
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Somalia Recurrent Cost (P154875)




8.3.1: MoLSA has issued two quarterly
                                                        Unable to complete within specified time frame.
reports covering all non-security MDA’s  No
                                                        Consequence of missed DLR 8.1
applicability of new civil service Law
8.3.2: The cabinet has endorsed the
                                         No             Unable to complete within specified time frame.
‘Organizational Ordinance’
DLI 9: Monitoring staff attendance with Biometrics
9.1: One non-security ministry has
                                                        Successfully completed within the specified time
implemented biometric attendance         Yes
                                                        frame
monitoring
                                                        Currently underway to create links with Payroll
                                                        through SFMIS. Delay is due to previous efforts to
9.2.1: 15 non security MDA’s have
                                                        collect data & record attendance that were
implemented biometric attendance
                                          No            affected by the pandemic & govt. directives to
monitoring (including links to Payroll,
                                                        work remotely.
performance & disciplinary actions
                                                        Deferred to next verification cycle.
                                                        Currently underway. Unable to report on lessons
9.2.2: NCSC has adopted action plan                     learnt as the activity is still in process.
                                          No
based on lessons learnt
                                                      Deferred to next verification cycle.
DLI 10: Promoting opportunities for women in the recipient’s civil service & leadership
10.1: NCSC issues guidelines documenting
number of women in various govt roles and             Successfully completed within the specified time
                                            Yes
measures to achieve 30% women in senior               frame
leadership roles.
10.2: NCSC has an annual report covering
number of women in senior roles, progress             Successfully completed within the specified time
                                            Yes
made and action plan for next reporting               frame
period
DLI 11: Reforming Civil Service Pay & Grading
11.1: The govt has approved the ‘Pay                  Unable to complete within time frame. There is a
                                            No
Grade’ reform                                         PBC regarding this activity in RCRF III.
11:2: The govt has approved a plan for
                                                      Unable to complete within time frame. There is a
transitioning CIM staff into new Pay &      No
                                                      PBC regarding this activity in RCRF III.
Grading system
DLI 12: Reforming Pensions Policy & Administration
12.1: Cabinet has approved pension policy             Successfully completed within the specified time
                                            Yes
& submitted draft pension law to Parliament           frame
12:2: The Recipient has adopted the                   Unable to complete. However, RCRF III has a
                                            No
pension regulations                                   PBC on Pensions.
12.3.1: The recipient has granted pensions            Unable to complete. However, RCRF III has a
                                            No
and started paying them in Jan 2022                   PBC on Pensions.
12.3.2: The MoF has established a pension             Unable to complete. However, RCRF III has a
                                            No
fund department                                       PBC on Pensions.
DLI 13: Improving Wage Bill Management & Transparency


                                                                                             Page 9 of 29
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Somalia Recurrent Cost (P154875)




                                                           Unable to complete. Introduced as a new IMF
13.1: Cabinet approved Action Plan to  No
                                                           Extended Credit Facility for Somalia Project
improve transparency and management of
                                                           benchmark and will be addressed through that
non-formal wage bill
                                                           project.



Outcomes against targets

The total amount of the civil service wage bill financed by the FGS budget was raised from 40% in 2018 to
86% in January–December 2021, exceeding the revised (reduced) target of 40%. This value represented the
total amount of civil servants' salaries deducted by the amount of 'baseline' civil service salaries and CIM
(Capacity Injection Mechanism) salaries paid by the RCRF and divided by the total amount of non-security
sector civil servants. The value does not include the DLI disbursements. If these are to be added, the
indicator value changes to 53 percent in 2019, in 2021, and 45 percent in FY2022 (July 2021–June 2022).

The percentage of eligible civil servants' salaries paid on time was raised from 8% to 75%, exceeding the
revised (reduced) target of 22%. Before the intervention, payment of civil servants was in cash and would
take up to four months. After this reform, payments were ready with the Central Bank of Somalia (CBS) or the
commercial Bank for timely payment before the 28th of each month in line with the government's statutory
pay period.

Progress across the DLIs was mixed. Under the first set of DLIs (1-4) most targets were met although DLI 4
was the only one under which all targets were met. Under DLI 8-13 the majority of targets were not met.

The project contributed to strengthening the resource management system. All PDO and intermediate
indicators achieved or exceeded their target. The extent of the achievement was well captured by the PDO
indicators.



Rating
High


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To strengthen the inter-governmental fiscal framework

Rationale
Theory of change: to achieve the stated objective, the project's national financing would reward accountable
and transparent government in line with RCRF II's broader principles. Interim and emerging states will need to
comply with clearly defined readiness criteria before receiving financing.

Intermediate results and outputs

        The number of inter-governmental forums held annually was raised from 3 to 4, meeting the revised
         (downward) target of 4.

                                                                                               Page 10 of 29
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Somalia Recurrent Cost (P154875)




        Strengthen FGS transfers to FMS was not met for 2021. The execution rate for fiscal transfers to FMS
           for the months (Jan.-June) of 2021 is 18.48% (US$10.45m/56.5million), which is less than the outturn
           rate for domestic revenue of 37.1% (US$100million/$269.7million).
          US$34.4 million was transferred to FGS from the FMS.
          Through sustained dialogue, the fiscal federal technical committee successfully harmonized sin tax
           rates and reached an agreement on tax laws and the Revenue Act.
          The Finance Ministers' Fiscal Forum created a policy note that led to an agreement on a fiscal transfer
           system. On the topic of tariff harmonization, an ad Valorem-based taxation system was implemented
           between FGS and FMS with ports (Puntland and Jubbaland).
          An intergovernmental forum for the education sector was established to negotiate national exams, a
           common curriculum framework, and a syllabus for primary education.
          FGS and FMS MoHs conducted quarterly health technical coordination meetings that brought together
           the health sector where harmonization of salary scales was discussed.



DLIs

DLI 5: Strengthen intergovernmental fiscal policy framework
Activity                                       Complete Comments
5.1: Policy paper outlining policy framework            Successfully completed within the specified time
                                               Yes
for intergovernmental fiscal transfers                  frame
5.2: Draft policy paper including principles
                                                        Successfully completed within the specified time
to guide FGS transfers, comparative            Yes
                                                        frame
analysis and long-term views
5.3: Fiscal transfer allocations in draft 2021          Successfully completed within the specified time
                                               Yes
FGS budget reflect policy paper principles.             frame
DLI 6: Strengthen FGS transfers to FMS
6.1: FGS fiscal transfers execution rate to
                                                        Unable to complete within specified time frame.
FMS equal or greater than outturn rates for No
                                                        There is a similar PBC in RCRF III.
revenue (by Aug 2019)
6.2: FGS fiscal transfers execution rate to
                                                        Successfully completed within the specified time
FMS equal or greater than outturn rates for Yes
                                                        frame. There is a similar PBC in RCRF III.
revenue (by Aug 2020)
6.3: FGS fiscal transfers execution rate to
                                                        Unable to complete within specified time frame.
FMS equal or greater than outturn rates for No
                                                        There is a similar PBC in RCRF III.
revenue (by Aug 2021)
DLI 14: Harmonizing CoA and reliable & timely fiscal reports
14.1: MoF has issued a policy prescribing
the harmonization of budget codes and
                                                        Successfully completed within the specified time
CoA, standardized reporting formats,           Yes
                                                        frame
generation of budget reports and creation
of Financial Reporting Unit
14.2: The new Financial Reporting Unit has Yes          Successfully completed within the specified time
adopted a harmonized budget code and                    frame


                                                                                                   Page 11 of 29
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Somalia Recurrent Cost (P154875)




CoA and control mechanisms to manage
expansion
14.3.1: Budget for FY2022 prepared with                      Unable to complete within specified time
harmonized CoA and issued instructions for No                frame. There is a PBC regarding this activity in
its use on SFMIS                                             RCRF III.
14.3.2: MoF publishes monthly fiscal                         Unable to complete within specified time
reports using the new CoA & reporting      No                frame. There is a PBC regarding this activity in
format                                                       RCRF III.



Outcomes against targets

Inter-governmental transfers to eligible FMS rose by 109% vis-à-vis the baseline year of 2018, exceeding the
target of 45%. Total transfers to eligible FMS in 2018 were US$15 million. Total transfers to eligible FMS by
the end of 2020 were US$59.6 million or 296% compared to the baseline year of 2018 (US$15 million). Total
transfers to eligible FMS in FY2021 were US$31.6 million or 109.9% compared to the baseline. The
enhanced fiscal transfers significantly improved salary payments for teachers and health workers. DLI 5 met
all of its targets but many of the targets under 6 and 14 went unmet.

The project contributed to strengthening the inter-governmental fiscal framework. The PDO and one of the
intermediate indicators achieved or exceeded their target. One intermediate indicator was not met. The extent
of the achievement was well captured by the PDO indicator.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
To strengthen service delivery systems in health and education

Rationale
Theory of change: to achieve the objective, the project would support the FGS, Puntland, and Jubbaland to
expand their service delivery systems through the improvement of accountability systems and support of
recurrent costs in the education and health sectors. It would specifically finance (i) the establishment of basic
accountability systems in both sectors, (ii) eligible salaries and allowances for teachers and health workers
from 2015 to 2020, and (iii) eligible non-salary recurrent costs in the sectors.

Intermediate results and outputs

      School supervision was strengthened; school supervision reports were prepared for 1,554 primary and
       secondary schools in five states and the capital. No school supervision was conducted in 2021 due to
       COVID-related school closures.
      Contract Management Unit established and fully staffed according to organogram,

                                                                                                   Page 12 of 29
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                    Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Somalia Recurrent Cost (P154875)




        A quarter of women of childbearing age (15-59 years) and children 0-59 months were referred to
           health facilities by Female Health Workers, exceeding the target of 10%.
          Female Health Workers selected according to guidelines, trained, and actively providing services at
           the target of 750.
          3,372 teachers were recruited, of which 80 percent were male.
          The Federal Ministry of Education conducted a national teacher proficiency test in the Benadir region
           and four FMS that participated 1,816 teachers to measure their understanding of both pedagogical
           and content knowledge in Mathematics, Somali Islamic Studies, and the English Language.
          In March 2021, a Health Technical Partner was recruited and provided technical assistance and
           capacity building.
          681 Female Health Workers (FMS) were identified, verified (360 existing cadres), and trained.
          The FGS team set up an Open Data Kit for each FMS on a single server where FHW could upload
           different registers, namely family register, daily activity tracker, and weekly supply tracker, to the real-
           time server data started to come.

DLIs

DLI 7: Strengthen teacher proficiency training
Activity                                        Complete          Comments
7.1: Teacher proficiency testing in at least                      Successfully completed within the specified time
                                                Yes
one FMS or BRA                                                    frame
7.2: Teacher proficiency testing in at least                      Successfully completed within the specified time
                                                Yes
two FMS or BRA as part of annual exercise                         frame
7.3: Teacher proficiency testing in at least
                                                                  Successfully completed within the specified time
three FMS or BRA as part of annual              Yes
                                                                  frame
exercise
DLI 15: Enhancing Health Service Delivery Systems
15.1: MoH has issued instructions on the
                                                                  Successfully completed within the specified time
use of Mobile Phone infrastructure for          Yes
                                                                  frame
improved service delivery
15.2: MoH has piloted data gathering &                            Successfully completed within the specified time
                                                Yes
training of FHW/FHS in 2 FMS’                                     frame
15.3.1: MoH has recruited, trained, and                           Successfully completed within the specified time
                                                Yes
deployed at least 700 FHW.                                        frame
15.3.2: At least 300 FHW report daily
                                                                  Successfully completed within the specified time
activities and additional 300 report activities Yes
                                                                  frame
fortnightly
                                                                  Unable to complete within the specified
15.3.3: MoH has reached out to at least                           timeframe.
                                        No
500 pregnant women using mobile phones
                                                                  Deferred to next verification cycle.
15.4: MoH has conducted a stock-taking       Yes                  Successfully completed within the specified time
exercise on lessons learned from the rollout                      frame
of IT-based data gathering & has adopted



                                                                                                         Page 13 of 29
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Somalia Recurrent Cost (P154875)




                            an approved action plan for calendar year
                            2022



                            Outcomes against targets

                            Four eligible governments started conducting proficiency testing of teachers as an annual exercise in 2020,
                            establishing minimum competency level of teachers (DLI 7), exceeding the target of 3. Performance across
                            the DLIs was strong with just one target missed.

                            The project contributed to strengthening service delivery systems in health and education. The PDO and all
                            the intermediate indicators achieved or exceeded their target. The extent of the achievement was well
                            captured by the PDO indicator, but the project lacked a PDO indicator on the outcome of health activities.



                            Rating
                            High


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The PDOs were substantially relevant to the project's overarching objective and all PDO targets were met and
                            surpassed. Seven out of eight intermediate indicators were met. The only intermediate indicator not met was
                            also a DLI related to the intergovernmental transfers.

                            The DLIs supported achieving the overarching objectives pursued by the PDOs and substantive progress was
                            made against them. Thirty out of 44 DLRs were met within the project timeframe. Four DLRs were canceled,
                            with the funds reallocated to other components. Of the 21 DLRs agreed during the 2018 restructuring, 16
                            were achieved, one was not, and four were canceled. Twenty-seven DLIs (8-15) were added in March 2021.
                            These were intended to help Somalia through a liquidity crisis by frontloading support from the outer month of
                            RCRF II and to capture a window of opportunity for agreeing on a more complex set of reforms related to the
                            fiscal sustainability of the wage bill. With less implementation time and more political upheaval, of these 27,
                            14 were met.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            High



          5. Efficiency


                                                                                                                             Page 14 of 29
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Somalia Recurrent Cost (P154875)



Analysis: The usual economic and financial analysis for this project was not carried out, given the paucity of
economic data, the ongoing conflict and fragility in southern Somalia, and the uncertainty in determining costs
and benefits. Consequently, no traditional measures of efficiency are available. Instead, this ICRR includes a
qualitative analysis of the impact of the project on state-building, stability, federalism structure, and service
delivery and spillover effects in an FCV context, in comparison with the hypothetical counterfactuals.

Result/reform         Impact                                  Counterfactual
                      The recurrent cost had the strategic
                      objective of financing the civil
                      service to maintain a government
                                                              The FGS payroll would have
                      for the vital purpose of stability.
                                                              continued to include errors,
                                                              duplications and inaccuracies
                      As a result of the ‘sliding scale’ of
                                                              and lack the formalization to
                      incrementally reduced financing of
                                                              correct them. This would have
                      the FGS payroll, while also
                                                              grown over time and as the FGS
                      maintaining a monthly Monitoring
                                                              added new employees without
                      Agent review of the entire FGS
Civil service salary                                          having put in place proper
                      payroll during the life of the project,
at the FGS level on                                           payroll systems. Ultimately the
                      the FGS has established credible
a declining scale                                             integrity of the FGS payroll,
                      payroll systems and saved up to
                                                              which comprises half of public
                      15% of payroll payments in
                                                              expenditure, would be so low
                      efficiency terms through capturing
                                                              that HIPC Completion Point
                      and correcting errors in the wider
                                                              would not feasible/justifiable,
                      (non-RCRF financed) FGS payroll.
                                                              and the state would ultimately
                      Compounded over time these
                                                              be a less effective vehicle for
                      amounted to significant efficiency
                                                              delivering public services.
                      savings for FGS as many of the
                      payroll deficiencies were
                      addressed.
                                                              The federation would have
                      Establishment of 4 out of 5 federal
                                                              remained highly asymmetrical,
                      member states in Somalia.
                                                              with a federal government in
                                                              Mogadishu, a relatively strong
                      Building stronger public trust in the
                                                              administration in Puntland, but
Civil service         government as the decision-making
                                                              no meaningful local
salaries and non- and basic public services were
                                                              administration above District
salary recurrent      brought closer to citizens and
                                                              level throughout the rest of the
cost financing at the businesses.
                                                              country. Higher levels of
FMS level
                                                              instability and insurgency would
                      Efficiency gains through the
                                                              ensue, as for example the
                      monitoring of FMS payroll by the
                                                              Jubbaland FMS was
                      Monitoring Agent, similar to the
                                                              instrumental in limiting Al
                      argument on the FGS payroll above.
                                                              Shabab in the South.
                      RCRF established a cadre of             FGS and FMS would have
The establishment
                      accountants in FGS MoF and in           lacked capacity to implement
and support to
                      every FMS MoF and a culture of          and ensure financial
External Assistance
                      stricter financial accountability. This accountability of the whole


                                                                                                     Page 15 of 29
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Somalia Recurrent Cost (P154875)



Finance Section       improved the efficiency of RCRF      World Bank US$1.8 billion
(EAFS) staff          financed expenditures and had        portfolio in Somalia.
                      spillover effects in the entire FGS
                      and FMS public expenditure and
                      throughout the World Bank portfolio.
                      HIPC decision point reached in
Support to
                      March 2020 opened-up access to
achieving HIPC
                      the expanded IDA grant financing
decision and
                      and IMF Extended Credit Facility.
anticipated HIPC
completion point
                      On reaching the Completion Point,
(DLIs on revenue                                              HIPC decision point would not
                      Somalia will qualify for full and
mobilization, PFM,                                            have been achieved at this time,
                      irrevocable debt relief, which could
the creation of the                                           depriving Somalia from much
                      reduce the debt-to-GDP ratio from
intergovernmental                                             needed debt relief.
                      41% in 2022 to 6%, meaning that
fiscal forum,
                      debt is sustainable in a forward-
intergovernmental
                      looking sense, contingent on the full
agreements in the
                      delivery of HIPC, Multilateral Debt
education sector,
                      Relief Initiative, and beyond-HIPC
etc.)
                      assistance.
Implementation of
DLI benchmarks:
                                                           Without this reform, the Ministry
Ministry of Finance
                                                           of Interior would have continued
to take over         This helped to break a deadlock on
                                                           to collect these revenues and
responsibility for   this topic between various ministries
                                                           refuse to remit them to the
collection of        and while also demonstrating that
                                                           Treasury to finance the general
revenues at          benchmarks could be used to
                                                           budget, creating lasting
Immigration and      advance their reform objectives.
                                                           distortion in resource allocation
Commerce through
                                                           at FGS level.
SFMIS collection
system.
Implementation of
DLI
                                                           Without this reform, progress on
benchmarks: Adopti Helped to lay the foundation for
                                                           revenue generation through
on and enforcement non-customs revenue generation at
                                                           taxation would have been
of use of Taxpayer FGS level.
                                                           challenging.
Identification
Numbers (TINs)
Implementation of Lasting efficiency gains for the FGS, Without this reform, the
DLI benchmarks:      which will have compounded over government’s financial viability
Suspend all          subsequent years, especially when would have remained undercut
practice of off-     the precedent (and underlying         by inefficiencies.
payroll cash         systems) established in the civil
payments at the      service was later extended to the
Ministry of Finance, 24,000+ security forces.
allowance
payments to be

                                                                                                     Page 16 of 29
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Somalia Recurrent Cost (P154875)



made directly into
individual bank
accounts
Implementation of
                                                              Without this reform, the
DLI benchmarks:      Efficiency gains in FGS undoubtedly
                                                              opportunities for inefficiency and
Reduction of cash    as a result of this. It was also part of
                                                              waste would not have been
transactions and     the HIPC process, keeping the
                                                              reduced, undercutting the
transition to        results/progress moving even in
                                                              financial viability of the Somali
electronic funds     midst of political setbacks
                                                              state.
transfer
                     RCRF was the foundation for an
                     inter-governmental fiscal settlement     In the absence of the
                     between FGS and the FMS by a)            intergovernmental forum, trust
                     supporting the creation of these         between federal entities would
Intergovernmental    entities, and b) bringing them           deteriorate. This would lead to
dialogue             together in a facilitated forum for      the lack of agreements on key
                     dialogue and negotiation, and c)         reforms in accounting, revenue
                     structuring results around the           sharing, harmonization of
                     incremental advancement of a             standards and regulations.
                     positive fiscal settlement.
                     The revenue sharing agreements
                     reached through the
                     intergovernmental component
                     enabled predictable transfers of
                     budget grants through a 60/40
                                                              Without RCRF, there would
                     formula, whereby for instance FMS
                                                              have been no functioning FMS
                     received 40% of budget support
                                                              systems, no intergovernmental
                     funds in 2022, 50% of which was
                                                              fiscal forum, no benchmarks to
                     directed at service delivery in health
                                                              anchor incremental deal-making
                     and education.
                                                              progress, and no inter-
                                                              governmental customs and
                   Agreements on customs tariff
Revenue sharing                                               other revenue harmonization
                   harmonization has potential future
                                                              settlement. Moreover, there
                   efficiency gains in terms of
                                                              would be arguably no HIPC debt
                   predictable trading environment,
                                                              relief, certainly much slower and
                   reduction in frictions/distortions
                                                              more contested customs tariff
                   between ports allowing traders to
                                                              harmonization, trade frictions
                   select the economically desirable
                                                              and associated costs to traders
                   port, compounding over time of
                                                              continued at far higher levels.
                   marginally higher GDP growth
                   across Somalia, fundamental to the
                   international community
                   benchmarks for HIPC Decision
                   Point and Completion Point.
Onboarding teacher After decades of off-budget non-   The school enrollment rate
cadre              governmental financing of schools would have been lower by at
                   the RCRF helped to establish a     least 10% and drop-out rates

                                                                                                      Page 17 of 29
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Somalia Recurrent Cost (P154875)



                     government financed teacher cadre.    higher, as in the absence of
                     RCRF II financed the salaries of      government financed teachers,
                     3,720 teachers, that delivered        parents would need to pay
                     education to approximately 338,520    school fees (15-20$ a month)
                     students (each teacher recruited      per child.
                     covers approximately 91 students
                     see: https://moe.gov.so/wp-
                     content/uploads/2022/06/Annual-
                     Statisitics-Yearbook-2021-
                     Final.pdf). This corresponds to 25%
                     of children currently enrolled in
                     schools.
                                                           There would be limited or no
                     Female Health Workers delivering
                                                           health service delivery by the
Female Health        services, healthy behavior change
                                                           government, undermining citizen
Workers              messages and medication to
                                                           trust and nascent social
                     approximately 85,000 households.
                                                           contract.
                     The Introduction of ICT innovations
                     to deliver services and engage
Use of ICT           beneficiaries in an extremely harsh Limited use of ICR for service
innovations          environment and related savings on delivery.
                     travel costs and monitoring and
                     supervision costs.

Other aspects of design and implementation also indicate substantial efficiency. Actual costs by
component did not exceed the costs as approved through additional financing in 2018 and 2021. The project
was extended by two years from June 2020 to June 2022 to reflect the additional financing and allow for
activities that were added in the 2018 restructuring. RCRF was completed on time and on budget. Component 4
Project Management costs closed under the estimated amount of US$9 million or 5.5 percent of the project's
total actual cost. Additional financing allowed the project to do more as evidenced by the project outcomes and
additional outcomes. Cancelled DLR amounts did not represent a significant reduction, they have been
reallocated to other project activities and the reforms included in the RCRF III. Changes of TTLs throughout the
life of the project were efficient, as indicated under Bank Performance.

The use of a Monitoring Agent to make Ex Ante and Ex Post review requests for financing by the FGS
contributed to program efficiency. In the case of ex-post requests, the expenses could still be declared
ineligible and recovered by lowering replenishments if necessary. The Monitoring Agent supported FGS in
building the technical skills necessary to make quality withdrawal requests that were accurate and evidence-
based. Their use of real-time feedback to identify problems, facilitate agreement on potential solutions, and build
institutional capabilities strengthened pre-existing systems so they could meet World Bank fiduciary standards.
These standards remained robust over time, for example, payroll integrity.

RCRF's approach of using country systems was likely not the most efficient but achieved important
state-building objectives. RCRF's approach of channeling funds through Somali systems was key to the
project's goal of building state capacity and represented a major break with Somalia's history of aid dependence
and minimal government agency. The project also played a vital role in fostering dialogue and trust between
FGS and FMS, crucial for Somalia's future. The project's financial incentives encouraged FMS participation in
technical meetings with FGS, even during political conflicts. However, improving governance proved challenging

                                                                                                     Page 18 of 29
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Somalia Recurrent Cost (P154875)



as political differences between federal and state governments were still being resolved. These political
settlements resulted in obtuse governance outcomes. The governance systems set up in the states were, at
times, not designed for service delivery but to accommodate political clan composition and rent distribution.
Furthermore, the newly created ministries were very rudimentary, especially in the weakest states, lacking even
the most basic staffing and office resources. As a result, time and money were lost, making this approach likely
not the most efficient in the short term (discussed further in Bank Performance). However, such settlements
preserved peace in the short term and represent an important step in Somalia’s state building. Similarly, to
increase service provision, the project opted to invest in quality service delivery and not just inputs, adding
activities like implementing school supervision to strengthen the quality of education outcomes. Thus, RCRF II
involved government agencies in the service delivery for the first time, but only in a very limited manner. RCRF II
was only to have a modest impact on overall education and health service access but did start important
intergovernmental conversations around the role of the state on each government level. As such, it was only a
first step, opening the door for the federal government and federal member states to define more clearly their
role in ensuring basic services across the country for its people.

Overall

The efficiency of this project is challenging to assess due to a lack of data and the hard-to-quantify benefits of
the state-building impacts of the project. The ICR cites studies that found investments of FCV countries in
conflict prevention and in health can be highly cost-effective, yet whether that was the case here cannot be
assessed. While the reduction in the PDO Indicator targets could be taken to indicate less-than-perfect
efficiency, there is little certainty that better outcomes could have been achieved in Somalia's unpredictable FCV
environment. The qualitative analysis of project impacts and the potential counterfactuals present sufficient
evidence to rate efficiency substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     0
 Appraisal                                                  0
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     0
 ICR Estimate                                               0
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

RCRF II achieved significant state-building gains in a difficult environment. It strengthened resource
management, built a system for fiscal transfers, and improved intergovernmental relations. It scaled up transfers
to FMS for education and health services delivery. The RCRF helped establish a common approach to financial

                                                                                                     Page 19 of 29
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Somalia Recurrent Cost (P154875)



management. The technical nature of the RCRF also helped enable continued inter-governmental dialogue on
reforms, even at times when political dialogue was deadlocked. Most importantly, RCRF showed that it was
possible to work with government systems in Somalia rather than the off-budget approach taken by most
international donors. This helped to strengthen the Somali state and increase its legitimacy, thus tackling some
of Somalia's drivers of conflict.

The RCRF II introduced disbursement-linked indicators as part of an adaptive management approach to
create incentives for reform and support FGS liquidity issues. The DLIs provided a guaranteed advance
and payment despite the declining scale of the recurrent cost financing (see section 3. Relevance of
Objectives). While the DLIs helped to incentivize reform and helped Somalia complete the HIPC process they
were not all achieved. Some Disbursement Linked Results were canceled under DLIs 1, 2, and 6, with the funds
reallocated to other components. Additional DLIs were added in March 2021. The main objective of this
package of reforms was to help Somalia grapple with a liquidity crisis by frontloading support from the outer
month of RCRF II and to use this window of opportunity to agree with the government on a more complex set of
reforms related to the fiscal sustainability of the wage bill. The shorter implementation time (15 months) and the
2020-2022 political crisis and related dysfunction of parliament caused a higher share of these DLIs not to be
met, and money was returned. These reform areas were continued under RCRF III.

The Relevance of the PDO is rated High, the overall efficacy is High, the efficiency is rated Substantial, and the
overall outcome is rated Highly Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Highly Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The risk to the project's development outcomes is significant and spans most risk categories,
primarily due to Somalia's status as a fragile state marked by weak institutions, limited state
capacity, and ongoing conflict. These challenges pose significant obstacles to project implementation and
long-term sustainability. Escalating tensions with Al Shabab could erode the government's effectiveness,
potentially draining resources required for civil servant salaries. Additionally, any breakdown in relations
between the Federal Member States (FMS) and the Federal Government of Somalia (FGS would undermine
the progress made in state-building efforts. The political landscape in Somalia is characterized by competing
interests and power struggles, further jeopardizing the sustainability of development outcomes. Moreover,
Somalia's significant financial constraints limit the government's ability to maintain the project's
achievements. Reliance on financial support adds to the risks. Overall, it should be noted that while the last
decade represents a positive break from Somalia’s recent past and a hopeful sign of a potentially more
peaceful future, the improvements should not be overstated. The Somali central and state governments
remain largely in an embryotic state.

Though the RCRF project was initially designed with financial sustainability in mind, the political
realities in Somalia meant the government's wage bill grew quickly and outpaced revenue
generation. Accommodating the competing interests of different clans and political factions often meant
adding more individuals to the government's wage bill (as discussed above in efficiency). As government
revenue is low and likely to remain low for the foreseeable future, new commitments present a burden for the


                                                                                                    Page 20 of 29
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Somalia Recurrent Cost (P154875)



future state and should be avoided. For now, it remains unclear if the government could ever fully pay its
staff without outside support. The scale of the problem grew as the project moved into the service delivery
areas of government. Wanton civil service expansion could put an unsurmountable fiscal burden on the
Somali state. Stronger conditionality on the FMS could have helped to curtail the expansion of cabinets and
ministries.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project design was sensible, focusing on key state-building activities. The project design
  recognized that the success and sustainability of any development intervention in Somalia required
  effective governance arrangements and capable public administration, as also argued by the Somalia risk
  and resilience analysis and systematic country diagnostic. Financing of recurrent costs enabled the
  government to function and continue strengthening core public administration. RCRF II support was
  implemented through government systems rather than creating a parallel system, which was essential for
  building institutional capacity.

  The project design was flexible and adaptable to respond to the emerging federal system, the
  fiscal crisis, and the country's FCV context. At the time of project preparation, the team had limited
  information on the institutional capacity of the FGS and FMS due to a lack of baseline information and
  analytical work to inform project preparation. Although the project was expected to support multiple FMS,
  several of them had not been created at the time of appraisal, adding to the complexity of the project
  design. These difficulties prevented the team from preparing a traditional detailed design and appraisal
  for the project. Instead, the team made the project design flexible by introducing readiness criteria,
  implementing performance benchmarks, conducting annual reviews, and frequently restructuring the
  project to adapt to changing circumstances. These measures allowed the team to mitigate
  implementation risks and steer the project amid uncertainties toward achieving the PDO.

  Readiness Criteria and DLIs, later PBCs, incentivized government reforms and provided
  macroeconomic stability. The RCRF II Readiness Criteria, explicit requirements to be met by FGS and
  FMS prior to receiving recurrent cost financing, empowered those in the government who were interested
  in reform and promoted system building and strengthening. The RCRF II reform benchmarks, followed by
  more formalized DLIs, provided a guaranteed advance and payment despite the declining scale of the
  recurrent cost financing. This dispelled the perception of 'endless free money' while still incentivizing the
  government to think about the future and pursue reforms. Some DLIs were further amplified through
  alignment with EU budget support triggers. The DLIs also incentivized reforms impacting other projects in
  the portfolio, such as CIP and PFMCSP II. Collectively, they contributed to the reform "track record"
  needed to reach the HIPC Decision Point. Early on, there was significant buy-in and interest in reform
  among ministers, supported by dialogue at the highest level. As more DLIs were introduced, this became
  increasingly challenging fewer reforms out of the second set of DLIs, were implemented, indicating that
  the provided parallel technical assistance was not sufficient to maintain engagement on reforms.

  Though the RCRF had a strong initial financial sustainability goal the operation did not
  sufficiently pursue this over the course of the project. The operation was designed with the strong
  aim to increase government capacity to cover recurrent costs, as captured by the use of the word

                                                                                                    Page 21 of 29
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Somalia Recurrent Cost (P154875)



  ‘sustainable’ in the PDO. Indeed, the World Bank anticipated that the FGS would take sole custody of
  recurrent costs during the operation's lifetime and included this PDO level indicator with a target of 100%.
  However, in 2018, the PDO was simplified including by dropping the word ‘sustainable.’ At the same time,
  the scope of the project was expanded, through the inclusion of seven DLIs and increased in the sectors.
  The target of the declining scale calculation was reduced from 100% of eligible recurrent costs covered
  by the government to 40%. The baseline was at that moment adjusted from 0% to 40%, effectively
  meaning that no further improvement was targeted. The 2021 restructuring did introduce DLIs 11-13
  which supported effective and transparent wage bill management for enhanced fiscal sustainability.
  However, given the significant risk that an expanding civil service wage bill without accompanying
  improvements in revenue generation poses to the viability of the Somali state, a stronger focus on
  sustainability should have been maintained. The Afghanistan Reconstruction Trust Fund provides a
  cautionary example in this regard. It intended to stop financing recurrent costs by 2004 but continued to
  until the fall of Kabul. A combination of stricter adherence to set targets, more support for revenue
  generation, and stronger conditionality on the FMS to curtail the expansion of the wage bill would have
  been warranted.

  The PAD was overly optimistic in some of its core assumptions. The project faced the difficult
  challenge of designing a project and setting targets that were ambitious and would constitute a marked
  improvement if achieved while taking into account the challenging environment and limited capacity of the
  FGS and FMS.
  The PAD was overoptimistic in assuming that investments in salaries would result in health and
  education outcomes. Engaging the government in service delivery was important for improving state
  legitimacy but proved difficult to execute effectively (as described under efficiency). The assumption that
  the project could build state capacity at the rate needed to reach project outcomes and withstand external
  shocks also proved overly optimistic.

  The World Bank involved key stakeholders from FGS and FMS in the preparation of RCRF II and
  ensured that the project was aligned with government priorities, creating strong ownership. The
  project was important to both the FGS and FMS. Not only because they needed the resources of RCRF II
  to pay the salaries of civil servants, teachers, and health workers but also because the project would
  grant the government international credibility by having the World Bank channel funds through their
  systems on an ongoing basis. FGS and FMS stakeholders were highly motivated and actively
  participated in the project's preparation, including in multiple field consultations. Despite that, several
  coordination challenges were to emerge during implementation (see Quality of Supervision).



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 High-level political support and dedicated technical staff enabled the implementation of difficult
 reforms. RCRF II experienced strong ownership from the government. High-level government officials,
 including the prime minister and the ministers of finance and planning, were accessible and committed to
 the success of the project. They played a vital role in building consensus amongst stakeholders and



                                                                                                   Page 22 of 29
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Somalia Recurrent Cost (P154875)



mobilizing constituents. The close engagement with high-level government officials allowed the World Bank
to have a strategic dialogue with the government on reforms and continue supporting the reform process.

Constructive collaboration and coordination with the donor community increased development
impact. RCRF invested significantly in coordination. The Bank participated regularly in donor coordination
meetings to provide updates on project implementation progress and flag risks. The Bank kept the donor
communities informed on the design of DLIs, which generated constructive collaboration with other donor-
supported projects, such as the PREMIS project and the EU budget support. The PREMIS project
supported FMS that were not supported by the World Bank's FM and CI operations. PREMIS supported
systems building in Galmudug, Hirshabelle, Jubbaland, and South West, while the World Bank's FM and CI
operations supported Puntland. The EU budget support was informed by RCRF II. It adopted several
RCRF II benchmarks, which increased the associated financial incentives and reduced transaction costs
for the FGS. RCRF II was also closely aligned with IMF structural benchmarks and reform dialogue.

Communication and coordination with the FMS stalled implementation progress. Initially, the World
Bank relied on FGS to engage with FMS, and the FGS did not consistently consult FMS before making all
decisions. This led to delays in implementation. For example, in the female health worker program, the
World Bank and FGS had agreed on the parameters for selecting the health technical partner without
sufficient and timely communication with the FMS. When FMS sent their inputs later, the parameters
needed to be revised, causing further delay. After being made aware of the situation, the Bank integrated
health director generals from FMS into weekly meetings and encouraged FGS to improve communication
with FMS.

Severe capacity constraints of the FGS contributed to administrative bottlenecks and delays.
Capacity constraints in Somalia are extensive. Few people in the workforce have completed primary
education. The institutional capacity is also weak due to the lack of defined processes and responsibilities.
It took a year to prepare FMS systems for teacher payroll. To reduce opportunities for corruption and fraud,
the World Bank needed to provide No Objection for every expenditure request. As a risk mitigation
measure, almost every decision of the project required a No Objection from the World Bank. The World
Bank team was small compared to the complexity of the project and the substantial number of transactions
that required World Bank approval. At times, the World Bank was not able to respond in a timely manner to
the multitude of requests from the government, causing administrative bottlenecks and delays in
implementation. Furthermore, security constraints increased the difficulties for implementation and
supervision. It was difficult to organize in-country missions due to security threats. Missions were
postponed with short notice due to security alerts.

Supervision required significant engagement from the Bank. Supervision of RCRF II required
substantial dedication from the task team. The team held weekly virtual meetings and conducted at least
two supervision missions a year in Somalia or from Kenya. The weekly meetings and day-to-day
engagement provided substantial technical assistance to the government. Having two Co-Task Team
Leaders based in Nairobi also facilitated the engagement with the client. However, given the demanding
environment and complex operation, the considerable number of consultants, and No Objections to
manage, the team indicated that it could have benefited from more operational support to expedite the
process and reduce bottlenecks.

Coordination and capacity challenges were reflected in the delayed hiring of the health technical
partner. The procurement process –from defining the terms of reference to signing the contract– took
almost two years. FGS and FMSs grappled with how to provide health services. The FMSs were nervous


                                                                                                  Page 23 of 29
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Somalia Recurrent Cost (P154875)



 about channeling resources through the treasury and outsourcing the supervision work to the health
 technical partner. It took a significant amount of time for the World Bank, the FGS, and the FMS to
 reconcile. The procurement process was led by the PIU housed in the MOF, while the MoH was less
 involved in developing the Terms of References. The PIU did not have the technical expertise and
 competence on health matters, while the MoH had not managed any project through the government
 budgetary system. Administrative mistakes made in the procurement process also contributed to the delay.

 An independent monitoring agent was instrumental in implementation support and risk
 management. Abyrint, a global management consultancy that specializes in rebuilding governments in
 post-conflict states, was hired by the Multi-Partner Fund to be its monitoring agent. In that capacity, it
 provided third-party monitoring, assurance, and advisory support to ensure that MPF funds engaged by
 Somali authorities are being used according to the MPF grant agreements. This arrangement has been in
 place since RCRF I. The responsibilities of the firm regarding RCRF II encompassed three areas: i)
 monitoring every transaction of RCRF II, identifying ineligible expenditure, and performing other monitoring
 and verification work for the project as needed; ii) providing strategic advice to the World Bank team on
 country context, payroll trends, Human Resources Management practices and policies, and risks; iii)
 ensuring that the World Bank procedures were understood by the government and helping the government
 create the instruments and processes needed to implement those procedures. The Monitoring Agent's role
 was critical for the implementation of RCRF II. It ensured the integrity of RCRF II transactions, provided
 invaluable supervision support to the World Bank, and provided tremendous technical assistance to the
 government. However, as the Monitoring Agent has no permanent presence in Mogadishu, they could not
 provide accessible daily support to the PIU, which would have been beneficial.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 While the project’s theory of change was largely clear, the thinking on its sector impact evolved
 over time. The project's original theory of change was clear, except with respect to revenue for the
 sustainability of the outcomes. As discussed under Components, the 2018 restructuring revised the PDO
 project components and expanded the sector reform agenda of the project, reflected through the
 intermediary indicators. The expanded scope also included the inclusion of seven DLIs. After restructuring
 extensive DLI support in sectors and investments in component 3 shifted, the project's focus shifted from
 inputs for salaries to foundational investments in health and education. The most significant design
 shortcoming was the lack of a PDO indicator on the outcome of health activities, which was a key aspect of
 the project's contribution to service delivery. While there were two health intermediate results indicators
 these are no substitute for a DPO results indicator. As the project was progressively restructured the focus
 on sustainability of government expenditure deteriorated.


                                                                                                  Page 24 of 29
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Somalia Recurrent Cost (P154875)




b. M&E Implementation
  The project faced FCV challenges in collecting data and long lacked an M&E specialist. The data
  for most of the indicators come directly from government financial management systems, while the rest
  can be obtained from regular monitoring of project activities. The project initially encountered challenges
  in the collection of data related to the work of female health workers and resolved the problem by
  implementing mobile phone-based solutions. Shortcomings include the lack of clarity on the calculation of
  the PDO indicator on the share of civil service salary financed by the government, which was not clarified
  until the last Implementation Status and Results Report (ISR). Its original target was revised from 100%
  to 40%, while achievement was 86%. That value represents the total amount of civil servants' salaries
  deducted by the amount of 'baseline' civil service salaries and Capacity Injection Mechanism salaries
  paid by the RCRF and divided by the total amount of non-security sector civil servants' salaries. However,
  this calculation did not treat DLI disbursement as WB financing. If DLI disbursement is considered World
  Bank financing and added, the indicator value changes to 45%. That significantly reduces the growth
  from the baseline of 40% to a fraction of the currently used achievement, although still meeting the final
  target, which itself was set at baseline. Another shortcoming is that the project did not hire a dedicated
  M&E specialist until late 2021, depending mostly on the PIU for data collection. However, the project
  reported timely data in the ISRs. The Monitoring Agent provided regular analytical reports. M&E design,
  implementation, and utilization were adequate to the task and robust in the areas with the highest risk.



c. M&E Utilization
  M&E data was used to provide evidence on the achievement of results and form the basis for
  discussion on course correction, but additional reform could have been incentivized. The
  Monitoring Agent's analytical work was used by the Bank and development partners alike. The frequent
  restructurings reallocated investments between PBCs based on their performance and the country's
  reform needs. M&E data created positive knock-on effects. For example, the data collected in health
  feed into their information systems, rendering them operational. Additionally, the targeted share of civil
  servants' salaries financed by the government was reduced from 100 percent to 40 percent, and the
  targeted percentage of eligible civil servant salaries paid on time was reduced from 80 percent to 22
  percent. By the project closing, achievements far exceeded the revised targets, leaving the question of
  whether this reduction in ambition was necessary. Especially the reduction in ambition on the recurrent
  cost covered by the FMS should have been considered more carefully given its significance to the
  sustainability of the Somali state.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards


                                                                                                    Page 25 of 29
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Somalia Recurrent Cost (P154875)



  The project was classified as Category C, and no environmental or social compliance issues
  occurred during implementation. No specific environmental or social safeguard instruments were
  required, and no safeguard policies were triggered.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  The project had a longstanding Moderately Unsatisfactory (MU) staff self-evaluation rating in
  Financial Management because DLIs were introduced without a formal restructuring. The project
  was originally designed to be a traditional Investment Project Financing. Performance benchmarks were
  introduced during implementation to incentivize the government to undertake reform. Although this
  contributed significantly to the reform progress, it also caused a longstanding MU rating in Financial
  Management in the initial years because proceeds disbursed against the performance benchmarks are not
  linked to specific activities as in a traditional IPF. Furthermore, the project was misclassified in the
  government budget, undermining the transparency of budget execution and financial reporting. The issue
  was resolved in 2019 following a thorough review of the supporting documents submitted by the
  government.

  In a capacity and credibility-building measure, the Monitoring Agent provided ex-ante review and
  verification of the entire payroll, not just World Bank-covered expenditures. Throughout the life of the
  operation, the Monitoring Agent identified US$5.4 million in payroll exceptions, of which only US$280,000
  was declared ineligible. World Bank and Ministry of Finance management were consulted and involved in
  finding solutions, thereby addressing systemic issues and improving the system overall. Subsequently, the
  remaining US$5.12 million was either not paid by the World Bank, refunded to the designated account, or
  was resolved by the government.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  The reforms implemented under the RCRF had wide-reaching impacts. The processes and reforms
  built by the RCRF enabled other reforms within the government. For example, the RCRF demonstrated
  payroll reform was possible in non-security government ministries. This inspired similar reforms in the
  security sector, where the electronic registration of security personnel was implemented. Those payments
  were not channeled through the RCRF, but they mirrored the reforms that were developed through the
  RCRF.

  A further unintended impact of RCRF II has been spillovers from RCRF II project staff into the civil
  service. Senior management positions at technical and political levels are being filled by former project
  consultants familiar with good budgeting and accounting practices and the practical implementation of
  fiscal federalism. For example, one RCRF project consultant later became Director General of Finance.
  They represent a cadre of trained financial experts entering the FGS and FMS ministries of finance.

  Constructive collaboration and coordination with the donor community increased implementation
  efficiency and development impact. RCRF II created a platform for donors to coordinate on the state-
  building agenda. The Bank participated regularly in SMPF meetings to provide updates on project
  implementation progress and flag risks. The Bank kept the donor communities informed on the design of

                                                                                                Page 26 of 29
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Somalia Recurrent Cost (P154875)



   DLIs, which generated constructive collaboration with other donor-supported projects, such as the UK/EU
   Public Resource Management project and the EU budget support (discussed above).



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                     IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Highly Satisfactory    Highly Satisfactory

Bank Performance                Satisfactory           Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                  Substantial            Substantial

Quality of ICR                  ---                    Substantial


12. Lessons

    1. Successful state-building in fragile contexts requires a long-term, multi-phased
       approach that fully engages the government. Full government engagement in project
       design led to strong ownership and alignment with the Federal Government of Somalia's
       (FGS) strategies, allowing for flexibility in resource allocation and enabling the project to build
       capabilities where the government was prepared to act. This engagement was
       complemented by a focus on strengthening core Human Resource Management (HRM) and
       Public Financial Management (PFM) systems, which proved fundamental for the
       sustainability of development interventions. The use of country systems not only built
       institutional capacity but also served as a testing ground for other projects, thereby paving
       the way for future operations like RCRF III and sectoral projects in health and education.
       Recognizing that state-building is a long-term endeavor, the project wisely adopted a multi-
       phased approach, allowing for significant progress even within a five-year timeframe. This
       approach underscored the need for sustained, long-term support from development partners
       as the government continues to rely on external funding for some recurrent costs,
       emphasizing the necessity for a longer-term commitment from development partners for
       ongoing reforms and state-building.
    2. The use of focused DLIs with eligibility criteria can be a powerful combination to
       ensure ownership and incentivize reforms, but coordinated technical assistance is
       needed. DLIs and eligibility criteria allowed the government to make progress at a realistic
       pace while maintaining pressure for reform. However, consistent technical assistance was
       required. Some DLIs were intended to incentivize reforms supported by other projects. In
       such cases, stronger Bank internal coordination and with different government counterparts
       would be essential to facilitate the achievement of such DLIs.
    3. The use of a Monitoring Agent is an innovative approach to buttress credibility in
       country systems while building institutional capacity. The monitoring agent created trust
       in nascent fiduciary systems. The frequency of communication between the Monitoring Agent

                                                                                                      Page 27 of 29
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Somalia Recurrent Cost (P154875)



        and the government helped build state capability and explain how to work with partners like
        the Bank. The Monitoring Agent also provided regular strategic and options papers, which
        benefited the CMU and development partners alike. This approach could be beneficial in
        other fragile and conflict-affected settings to ensure credibility and facilitate state-building
        efforts.
     4. Coordination amongst World Bank projects and with donor projects can increase
        impact. In Somalia, donors provide financing and support in different regions and different
        sectors, and the government's capacity to coordinate these interventions was low. Therefore,
        the World Bank can play a proactive role in coordinating with and informing donors of
        implementation progress and risks, ensuring synergy in project design.
     5. Bank Communication and coordination with subnational governments is essential. In
        a conventional IPF, the World Bank engages mostly with the center and relies on the national
        government to coordinate with their subnational counterparts. In a context where there is a
        lack of trust between the national and subnational governments and an unstable security
        situation, this could worsen intergovernmental relationships or result in frequent delays.
        Therefore, the World Bank should maintain close engagement with state or subnational
        governments and include them in discussions and decision-making whenever possible. A
        communication and change management plan could further these efforts.
     6. Intensive implementation support in FCV projects in Somalia should be adequately
        supported by both human and financial resources. Due to the security challenges and
        the huge need for technical assistance, which is not easy to acquire, RCRF II required a
        supervision budget much higher than that of a typical IPF. The resources provided by the
        SMPF were key to ensuring that the Bank could carry out regular supervision missions and
        dedicate sufficient time and talent to provide intensive implementation support. For a project
        with such a broad scope and high complexity as RCRF II, it could have benefited from
        additional staff members to support operational tasks, M&E, and training.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  Yes
  ASSESSMENT_TABLE
  Please Explain
  This a rare example of recurrent cost financing with DLIs through an IPF and therefore merits a deeper
  analysis.



14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR offers an in-depth summary of the project, substantiating its ratings with available data and evidence. It
maintains a straightforward, precise, and largely consistent alignment with the project's developmental
objectives. While adhering to most of the established guidelines, the report endeavors to cross-reference data
to arrive at its conclusions and maintains a results-oriented focus. Although the quality of the evidence and
analysis is generally robust, there are gaps in data completeness and information. The report includes a

                                                                                                    Page 28 of 29
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Somalia Recurrent Cost (P154875)



discussion of the project's theory of change, aiding the reader in comprehending the basis for the given ratings.
However, the ICR could have gone further in depth as to the basis of the TOC, addressing what analysis
informed it and if a similar approach had been successful in other FCV countries. The description of the design,
selection, and monitoring of the DLIs in the ICR was limited. The ICR’s risk section could have more
strongly acknowledged the existential risks to the sustainability of the project outcomes. Lessons drawn from
the project are articulated clearly, are practical, and are substantiated by the evidence presented in the ICR.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                   Page 29 of 29
