     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     UG-Albertine Reg. Sustainable Dev. Proj (P145101)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0023626

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P145101                                    UG-Albertine Reg. Sustainable Dev. Proj

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Uganda                                     Urban, Resilience and Land


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-54060                                  31-Jul-2019                                        132,088,298.22

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 26-Mar-2014                                31-Dec-2022

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           145,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                            145,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Actual                                        132,349,639.22                                              0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Maria Shkaratan             Fernando Manibog             Avjeet Singh                   IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to improve regional and local access to infrastructure, markets,
   and skills development in the Albertine Region (Grant Agreement, page 5). The PDO was stated identically in
   the PAD.

   The PDO was not revised.



                                                                                                  Page 1 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     UG-Albertine Reg. Sustainable Dev. Proj (P145101)



   For the purposes of this Implementation Completion Report (ICR) review, the objective will be assessed as
   follows:

   PDO1: To improve regional access to infrastructure.

   PDO2: To improve local access to infrastructure.

   PDO3: To improve skills development in the Albertine Region.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   1. Original components

   Component 1 Regional Access and Connectivity (cost at appraisal: US$101.89 million, actual cost:
   US$74.99 million) was designed to increase overall accessibility to and within the Albertine Region, reduce
   travel time, and increase access to markets and services. It upgraded 100.4 km of the Kyenjojo–Kabwoya
   Road from gravel to pavement.

   Component 2 Local Access, Planning and Development (cost at appraisal: US$25.0 million, actual
   cost US$34.2 million) was to support the following activities in nine urban centers:

   Subcomponent A Physical Planning involved preparation of physical development plans.

   Subcomponent B Local Infrastructure Development was to support (i) rehabilitation of district and local
   roads to reduce congestion and increase their resilience; (ii) improvement of economic infrastructure; and
   (iii) upgrading selected urban roads, mainly in Buliisa, to bituminous standard.

   Component 3: Skills Access and Upgrading (cost at appraisal US$27 million, actual cost US$32.0
   million) was to invest in physical and institutional improvements. The main activities included upgrading
   physical infrastructure, supplying equipment, developing curriculum, training instructors and students, and
   providing Bursary Scheme to support skills development in the region.

   2. Changes in components during implementation

   The Project’s components remained unchanged during implementation.




                                                                                                   Page 2 of 22
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    UG-Albertine Reg. Sustainable Dev. Proj (P145101)



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost: The appraisal estimate was US$153.89 million, and the actual Project cost (disbursement at
  closure) was US$141.19 million. The difference between the appraisal cost estimate and the disbursement
  at closure in the amount of US$12.7 was due to the foreign exchange loss, which occurred as a result of the
  depreciation of US$ against the Special Drawing Rights (SDR) over the life of the Project (the Project was
  denominated in SDR) (ICR, page 11).

  Project Financing: The Project was financed by an IDA credit; the appraisal-level amount was US$145.0
  million, and the actual amount disbursed was US$132.09 million.

  Borrower/Recipient contribution: The Borrower’s contribution was US$8.89 million, the same amount as
  was anticipated at appraisal. This was allocated as follows: US$6.89 million to Component 1 and US$2
  million to Component 2.

  Project Dates: The Project was approved on March 26, 2014 and became effective on December 7, 2015.
  The mid-term review was held on March 5, 2018. The original closing date was July 31, 2019. The Project
  was extended three times, for a cumulative period of three years and five months (or 43 months) to
  December 31, 2022.

  Project Restructurings:

  The Project underwent four restructurings, with no change to the PDO. However, during the second
  restructuring of May 2019, several intermediate indicator targets were lowered (reducing the Project scope),
  one was increased, and several new indicators were added. Also, during the third restructuring of Dec
  2020-January 2021, the phrasing of the Objective 3 PDO indicator (PDO4) was modified. In addition, the
  funds were reallocated among components. Specifically:

  1. The following intermediate indicators’ targets were reduced:

  - “Rural District roads rendered passable all season under Project (Number)”: from the original 350 km to
  150 km.

  - “Town Roads upgraded/rehabilitated under Project (Kilometers)”: from the original 10 km to seven km.

  - “Markets constructed under the Project (Number)”: from the original 10 markets to three markets.

  - “New entrants enrolled in training for identified trades/occupations in the two targeted institutions
  (Number)”: from the original 500 trainees to 440 trainees.

  2. The following intermediate indicator’s target was increased:

  - “Local physical plans updated/ completed and approved for selected areas in Buliisa and Hoima Districts
  (Number)”: from the original eight plans to nine plans.

  3. The following new intermediate indicators were added:

  - “Urban Roads Linking to the National Roads upgraded (Kilometers)”



                                                                                                      Page 3 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     UG-Albertine Reg. Sustainable Dev. Proj (P145101)



   - “Registered grievances satisfactorily resolved in line with Grievance Redress System. (Percentage)”

   - “District Roads Designed under the Project (Kilometers)”

   - “Proportion of beneficiaries expressing satisfaction with the completed subprojects (Percentage)”

   - “Proportion of the Bursary Scheme learners who complete the targeted short courses (Percentage)”

   - “Students from targeted programs supported for internship placement and industrial training (Number)”

   - “Number of Workshops constructed and equipped for the targeted programs (Number)”

   - “Proportion of Trainees and Bursary beneficiaries expressing satisfaction with the Training Programs and
   Bursary Scheme (Percentage)”

   4. The phrasing of the original Objective 3 PDO indicator (PDO4) was changed from “Percentage of
   training graduates who are employed or self-employed after six months of completing training in supported
   programs” to “Proportion of employers satisfied with Technical Vocational, Education and Training (TVET)
   graduates at internship.” This was done essentially to replace the original indicator, which was articulated
   above the PDO level (and achieving it was outside of the Project’s control), with the new one that was fully
   linked to the PDO and was within the Project’s control. This change did not reduce the ambition of the
   PDO3 indicator but rather aligned it with the PDO.

   5. The funds were reallocated across components in the following way: Savings in Component 1 (as a
   result of a waiver of the value-added tax in 2019) were reallocated to other components: (i) during the third
   restructuring (December 2020-January 2021), US$2.6 million were reallocated to Component 2 and US$1.6
   million to Component 3. During the fourth restructuring, undisbursed amounts from Component 1 were
   reallocated as follows: US$7.4 million to Component 2 and US$7.7 million to Component 3. (ICR, page 13)




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country and Sector Context: At appraisal, Uganda was a lower-middle-income country with a gross
domestic product (GDP) per capita of US$830.5 and a population of 35 million. At closure, the country had
a low-income status, its GDP per capita was US$964.2, and the population amounted to 47 million. The
Albertine Graben Region played a strategic role in the country, occupying the entire western quarter of
Uganda and having 33 percent of the total population. The region was producing 30 percent of the nation’s
food crops and accounted for more than 70 percent of tourism sector revenue. The discovery of oil in the
region in 2006 significantly boosted Albertine’s role in the country’s development: it had been estimated that
if the oil potential were realized, it could double Uganda’s budget. Improved integrated infrastructure and
services in the region would enhance interconnectivity and support economic development as related to oil
resources, agriculture, and tourism; promote local development; create employment opportunities; and
boost living standards.



                                                                                                    Page 4 of 22
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                       Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      UG-Albertine Reg. Sustainable Dev. Proj (P145101)



               Relevance to Government Strategies at approval and closure. The Project was aligned with the Second
               National Development Plan (NDP-II) (2015/16–2019/20) and Uganda Vision 2040, which had strategic
               objectives of increased competitiveness for sustainable wealth creation, improved employment, and
               inclusive private sector–led growth. The four primary development objectives of the NDP-II were to
               enhance: (i) sustainable production, productivity, and value-added in key growth areas; (ii) stock and quality
               of the infrastructure; (iii) human capital development; and (iv) mechanisms for high-quality, effective, and
               efficient service delivery.

               Relevance to the World Bank Group's (WBG’s) Assistance Strategies at approval. The Project was
               aligned with the Uganda Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) 2013, prepared for the period FY2011-15,
               which emphasized support to the improvement of the country’s (i) infrastructure, including the rehabilitation
               of major transport corridors; (ii) agricultural productivity and access to markets; and (iii) job market, based
               on skills development. It included the strategic goal of developing the oil-producing region as a growth pole.

               Relevance to the World Bank Group's (WBG’s) Assistance Strategies at closure. The Project was
               consistent with the World Bank Country Partnership Framework (CPF) 2016, prepared for FY2016-21.
               Specifically, it was aligned with the Strategic Focus Area B Raising Incomes in Rural Areas, Objective 1
               Increasing Agricultural Commercialization, which aimed at improving value chains in the agribusiness
               sector, linkages to markets, access of farmers to financial markets, access to high-quality agricultural inputs
               and extension services, and promotion of sustainable agricultural practices. The Project was also aligned
               with the Strategic Focus Area C Boosting Inclusive Growth in Urban Areas, Objective 6 Improving Access
               to Urban Services, which emphasized the importance of improving electricity access, ICT services, water
               and sewerage provision, and urban transportation.

               The relevance of objectives is rated High because they were aligned with the goals and targets of the
               Government’s NDP-II, and with the key objectives of the WBG’s CAS for FY2011-15, as well as of the
               WBG’s CPF for FY2016-21.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To improve regional access to infrastructure.

                             Rationale
                             The theory of change (ToC) for the Project was developed for the ICR. It showed a direct, logical causal link
                             from inputs to outputs, to intermediate outcomes, and to the PDO of this Project. There were two results
                             chains. The first results chain (under Components 1 and 2) showed that upgrades and repairs of gravel
                             roads, construction of markets, creation of physical development plans, and preparation of the strategic

                                                                                                                              Page 5 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   UG-Albertine Reg. Sustainable Dev. Proj (P145101)



investment plan for the Albertine Region would lead to the outcomes of reduced travel time and increased
share of the population with access to all-season roads and markets. This would in turn support the
achievement of the following two PDO objectives: (i) improved regional access to infrastructure and (ii)
improved local access to infrastructure. The second results chain demonstrated that development of the
occupational standards and curriculum for oil and gas, establishment of the Oil and Gas Sector Skills Council,
international accreditation, and training would improve the quality of the TVET education and therefore
increase the share of employers satisfied with the qualifications of the TVET graduates. This would in turn
support the achievement of the third PDO objective of improved skills development in the Albertine Region.

The ToC is logical, covers all main inputs and outputs, as well as the PDO outcomes; it also shows the links
from inputs to outputs, to intermediate outcomes, and to the PDO outcomes, thus presenting the logic of the
Project. The critical assumptions are also listed.

Outcomes:

- PDO outcome. By closure, the average travel time between Kyenjojo and Kabwoya for large vehicles or
public transport was reduced to 1.45 hours, while the original target was 2.0 hours. The target was exceeded.

- Direct Project beneficiaries amounted to 1,743,00 people at closure, as compared to the original objective of
1,690,000 people. The target was exceeded. The related target of female beneficiaries, which was 51 percent
of the total beneficiaries, was nearly achieved: it amounted to 50 percent.

- According to the beneficiary survey, almost all respondents (98 percent) said that travel time on the roads
upgraded by the Project decreased.

Output:

- By closure, 100.4 km of the main road between Kyenjojo and Kabwoya were upgraded to Class II, as
compared to the target of 100 km. The target was exceeded.

Overall, under Objective 1, the Project achieved all its targets. Three targets, including the PDO outcome
target, were exceeded. Almost all respondents of the beneficiary survey (95 percent or above) said that the
condition of roads improved and that the time of travel decreased. The near-achievement of the gender-
specific target (50 percent versus the target of 51 percent) is not considered to be an efficacy shortcoming but
rather a minor RF design deficiency.

Rating. The Project achieved or exceeded its original Objective 1 major targets, and its efficacy is rated High.



Rating
High


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
To improve regional access to infrastructure.


                                                                                                  Page 6 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   UG-Albertine Reg. Sustainable Dev. Proj (P145101)




Revised Rationale
Please see the discussion of the TOC under Objective 1, Original Project.

Outcomes and outputs that were revised or added under Objective 1, Revision 1:

Indicator targets were not revised.

The following output indicators were added:

- By closure, 12.1 km of urban roads linking to national roads were improved, as compared to the target of
eight km. The target was exceeded.

- By closure, 99.3 percent of total registered grievances were resolved in accordance with grievance redress
system, as compared with the target of 100 percent. The target was nearly achieved.

Overall, under Objective 1, the Revised Project achieved all its targets. Out of the two targets introduced at
restructuring, one was exceeded, and one nearly achieved. The near achievement of the target of
satisfactorily resolved grievances (99.3 percent versus the target of 100 percent) is not considered to be an
efficacy shortcoming but rather a minor RF design deficiency.

Rating. The Project achieved or exceeded its revised Objective 1 targets, and its efficacy is rated High.



Revised Rating
High


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To improve local access to infrastructure.

Rationale
Please see the discussion of the TOC under Objective 1, Original Project.

Outcomes:

- PDO outcomes. The share of rural population in the Project area with access to all-season roads was 75
percent at closure, as compared to the original target of 70 percent. The target was exceeded. The related
outcome of the number of rural people with access to all-season roads was also exceeded: 572,800 people at
closure, as compared to the original target of 450,000 people.

- According to the beneficiary survey, travel cost significantly reduced as a result of the Project: the cost of
travel by motorcycle from Bulindi Town to Dwooli dropped from US$5.3 to US$1.6; and the cost of travel by
bicycle or motorcycle taxi from Ngwedo to Buliisa Town dropped from US$2.4 to US$1.6. The rate of
satisfaction with the quality of the Project-built infrastructure was 88.8 percent, and more than 97 percent of
respondents said that the completed roads and markets were appropriate.


                                                                                                    Page 7 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   UG-Albertine Reg. Sustainable Dev. Proj (P145101)



Outputs:

- The number of bridges, culverts and swamp crossings constructed or rehabilitated was 62 at closure, as
compared to the originally targeted 40. The target was exceeded.

- By closure, the number of local physical plans updated/completed and approved for selected areas in
Buliisa and Hoima Districts was nine, as compared with the originally targeted eight. The target was
exceeded.

- The number of rural district roads rendered all-season passable amounted to 220 at closure versus the
original target of 350. The target was not achieved.

- The number of town roads upgraded or rehabilitated was 7.36 at closure versus the originally targeted 10.
The target was not achieved.

- The number of markets constructed under the Project amounted to four at closure, versus the original target
of 10. The target was not achieved.

Overall, half of the targets under Objective 2 were exceeded, while the other half was not achieved. Even
though the outcome targets were achieved, it was over reduced length of road e.g. the target for the number
of rural district roads rendered all-season passable was only 63% achieved.

Rating. The Project partly achieved its objectives, and its efficacy rating is Modest.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 2 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
To improve local access to infrastructure.

Revised Rationale
Please see the discussion of the TOC under Objective 1, Original Project.

Outcomes and outputs that were revised or added under Objective 2, Revision 1:

The following output targets were revised:

- By closure, 220.4 km of rural district roads were made all-season passable, as compared to the revised
target of 150. The target was exceeded.

- By closure, 7.36 km of town roads were upgraded or rehabilitated, as compared to the revised target of
seven km. The target was exceeded.




                                                                                                  Page 8 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   UG-Albertine Reg. Sustainable Dev. Proj (P145101)



- By closure, four markets were constructed, as compared to the revised target of three markets. The target
was exceeded.

The following output indicators were added:

- By closure, 366 district roads were designed, as compared to the target of 350. The target was exceeded.

- Ninety-three percent of the beneficiaries said they were satisfied with the completed subprojects, against the
target of 50. The target was exceeded.

Overall, the Project exceeded all of the targets under Revision 1. The three intermediate outcomes which
were not achieved under the Original Project and for which the targets were revised at the second
restructuring, were now reached.

Rating. The Project achieved or exceeded all of its revised Objective 2 targets, and its efficacy is rated High.



Revised Rating
High


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
To improve skills development in the Albertine Region.

Rationale
Please see the discussion of the TOC under Objective 1, Original Project.

Outcomes:

- PDO outcome. The original Objective 3 PDO indicator “Percentage of training graduates who are employed
or self-employed after six months of completing training in supported programs” was dropped and replaced at
the third restructuring with the indicator "employers satisfied with technical and vocational education, and
training graduates during internships" that was deemed to better align and be attributable to the project
interventions. While the achievement of the original indicator at closure was reported in the ICR as exceeding
the target (actual result 82 percent vs. the target of 80 percent) (ICR, page 15), the achievement could not be
fully attributable to the project (and hence was dropped for those reasons).

- By closure, the reform task force Oil and Gas Committee was established and functional to define skill
needs, set occupational standards, and develop curriculum for oil and gas sector, as planned at approval.
The target was achieved.

Outputs:

- By closure, competence-based training (CBT) curricula and assessment was developed and internationally
accredited, as planned at approval. The target was achieved.



                                                                                                   Page 9 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   UG-Albertine Reg. Sustainable Dev. Proj (P145101)



- By closure, 608 students from the Albertine Region received support for bursary technical and vocational
education and training (BTVET), as compared to the original target of 600 students. The target was
exceeded. Note: the bursary scheme was developed to fill in the gap while the targeted institutions were
undergoing reforms to develop skill development programs to address the long-term labor market needs. The
bursary scheme addressed short-term needs.

- By closure, 40 percent of students who received support for BTVET were female, as compared to the
original target of 40 percent. The target was achieved.

- By closure, 448 students were enrolled in training for trades/occupations in the two targeted institutions,
while the original target was 500. The target was nearly achieved.

Overall, under Objective 3, most of the original targets were achieved, with the exception of the original
intermediate target on students enrolled in training for trades/occupations. The efficacy is rated Substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 3 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
To improve skills development in the Albertine Region.

Revised Rationale
Please see the discussion of the TOC under Objective 1, Original Project.

Outcomes and outputs that were revised or added under Revision 1:

The following outcome indicator was revised:

- Revised PDO outcome. The share of employers satisfied with technical and vocational education and
training (TVET) graduates at the internship was 98 percent, as compared to the target of 80 percent. The
target was exceeded. Note: this was a new Objective 3 PDO indicator, replacing the original one.

The following output target was revised:

- By closure, 448 new entrants enrolled in training for identified trades/occupations in the targeted institutions,
compared to the revised target of 440 new entrants. The revised target was exceeded.

The following output indicators were added:

- By closure, 97 percent of the Bursary Scheme learners completed the targeted courses, as compared to the
target of 90 percent. The target was exceeded.




                                                                                                    Page 10 of 22
                                 Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                 UG-Albertine Reg. Sustainable Dev. Proj (P145101)



                              - By closure, 583 students from targeted programs were supported in connection with their internship
                              placement and industrial training compared to the target of 440 students. The target was exceeded.

                              - By closure, ten workshops were conducted for the targeted programs, compared to the five workshops'
                              target. The target was exceeded.

                              - Ninety-seven percent of the trainees and Bursary beneficiaries said they were satisfied with the educational
                              programs, against the target of 50. The target was exceeded.

                              Overall, the Project exceeded or achieved all the targets under Revision 1. The three intermediate outcomes
                              not achieved under the Original Project and for which the targets were revised at the second restructuring
                              were now reached.

                              Rating. The Project achieved or exceeded all of its revised Objective 3 targets, and its efficacy is rated High.



                              Revised Rating
                              High


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Original Project:

                            For the Original Project, the efficacy is Substantial. Under Objective 1, the Project fully achieved its
                            objectives, reducing travel time as anticipated, upgrading the main road as planned, and providing benefits to
                            the targeted population. Under Objective 2, the Project partially achieved its objectives: while it provided the
                            targeted rural population with the all-season roads and rehabilitated/constructed bridges and crossings as
                            planned, several output targets, such as the number of rural and town roads upgraded, were not reached.
                            Under Objective 3, the Project almost fully achieved its targets: while it created a functional task force to
                            define skill needs and set occupational standards for oil and gas sector, as well as provided financial support
                            to the targeted number of bursary students, at the same time, it did not reach the targeted number of
                            supported students in participating institutions.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial

                  OBJR1_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
                            Revised Project:


                                                                                                                                Page 11 of 22
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      UG-Albertine Reg. Sustainable Dev. Proj (P145101)



  For the Revised Project, the efficacy is High. The Project achieved all its intended outcomes under all three
  Objectives.



  Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating
  High



 5. Efficiency
I. Economic Analysis.

Economic analysis was conducted for all three Project components, using the same methodology both at
appraisal and at closure, including using a discount rate of 12 percent (ICR, page 22). The analysis was done
separately for individual activities, and therefore, the overall Project’s economic internal rate of return (EIRR)
and net present value (NPV) are unavailable. For Components 1 and 2, the costs included construction and
maintenance costs. For Component 3, the costs used in economic analysis included the Component costs
(excluding technical assistance costs) and private costs (the costs of school registration fees, uniforms, books
and school supplies, transportation costs to and from school, boarding fees). The benefits of road construction
(factored into economic analysis) included decreased travel time, reduced vehicle operating costs, and reduced
road accidents. The benefits of constructing local economic infrastructure included jobs created and revenue
collected in the markets. The benefits of skills access and upgrading included the wage premium of the
graduates.

1. Component 1 economic analysis.

The estimates were prepared for the Kyenjojo-Kabwoya main road, both at appraisal and at closure. The NPV at
appraisal was US$26.7 million, and at closure it increased to US$146.8 million. The EIRR at appraisal was 17.9
percent, and at completion it declined to 14.5 percent.

2. Component 2 economic analysis.

The estimates were prepared for four town and district roads (for two of them both at appraisal and at closure,
and for the other two at closure only) and for four markets (both at appraisal and at closure). The results are as
follows:

- Buliisa Town Council tarmac roads: the NPV was US$1.4 million at appraisal and decreased to US$0.9 million
at closure; while the EIRR was 3.2 percent at appraisal and declined to 1.8 percent at closure.

- Hoima District gravel roads: the NPV was US$5.0 million at appraisal and decreased to US$2.5 million at
closure; while the EIRR was 9.9 percent at appraisal and declined to 3.7 percent at closure.

- Buliisa gravel roads (only appraisal estimates are available): at appraisal, the NPV was US$3.2 million, while
the EIRR was 11.8 percent.




                                                                                                     Page 12 of 22
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      UG-Albertine Reg. Sustainable Dev. Proj (P145101)



- Kikuube gravel roads (only appraisal estimates are available): at appraisal, the NPV was US$4.1 million, while
the EIRR was 7.0 percent.

- Kabale Market: the NPV was US$0.3 million at appraisal and decreased to US$0.2 million at closure; while the
EIRR was 9.6 percent at appraisal and declined to 2.3 percent at closure.

- Buhuka Market: the NPV was US$0.4 million at appraisal and increased to US$4.1 million at closure; while the
EIRR was 20.8 percent at appraisal and declined to 4.6 percent at closure.

- Biiso Market: the NPV was (-US$405.9) million at appraisal and improved to (-US$0.14) million at closure;
while the EIRR was (-1.6) percent at appraisal and declined to (-2.1) percent at closure.

- Walukuba Market: the NPV was (-US$706.3) million at appraisal and decreased to (-US$1,818.7) million at
closure; while the EIRR was (-2.2) percent at appraisal and increased to 4.6 percent at closure.

3. Component 3 economic analysis.

The estimates were made for the institutional capacity building in the two targeted institutions: Uganda
Petroleum Institute Kigumba (UPIK) and Uganda Technical College (UTC). The NPV was US$27.2 million at
appraisal and increased to US$256 million at closure; while the EIRR was 15.5 percent at appraisal and
increased to 19.1 percent at closure.

Overall, while the EIRRs were largely positive, several EIRRs at closure were below the appraisal
estimates (with the exception of the Walukuba Market EIRR and the institutional capacity-building
activities), and few EIRR estimates were below the opportunity cost of capital reflected in the discount
rate of 12 percent, which was used in the economic analysis. The EIRRs exceeding the discount rate were
those estimated for Component 1 and Component 3 (both at appraisal and at closure) and for the Buhuka
market at appraisal. Component 1 represented 70 percent of the total Project cost at appraisal and 53 percent at
closure; Component 3 represented 17.5 percent of the total project cost at appraisal and 22.7 percent at closure;
and Buhuka market was one of many subprojects under Component 2, the latter representing 16.2 percent of
the total project cost at appraisal and 24.1 percent at closure. Regarding the Buliisa Town Council tarmac roads’
decrease in the NPV and EIRR from appraisal to closure, the ICR notes that this investment was linked to other
infrastructure investments in the region and to the expected economic growth once oil activities are realized,
after the Project’s closure (ICR, page 21). If this was the case, it is unclear why such expectations were not
factored in the calculations of economic benefits. In two cases – the Biiso Market and the Walukuba Market –
the appraisal-level NPV estimates were significantly below zero, and it is unclear why the Project proceeded
with these two investments. The ICR states that “such improvements are not considered in a traditional
economic analysis” and that this investment improved “the living and working conditions of the local community”
(ICR, page 21). However, such an explanation is insufficient in the context of economic analysis.

II. Administrative efficiency.

The Project was able to achieve its objectives within the original financing envelope, although with a reduction in
the scope of activities. The project was extended three times, for a cumulative period of three years and five
months (or 43 months). The ICR reports that the Bank suspended funding to Uganda National Roads Authority
(UNRA) under Component 1 for 18 months due to the non-compliance with social safeguards, and Component 3
was delayed because of an inadequate assessment of requirements and processes for the twinning
arrangements between the two targeted institutions (UPIK and UTC). Another cause of delays was the late
timing of the feasibility studies for Component 2, resulting in the need to restructure it during implementation.

                                                                                                     Page 13 of 22
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      UG-Albertine Reg. Sustainable Dev. Proj (P145101)



The COVID-19 pandemic caused delays in procurement and in the implementation of construction and other
investment activities, and suspension of training. (ICR, page 22)

Given the shortcomings in economic analysis and significant implementation delays, the efficiency is rated as
Modest. It is noted that the ICR uses the term “moderate" as the rating of a project’s efficiency (ICR, pages
21,22 and 23), while there is no such rating in the ICR preparation guidelines. Therefore, it was unclear what
rating the ICR assigned for project efficiency.

Note: Figures were not entered below because an overall EIRR was not calculated for the project, since the
economic analysis of each component was prepared instead.




Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?            Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                    0
 Appraisal                                                 0
                                                                                     Not Applicable
                                                                                    0
 ICR Estimate                                              0
                                                                                     Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Original Project:

Relevance of objectives: High

Efficacy: Substantial

Efficiency: Modest

Outcome: Moderately Satisfactory (a value of 4).

Revised Project:

Relevance of objectives: High



                                                                                                   Page 14 of 22
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      UG-Albertine Reg. Sustainable Dev. Proj (P145101)



Efficacy: High

Efficiency: Modest

Outcome: Moderately Satisfactory (a value of 4).

With both the Original and Revised Projects being rated as Moderately Satisfactory, the Overall Project outcome
rating is Moderately Satisfactory. For information, the shares of the disbursed funds before and after
restructuring were as follows: US$71.58 million or 54.2 percent of the Project costs at closure were disbursed
before the restructuring in May 2019 and US$60.51 or 45.8 percent were disbursed after that restructuring.

The rating is mainly due to the partial achievement of Objective 2 outcomes under the Original Project, as well
as to the implementation inefficiencies resulting in the EIRR at closure being below the EIRR at appraisal and in
a significantly extended Project closure date.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Financial and institutional. This risk can arise due to limitations for maintaining the created assets and the
built institutional capacity under Components 2 and 3. To mitigate this risk in relation to Component 2,
memoranda of understanding were signed with the beneficiary local governments and institutions. However,
the ICR reports that the local budgets were insufficient to maintain the built infrastructure (ICR, page 31). As
part of the sustainability plan under Component 3, UPIK was expected to have a discharge permit from the
Directorate of Water Resources Management and a permit to own and operate a treatment plant from the
National Environment Management Authority. However, at Project closure, these permits were not
completed. (ICR, page 31)

Government ownership and financial commitment. The project’s investments can only be fully realized if
related investments in infrastructure, which were beyond the Project scope, are made and maintained. This
includes road upgrades in locations adjacent to the Project area and upgrades of other major roads in the
region. Specifically, in specific locations, adjacent roads need to be raised above flood levels, and drainage
channels are to be constructed in conjunction with the newly built roads; also, the designs prepared under
Component 3 need to be implemented. All this requires government commitment, prioritization of these
activities, and extra funding.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The Project design responded to the urgent need to improve connectivity and skills development in the
  Albertine Region, thus supporting economic development. The ICR reports that the Project team leaders

                                                                                                     Page 15 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     UG-Albertine Reg. Sustainable Dev. Proj (P145101)



  demonstrated sound knowledge of the country and of the sector challenges and developed good
  relationships with the implementation agencies. The presence of the Bank team in the country supported
  the delivery of technical and operational advice and the mitigation of challenges and risks. Having the
  same task team leader during most of the implementation period helped to maintain consistency and
  build on prior experience (ICR, page 31).

  However, there were some deficiencies in design as it relates to Components 2 and 3. The late timing of
  the feasibility studies for Component 2 caused the need to restructure it during implementation.
  Component 3 was delayed because of an inadequate assessment of requirements and processes for the
  twinning arrangements between the two targeted institutions (UPIK and UTC). In addition, the design of
  the RF for the Project had moderate shortcomings, as described in sections 4 (Achievement of efficacy)
  and 9 (M & E Design, Implementation & Utilization) of this Review.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The ICR reported that implementation support missions were regular, timely, appropriately resourced, and
 solution oriented. The Bank specialists provided hands-on support and guidance on technical, fiduciary,
 and safeguard aspects of implementation. The task team was proactive in addressing challenges and
 working with the government in restructuring the Project. During the COVID-19 pandemic, the remote
 supervision was efficient.

 However, there were serious issues with environmental and social (E&S) performance and procurement
 during implementation (see section 10 Other Issues), as well as other inefficiencies, causing multiple
 implementation delays.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 Overall, the Project's RF mostly reflected the logic of Project interventions in the PAD and was sufficiently
 linked to the PDO. Most of the RF indicators were quantitative, and all of them were time-bound, had
 baselines and targets, and were attributable to the Project. There were two gender-disaggregated
 indicators. The RF measured the PDO outcomes, intermediate outcomes (such as reduced travel time; and
 the creation and operationalization of the task force Oil and Gas Committee) and the outputs (such as

                                                                                                  Page 16 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     UG-Albertine Reg. Sustainable Dev. Proj (P145101)



 number of markets constructed and number of students enrolled in training). The ICR reports that data
 collection methods and frequency of and responsibility for data collection were defined for each objective
 and each expected outcome in the PAD (ICR, page 27).

 However, the RF had moderate shortcomings, which had to be corrected during implementation.
 Specifically, the Objective 3 PDO indicator was articulated above the PDO level (and achieving it was
 outside of the Project’s control) and had to be replaced with a new indicator, which was fully linked to the
 PDO and was within the Project’s control. In addition, the RF insufficiently reflected Project interventions at
 the intermediate level, and several intermediate process indicators had to be added during the second
 restructuring in May 2019.



b. M&E Implementation
  The ICR reports that the M&E system functioning was efficient, but its complexity was excessive. The
  implementing agencies for each component were preparing quarterly reports, which were then
  consolidated by the Project Technical Committee (PTC). The Secretariat compiled and reproduced the
  M&E results for each component in the overall results framework. The reports were shared with the World
  Bank, PTC, and Project steering committee for discussions and action.

  However, the quarterly reports were often produced with delays, which affected the preparation of the
  Bank supervision missions. Monitoring progress and performance of outsourced services, especially by
  consultants, was not closely tracked to provide timely information for decision making. The midterm
  review recommended establishing a dedicated Project M&E reporting desk to deal with this issue, but this
  recommendation was not implemented. (ICR, page 27).



c. M&E Utilization
  The ICR reported that the M&E data and reports were used to track progress throughout
  implementation, and the client used independent monitoring, beneficiary satisfaction surveys, and labor
  audits to monitor and track the Project’s progress. (ICR, page 28)

  While considering the moderate shortcomings in design and implementation discussed above, the
  overall M&E quality is rated as Substantial on balance.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Environmental Safeguards. The Project was classified as Environmental Category B and triggered four
   environmental safeguard operational policies (OPs): Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01), Natural Habitats
   (OP 4.04), Forests (OP 4.36), and Physical Cultural Resources (OP 4.11). An environmental and social

                                                                                                     Page 17 of 22
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  UG-Albertine Reg. Sustainable Dev. Proj (P145101)



(E&S) management framework was prepared for Components 2 and 3, while an E&S impact assessment
was put together for the Kyenjojo-Kabwoya Road subproject under Component 1. Environmental safeguard
performance was monitored consistently during implementation, and detailed reports were submitted. The
safeguard performance ratings were Moderately Satisfactory throughout implementation, except for the
April 2022 Moderately Unsatisfactory rating, which was a result of the lack of social safeguards specialists
under Components 2 and 3, a failure to remit workers’ National Social Security Funds under all
components, and the lack of documentation on social risk management activities. There was an issue with
the delayed and inadequately restored contractors’ auxiliary sites at Project closure. At the time of the ICR
preparation, the client was working to ensure that these sites were fully restored. (ICR, page 33) At IEG's
request, the team provided detailed information regarding the current status of this issue: in summary, the
multiple Component 1 and Component 2 sites had been fully restored, with the exception of one camp site
which was partially restored with decommissioning still ongoing.

Social Safeguards. The Project triggered OP 4.12 Involuntary Resettlement Policy. The E&S management
framework and the resettlement policy framework were prepared. Site-specific plans were also prepared,
including Resettlement Action Plans and Stakeholder Engagement Plans. All three components established
grievance mechanisms.

The main social safeguard problem during implementation was that several fatalities and serious injuries
occurred, caused by lapses in health and safety management on road subprojects under Components 1
and 2, leading to work stoppage orders. Root cause analyses were conducted and safeguard corrective
action plans were prepared and implemented. The Project team, contractors, and consultants responded to
gaps identified, improving health and safety management. In addition, there was one Gender Based
Violence case under Component 2, for which a corrective action plan was prepared and implemented. (ICR,
pages 29-30)

The ICR did not provide sufficient details about the incidents that resulted in fatalities and serious injuries,
including the number of people affected, what lapses in safety management caused them, and what
constituted the corrective plans. However, at IEG request, the team provided detailed information on the
matter. Under Component 1, there were three serious and 11 severe incidents, with 22 fatalities in total.
Under Component 2, there were three deaths and eight serious injuries. Most of the incidents were related
to road traffic, and some to conducting work at construction sites, The main root causes were related to
unsafe driving by the project drivers or other drivers on the road; equipment failure on the sites; and human
error in using equipment. The implemented corrective action (shared with the World Bank) included the
following: usage of vehicle tracking systems (monitoring the speed and other driving characteristics);
defensive driving training; daily talks for drivers; mandatory hazard identification by site foremen and safety
teams; pre-hiring training; and community awareness on road safety.

IEG was also provided additional information regarding the gender-based violence case, where the police
took over the investigation but did not apprehend the alleged offender. The project provided psycho-social
support to the victim and her family employing by professional counsellors. The victim was also provided
with material support that was stipulated in the Corrective Action Plan.

The following social safeguard shortcomings were also reported in the ICR:

- Delayed remittances for workers’ National Social Security Fund funds under Components 1 and 2, which
were cleared before the ICR mission;



                                                                                                  Page 18 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     UG-Albertine Reg. Sustainable Dev. Proj (P145101)



   - Delayed resolution of community grievances under Component 1, of which nine grievances had not been
   resolved by the time of the ICR mission. At IEG's request, the team provided information on the current
   status of this issue: the issue was caused by dormant bank accounts, and the resolution is still pending.

   - Pending compensation for six Project-affected persons under Component 1 (due to the unresolved court
   cases, family disputes, and absentee project-affected persons). The compensation was deposited in a lands
   account with UNRA at Project closure. (ICRR, pages 29-30) At IEG's request, the team provided
   information on the current status of this issue: the funds have been deposited in court, but five out of six
   abovementioned people have not been paid yet due to incomplete documents, family disputes, or the lack
   of interest in the compensation.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   The ICR reports that the Project's financial management system was implemented, maintained, and
   operated satisfactorily, allowing for adequate financial monitoring and for compliance with overall financial
   management requirements. Audit reports were submitted in a timely fashion. Financial management
   performance was mostly rated as Moderately Satisfactory.

   The ICR reports that procurement plan was updated frequently, and regular supervision missions
   supported implementation and monitoring. However, procurement was often delayed. There were
   allegations of collusive practices from internal and external sources under Component 3. Other significant
   causes of delays included a government’s limitation on modifications of contracts, which capped them at
   25 percent of the signed contract value. This has been discussed several times with the government, and
   the consensus reached was that modifications above the 25 percent are to be allowed as exceptions to be
   handled on a case-by-case basis by the Bank and the Attorney General’s Office. There were some gaps in
   management and monitoring of contracts, especially with regards to timely information sharing with the
   Bank. (ICR, page 30)




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                   Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                      IEG
                                                                                   Disagreements/Comment
                                                                                   The ICR’s efficacy rating was
                                                                                   High because it only evaluated
Outcome                         Satisfactory             Moderately Satisfactory   the Revised Project, which
                                                                                   achieved all its targets, but failed
                                                                                   to evaluate the Original Project,

                                                                                                       Page 19 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     UG-Albertine Reg. Sustainable Dev. Proj (P145101)



                                                                                   which missed several of its
                                                                                   targets and had to be
                                                                                   restructured with a reduced
                                                                                   scope. IEG rated Project efficacy
                                                                                   as Substantial pre-restructuring
                                                                                   and High post-restructuring.
                                                                                   Efficiency is Modest, and
                                                                                   relevance of objectives is High.
                                                                                   Therefore, the Overall Outcome
                                                                                   is Moderately Satisfactory.
                                                                                   The design had several
                                                                                   deficiencies, leading to delays
                                                                                   during implementation, as well
                                                                                   as to insufficient funding and the
                                                                                   need to reduce Project scope.
                                                                                   There were serious E&S issues
                                                                                   during implementation, as well
                                                                                   as additional reasons for delays.
Bank Performance                Satisfactory             Moderately Satisfactory
                                                                                   This rating is supported by the
                                                                                   consistent ratings of moderately
                                                                                   satisfactory for environmental
                                                                                   and social safeguards
                                                                                   performance and financial
                                                                                   performance, and gaps in the
                                                                                   management and monitoring of
                                                                                   procurement contracts.
Quality of M&E                  Substantial              Substantial

Quality of ICR                  ---                      Substantial


12. Lessons

The following lessons were derived from the ICR (ICR, pages 32-33):

1. Adopting a holistic approach to addressing regional development could deliver good results. The
Project adopted a holistic approach that included addressing regional connectivity by improving the
main road connecting the region and the entire country; regional urban and rural planning; local
access to ensure year-round, uninterrupted access; access to markets; and developing skills
relevant for the evolving needs of the regional economy. Such a holistic/systemic approach proved
to be supportive of the multi-faceted development needs of the region, linking the investment in the
infrastructure assets with economic development and poverty reduction goals and creating support
from various stakeholders.

2. Appraisal stage project preparation should include feasibility studies, designs, obtaining permits,
and other necessary preparatory work. Feasibility studies were not done for Component 2 during
preparation, resulting in the need to restructure the component during implementation. Component 1
was suspended for 18 months, partly because the right of way was not obtained at preparation.

                                                                                                     Page 20 of 22
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       UG-Albertine Reg. Sustainable Dev. Proj (P145101)



Designs were not completed during preparation for Components 2 and 3, and funds allocated to
them turned out to be insufficient once the designs were completed during implementation. For
Component 3, the identification of the twinning institutions was delayed for nearly 2 years, and
therefore the implementation of the entire component could not proceed. Also, the government did
not provide RAP funding to Component 2, which caused challenges during implementation, and
some activities had to be dropped. The lesson is that the allocation of funding for investment
activities should be based on diligent country-specific analysis, and the necessary preparatory
activities should be conducted during appraisal and be a condition for project approval.

3. A concerted effort must be made to address environmental and social (E&S) risks. There were
problems with gender-based violence (GBV), violence against children (VAC), and occupational
health and safety. These challenges were addressed through concerted efforts of all stakeholders.
The Bank provided a GVB specialist and conducted hands-on training; the client ensured that a
memorandum of understanding was signed with the Ministry of Gender, Labor, and Social
Development to address GBV, VAC, and labor concerns and procured services of nominated
service providers and a nongovernmental organization to address these problems. The lesson is
that when social problems occur during project implementation, a judicious and multi-stakeholder
coordinated effort might be necessary to achieve a timely resolution.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provides sufficient technical details to understand the value-added of the activities and the outcomes
of the Project; a good justification of the PDO relevance; comprehensive and robust evidence on most aspects
of the Project’s evaluation; and a clear linking of evidence to findings. The ICR is technical, analytical, and has
internal consistency. The lessons are linked to the implementation narrative, and the ratings are useful for
future lending operations. At the same time, the ICR has the following weaknesses:

1. The ICR's approach to efficacy analysis has a deficiency: it only evaluated the Revised Project, which
achieved all its targets, but failed to evaluate the Original Project, which missed several of its targets and had to
be restructured with a reduced scope. In doing so, the ICR deviates from the OPCS guidelines for project
evaluation and incorrectly rates Project efficacy as High. However, the information on the missed targets in the
Original Project is fully presented in the other parts of the ICR, and therefore this deficiency is considered to be
moderate.

2. The Project had significant E&S issues; and while the ICR mentions them, it does not provide sufficient
information for understanding of the level and the causes of the issues. Importantly, the ICR states that there
was “a number of fatalities and serious injuries” caused by “lapses in health and safety management on road
subprojects under Components 1 and 2” and that “corrective action plans were prepared and implemented to
prevent recurrence of similar incidents,” but does not say how many people died, what exactly caused the
accidents, and what specifically was done to prevent this from happening again. The statements quoted above
are downplayed: they are placed at the very end of the E&S section, and the phrase “resulting in a number of

                                                                                                      Page 21 of 22
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      UG-Albertine Reg. Sustainable Dev. Proj (P145101)



fatalities and serious injuries” is placed in the parenthesis in the context of “lapses in health and safety
management.”

3. The project’s efficiency is rated as “moderate” (ICR, pages 21, 22, and 23), while the actual range of ratings
for efficiency in the ICR guidelines is limited to High, Substantial, Modest, and Negligible. Therefore, it is
unclear how the ICR rated efficiency.

Overall, the ICR quality is rated as Substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                       Page 22 of 22
