     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Erosion & Watershed Mgt Project (P124905)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0023713

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P124905                                    Erosion & Watershed Mgt Project

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Nigeria                                    Environment, Natural Resources & the Blue Economy


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-51050,IDA-62770,IDA-62780              30-Jun-2020                                        846,795,140.38

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 08-May-2012                                30-Jun-2022

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                             500,000,000.00                                            0.00

 Revised Commitment                              900,000,000.00                                            0.00

 Actual                                          837,268,410.75                                            0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Shashidhara Laxman         Vibecke Dixon                 Avjeet Singh                   IEGSD (Unit 4)
 Kolavalli




 P126549_TBL
 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P126549                                    NG Erosion and Watershed Mgmt. (PSG) ( P126549 )



 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
                                                                                                   8247580.94

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)


                                                                                                  Page 1 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Erosion & Watershed Mgt Project (P124905)



 08-May-2012

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                                      0.00                                     8,590,000.00

 Revised Commitment                                       0.00                                     8,247,580.94

 Actual                                                   0.00                                     8,247,580.94




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective as formulated in the Legal Agreement (p. 6, 2019) and the PAD (p. 5,
   2012) was to “reduce vulnerability to soil erosion in targeted sub-watersheds.”



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project had four components:

   Component 1: Erosion and Watershed Management Infrastructure Investments (Appraised
   cost:US$405.97 million; Additional Financing: US$304.00 million; Actual cost:US$665.94 million)

   Component 1 had three subcomponents:

   A. Gully rapid action and slope stabilization (GRASS): stabilization and rehabilitation of selected erosion
   related sites and prevention of further erosion. Activities included: i) emergency and temporary stabilization
   of gullies and management of landslides; ii) complementary structural and erosion and water management
   works, and; iii) preventive erosion management works.

   B. Integrated watershed management: activities for integrated management of selected sub-watersheds
   surrounding the gully systems. Activities included: i) sensitization, mobilization and organization of
   communities to manage erosion and prevent disasters; ii) preparation and implementation of integrated sub-
   watershed management plans and related technical guidelines and manuals, including land and water

                                                                                                    Page 2 of 19
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  Erosion & Watershed Mgt Project (P124905)



management, and disaster risk preparedness measures; and iii) subprojects for identification,
establishment, and management of soil and water conservation zones, including implementation of
associated land and water management practices, through the provision of sub-grants to eligible community
organizations.

C. Livelihoods Improvement: activities aimed at improving the livelihoods of communities in selected sub-
watersheds. Activities included: i) provision of training and other capacity building assistance to
communities to identify and develop livelihood support activities and enterprises; ii) sub-projects for the
acquisition of skills and resources to create employment and livelihood opportunities, through the provision
of sub-grants to eligible community organizations, and; iii) development of household and community water
harvesting facilities.

D. Technical and Socioeconomic Analysis: Technical and socio economic analysis to identify appropriate
remediation measures in locations with different characteristics from those already addressed under the
project in view of providing recommendation for major landscape and watershed level restoration programs
involving issues other than those addressed under the project, including other farms of watershed
management risks that compromise the natural resource base and associated livelihoods at a landscape
scale.

Component 2: Erosion and Watershed Management Institutions and Information Services
(Appraised cost:US$39.7 million; Additional Financing; US$40 million; Actual cost:US$76.49 million)

Component 2 had five subcomponents:

    A. Federal MDAs effectiveness and investment services for states: activities to strengthen the
         capacity of relevant federal and MDAs to perform their functions and to support and guide participant
         states relevant MDAs in performing their functions related to erosion and watershed management.
    B.   State MDAs effectiveness and services: activities to strengthen the capacity of relevant
         participating states MD's to perform their functions related to erosion and watershed management.
    C.   Local government authorities effectiveness and services: activities to strengthen the capacity of
         relevant LGAs to guidance sustain the operation and maintenance of infrastructure and facilities
         developed under the project.
    D.   Private and non-government institutions and services: activities to strengthen the capacity of
         relevant private contractors and other non-government entities to deliver effective services in the
         area of erosion and watershed management.
    E.   Support and capacity building activities focusing on training and other forms of human
         resource development, for the benefit of national centers of excellence in the areas of erosion
         control, landscape management and environmental assessment, erosion risk mapping, enhancing
         climate readiness work and environmental impact assessment capacities facilitating completion of
         guidelines for road construction to reduce gully erosion; and addressing solid waste management in
         restored gullies.

Component 3: Climate Change Response (Appraised cost:US$30.00 million; Additional finance: 24
million; Actual cost: US$ 50.38 million) Activities to strengthen the Recipient's capacity to adapt to climate
change, including advancing the preparation of activities identified under the Recipients Nationally
Determined Contributions (“NDCs”), and issuing green bonds.




                                                                                                   Page 3 of 19
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Erosion & Watershed Mgt Project (P124905)



  Component 3 had 2 subcomponents:

      A. Strengthening the strategic policy and institutional framework through institutional development and
         capacity building.
      B. Promoting low carbon development by supporting the development of an enabling framework for
         renewable energy.

  Component 4: Project Management (Appraised cost:US$32.92 million; Additional finance: US$32 million;
  Actual cost:124.02 US$ million)

      A. Federal project management: Management and coordination of the project at the federal level,
         including procurement and financial management, social and environmental safeguards
         management, communication, and monitoring and evaluation.
      B. State project management: Management and coordination of project activities within the respective
         participating state, including procurement and financial management, social and environmental
         safeguards management, communication, and monitoring and evaluation.

  The PAD listed two subcomponents under component 3. The Legal Agreement (2018) did not, but it
  explicitly included the issue of green bonds.

  There are minor differences in the activities mentioned in the Project paper (2018) and the ICR. The ICR
  does not include activities 1D and 2E, which were added in 2018 with additional financing.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project cost: The project was appraised at US$497.00 million. Additional funding raised it to US$908.59
  million, and the actual cost was US$845.52 million.

  Financing: The project was funded through a Specific Investment Loan of US$508.59M, consisting of a
  US$500M IDA concessional loan blended with GEF and SCCF grants totaling US$8.59M. Additional
  financing of US$400 was done through US$300 million from IDA 18 and US$100 million from IDA 18 scale-
  up Facility.

  Borrower Contribution: Planned contribution in cash and kind was approximately US$150M (Federal:
  US$83.34M; States: US$67M).

   Dates: The project was approved on May 8, 2012, and it became effective on September 16,2013. MTRs
  review took place on January 25, 2016. The original closing date was June 30, 2020, but it was extended
  twice for a total of 24 months, and actual closing was on June 30, 2022. The first extension from 2020 to
  2021 was because of a 16-month delay in the project becoming effective. The second extension was
  because of delays caused by COVID-19.

  The project went through two restructurings, one in 2018 which included additional financing and extension
  of the closing date, and a second restructuring in 2021 to extend the closing date because of delays in
  starting the project. According to the Bank team (discussed in a meeting on October 17, 2023), the project




                                                                                                 Page 4 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Erosion & Watershed Mgt Project (P124905)



   became effective more than a year after approval because of the usual delays in setting up project
   implementation infrastructure.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country Context: High growth in Nigeria, with significant contributions from renewable and non-renewable
natural resources, has come at a high cost. The non-oil economy was degrading the natural resources. The
cost of environmental degradation and associated disasters, such as landslides and flooding, was
estimated at 9 percent of GDP in 2011. Erosion, specifically, had caused loss of human lives, damage to
infrastructure (including roads, highways, pipelines, houses and buildings, and silted waterways), and
losses to natural assets (including productive farmland and forests, and thus, watershed functions).
Southern Nigeria was affected by massive and expanding gully erosion, an advanced form of land
degradation. Degradation was also accelerating in northern Nigeria. The causes of gully erosion in Nigeria
were related to human activity: (a) improper road design and construction; (b) poor solid waste
management in urban and peri-urban areas that choked the already-inadequate drainage; and (c)
unsustainable land-use practices (such as overgrazing, deforestation, cultivation of marginal lands, and
uncontrolled mining for building material) that removed protective vegetative cover.

Country Strategy: The PDO was consistent with the growth and resilience goals of Nigeria’s Vision
20:2020 (2010), which sought to implement programs to control environmental degradation and pollution
and promote sustainable use and conservation of natural resources. The country’s Transformation Agenda
(2011-2015) also called for efficient exploitation and utilization of available agricultural resources. The PDO
was specifically designed in response to the President of Nigeria’s request to the Bank to support the
country in addressing severe erosion and its impacts in southeastern Nigeria. It also aligned with the
priorities of Nigeria’s Economic Recovery and Growth Plan (2017-2020), particularly relating to
environmental sustainability, job creation, and public-private partnership by investing in public infrastructure,
restoring degraded land, and mobilizing private financing (green bonds) for carbon-efficient projects various
sectors.

World Bank Strategy: The PDO was consistent with the Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) II (2010-
2013), which sought to support sustainable and inclusive non-oil growth. Improved environmental and
climate risk management was a central part of CPS II, which acknowledged the need to address weak
policy, institutional, and incentive frameworks to support the wider adoption of sustainable land use
practices. The PDO aligned with achieving Pillar 2 (vulnerability and resilience) of the Bank’s Africa
Development Strategy, Africa’s Future and the World Bank’s Support to It (2011) and the goals of the
TerrAfrica program in which the government and Bank both participate and which helped fund project
preparation. The additional financing that was given in 2018 aligned with the priorities of Nigeria’s Economic
Recovery and Growth Plan (2017-2020). The PDO was consistent with i) enhancing Nigeria’s resilience to
climate variability, a key focus area of the Bank’s CPS (FY14-FY19) , ii) enhancing climate resilience
through sustainable erosion control structures, landscape management practices, and livelihood options, a
strategic pillar of the CPS (FY21-FY25), iii) the World Bank’s regional strategy for Africa, and iv) all five
Strategic Directions of the World Bank’s Next Generation Africa Climate Business Plan (NGACBP) of 2020,



                                                                                                      Page 5 of 19
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Erosion & Watershed Mgt Project (P124905)



               and v) the Biodiversity, Climate Change, and Land Degradation focal area strategies of the GEF and the
               SCCF.

               The recently approved follow-on Agro-Climatic Resilience in Semi-Arid Landscapes (ACReSAL) built on the
               results and lessons learned from the project, is expected to both consolidate and scale up the successes of
               NEWMAP while complementing these achievements with a stronger focus on the arid states in Northern
               Nigeria. GEF/SCCF incremental funding to the project was also relevant as it was part of a larger Umbrella
               Program led by the World Bank – the Sahel and West Africa Program (SAWAP) in support of the Great
               Green Wall Initiative.

               Level of the PDO: The PDO was pitched at the appropriate level to address the problem that Nigeria was
               facing, that is, to arrest land degradation. Both state and federal governments had failed previously to limit
               degradation because they were not able to address the problem comprehensively and at scale.

               As the PDO was pitched at the appropriate level to address the problems faced by Nigeria and it was
               consistent with the priorities and strategies of the Government and the World Bank, its relevance is rated
               high.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To reduce vulnerability to soil erosion in targeted sub-watersheds.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of change

                             The theory of change outlined that inputs or project activities such as:

                                       a. Stabilizing and rehabilitating major erosion related sites, using both structural and vegetative
                                          measures,
                                       b. Organizing communities in the sub-watersheds surrounding the targeted erosion related sites, helping
                                          them prepare integrated sub-watershed management plans, and supporting subprojects to implement
                                          improved land and water management practices,
                                       c. Assisting communities to develop livelihood support activities and enterprises, supporting sub-projects
                                          of community organizations, and developing household and community water harvesting facilities,
                                       d. Strengthening the enabling environment and capacity for investment planning and readiness for
                                          implementation of erosion and watershed management at federal, state, and local levels, and


                                                                                                                                      Page 6 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Erosion & Watershed Mgt Project (P124905)




     e. Enhancing Nigeria’s capacity to promote low carbon, climate resilient development to better address
        the threat of climate variability exacerbating Nigeria’s erosion challenges;

With the following expected project outputs:

     a. Gully complexes or other erosion sites treated with all planned measures and area treated with
        bioremediation measures at the selected sites,
    b. Area brought under sustainable management practices, number of sub-watershed management plans
       developed, and the number of people benefitting from advisory services on integrated land/water
       management practices,
    c. Communities and community groups supported, and household and community water harvesting
       facilities developed,
    d. Data and knowledge systems established, and plans, frameworks, and erosion risk maps developed,
    e. Technical reports completed, green bond released, low carbon demonstrations completed, and GNG
       emission reduced;

These outputs were in turn expected to lead to reduced vulnerability, indicated by the number of “targeted
gully complexes and other erosion sites with reduced severity level after treatment.” This was to measure the
biophysical severity of each gully site after project treatment, compared to a site-specific baseline to be
collected before works begin, using a set of 5 qualitative categories (from 'Catastrophic' - category 5 to
'Stable' - category 1). 'Stable' was defined as sites where "drainages are represented as natural, stable
channels; no signs of erosion; vegetation very common; and no signs of active headcuts, nickpoints, or bed
erosion." The PAD noted that additional physical impact indicators that are not directly attributable to the
project were to be included in the broader M&E system, given the large numbers of variables outside the
project’s direct span of control. These indicators will support the project’s efforts to better understand the
complex gully and watershed dynamics and improve project interventions during project implementation.
These indicators were to also inform the project’s Impact Evaluation and scientific capacity building.

Outputs:

Stabilization/rehabilitation

      92 gully complexes and other erosion sites were treated with 100% of planned measures, exceeding
        the target of 55
      2,164 ha was developed through bioremediation in targeted sub-watersheds, exceeding the target of
        400 ha
      61 detailed gully treatment plans were developed and received World Bank no objection without the
        funding, exceeding the target of 30

Sub-watershed activities

      30,627.96 ha was brought under sustainable landscape management practices, exceeding the target
       of 20,000 ha
      65 participatory sub-watershed management plans developed under the project for targeted erosion
       affected sub-watersheds, exceeding the target of 38



                                                                                                  Page 7 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Erosion & Watershed Mgt Project (P124905)




      1,827,887 people (of which 300,000 were female) received project supported advisory services in
         integrated land and water management practices, planning and or monitoring, exceeding the target of
         90,000

Livelihood

      35,977 households were supported with livelihoods enhancement activities, exceeding the target of
         12,000.

Institutional capacity

      One spatial knowledge MIS on erosion and watersheds was operationalized, achieving the target of
         one
        116 stations that provide data for integrated catchment planning upgraded or newly installed,
         exceeding the target of 100
        Three national centres of excellence in erosion control were established, achieving the target of three.
        Two city stormwater plans informed by climate projections were developed, achieving the target of two
        Two EIA guidelines were developed for targeted investment types that affect erosion, exceeding the
         target of one
        19 state improved erosion risk maps were completed, achieving the target of 19
        54 community interest groups to collect solid waste were established, exceeding the target of 50

Climate capacity

      149,554.31 tons of CO2 annually of Net Greenhouse emissions were reduced, exceeding the target of
       2,411.00 tons
      7 technical reports on enhancing climate resilience completed, meeting the target of 7
      42 climate adaptation/low carbon demonstration projects were completed, exceeding the target of 10
      1 green bond was developed and issued, meeting the target of one.

Outputs not listed in results framework but reported in ICR include:

      8,199 households received solar powered cook stoves
      54 Community interest Groups (CIGs) established and supplied with equipment to undertake
         community-driven waste management micro-enterprises to help maintain constructed structures

Outcomes

      103 Targeted gully complexes and other erosion sites with reduced severity level after treatment,
       exceeding the target of 55
      149,554.31 tonnes of annual GHG emission reduced, exceeding the target of 2,411 tons per year.

Three other PDO indicators, which are project outputs rather than outcomes – hence, included among the
outputs above – are:



                                                                                                   Page 8 of 19
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               Erosion & Watershed Mgt Project (P124905)




                                  92 gully complexes and other erosion sites were treated with 100% of planned measures, exceeding
                                   the target of 55
                                  2,164 ha was developed through bioremediation in targeted sub-watersheds, exceeding the target of
                                   400 ha
                                  30,627.96 ha was brought under sustainable landscape management practices, exceeding the target
                                   of 20,000 ha

                            The project has met the targets for all the outputs, and exceeded the targets in most cases. Importantly, many
                            more gully systems and erosion related sites were treated with 100 percent of the planned measures (92)
                            than planned (55).

                            The expected outcome was reduced vulnerability to erosion at the treated sites. The ICR reports that
                            vulnerability was reduced at 103 sites, exceeding the target (55) and the number of gully complexes that were
                            fully treated (92). The sites at which 50 percent of the planned measures were completed have been treated
                            as sites at which vulnerability has been reduced.

                            However, the actual methodology for reporting the outcome on 'reduced vulnerability to erosion at the treated
                            sites' differs from the suggested methodology in the results framework. The proposed results framework in
                            the PAD (p. 40) and the Project paper (2018) (p. 37) suggests that vulnerability should be independently
                            assessed and recommended impact evaluation to establish causality given the large numbers of variables
                            outside the project’s direct span of control (PAD, page 32). The biophysical severity of each site after project
                            treatment was to be compared with a site-specific baseline using qualitative categories to assess reduced
                            vulnerability. The reduction in severity was to be measured using the classification system from level 5
                            (catastrophic) to level 1 (stable). The PAD (page 40) states that "Gully categorization will be carried out by an
                            independent body and reinforced by aerial photography or high-resolution remote sensing". Additionally,
                            completion of 100 percent of the planned measures was deemed necessary to avoid erosion and flooding
                            impacts because of which the PDO indicator relating to treatment of sites was changed from completion of 75
                            percent of the planned measure to 100 percent of the planned measures in 2018. Instead, the ICR assesses
                            the indicator based on the sites at which 50 percent of the planned measures were completed and treated
                            and uses this as a proxy for sites at which vulnerability has been reduced. Even though the ICR notes that the
                            impact evaluation was conducted in 2022, it does not offer any information on the findings from the impact
                            evaluation on physical impact indicators.

                            The project met or exceeded the targets for all outputs. However, the project did not adequately measure the
                            key outcome (sites with reduced severity after treatment) as recommended in the design and offer adequate
                            evidence of project outputs contributing to the outcome. The efficacy is rated as substantial with moderate
                            shortcomings.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY

                                                                                                                               Page 9 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Erosion & Watershed Mgt Project (P124905)




  Rationale
  The project has met all the output targets. More erosion sites have been treated than planned. Information
  systems and capacities for planning and implementation have been developed at federal, state and local
  levels, as evident from the plans prepared and implemented. Communities in the surrounding watershed have
  been organized and supported to adopt good practices and develop livelihoods that contribute to improving
  the environment. These outputs are likely to reduce vulnerability of the treated sites to erosion. However, the
  indicator has not been measured adequately as suggested in the framework; the reduction in vulnerability is
  measured as a derivative of an output of planned measures implemented and not independently assessed as
  recommended. Thus, the efficiacy is rated as Subsatntial with moderate shortcomings.



  Overall Efficacy Rating
  Substantial



5. Efficiency
Economic and Financial Efficiency

A quantitative cost benefit analysis was carried out at appraisal for an anticipated 30 intervention sites based on
a sample of draft designs for a subset of candidate sites. The analysis included eight sources of benefits: i)
income losses and asset damage from soil erosion avoided, ii) untimely deaths avoided, iii) reduced time wasted
due to improved road conditions, iv) port Calabar dredging costs avoided, v) urban domestic water supply
improved, vi) decrease in agricultural yield avoided, vii) unusable farmland due to erosion avoided, and viii)
topsoil nutrient loss avoided. The estimated IRR was 12% over 30 years. The analysis conducted in 2019 for
additional funding considered only six sources of benefits: only three that were included in the appraisal (i)
avoided income losses and asset damage, ii) untimely deaths avoided and iii) reduced wasted time in traffic)
and three new ones: i) displacement of people avoided, ii) incremental profits from afforestation, iii) and GHG
emissions reduced. The estimated IRR was 16%.

The analysis at closing replicated the 30 year BCA but used seven sources of benefits. The sources included all
the sources from the 2019 analysis, including the 3 from 2012 (income losses and asset damage from soil
erosion avoided, Untimely deaths avoided; reduced time wasted due to road conditions), 3 benefits added in
2019 (Avoided displacement of people; afforestation benefits, and GHG emission reduction), and 1 new benefit
source, increase in value of previously erosion-prone land. The estimation yielded an IRR of 15%.

Even a stringent combination of assumptions, such as an 8% decrease in benefits and an 8% increase in costs
(as done in the analysis at appraisal), returned an NPV of US$ 136 million, an IRR of 12% and a benefit-cost
ratio of 1.15.

The analysis done at project closure uses benefit sources that are different from the ones used at appraisal. The
sources that have been left out relate largely to upstream benefits from improved management practices
through improvements in quantity and quality of water and agricultural lands (urban domestic water supply
improved, decrease in agricultural yield avoided, unusable farmland due to erosion avoided, and topsoil nutrient
loss avoided).



                                                                                                     Page 10 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Erosion & Watershed Mgt Project (P124905)



The project incurred costs of US$7.25 million per site compared to the estimated average costs of US$4 million,
but the costs were estimated to be US$10 million in the southern states where most of the sites treated by the
project were.

Administrative efficiency

Nigerian states, which have the primary responsibility for land management and allocations, implemented the
project with support from the federal government. Effective implementation of the project, therefore, required
inter-ministerial and interstate coordination, collaboration and information sharing.

The project experienced some procurement-related inefficiencies because of i) delays in getting Environmental
and Social Management Framework (ESMP) approvals and in mobilizing communities and ii) state Project
Management Units (PMUs) delayed site visits to monitor compliance because transfer of funds to states was
delayed, which in turn slowed down work by contractors.

A few other factors affected implementation: insurgency and security concerns, political changes that disrupted
work, extreme weather, COVID restrictions, and conflicts between states and contractors.

The economic returns estimated at the end of the project were higher than anticipated at appraisal. Even leaving
out some of the benefits anticipated at inception, the returns are higher. Overall costs are close to anticipated.
The rating, therefore, is substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     0
 Appraisal                                                 12.00
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     0
 ICR Estimate                                              15.00
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The PDO was highly relevant as it addressed the fundamental problem that Nigeria faced in managing its land
and water resources. The project delivered the outputs exceeding the targets in many cases. Efficacy is rated
substantial with moderate shortcomings because of the lack of use of the methodology proposed at design for
the critical outcome indicator related to "erosion sites with reduced severity level after treatment" based on



                                                                                                    Page 11 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Erosion & Watershed Mgt Project (P124905)



independent verification rather than measuring the outcome in terms of implementation of planned measures.
Efficiency is rated substantial. The overall rating is, therefore, Moderately Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Technical Risk: One source of risk to continued benefits comes from the level and the extent to which the
beneficiaries in the treated sites will continue to adopt improved livelihood and land management practices.
Their continuing to do so will depend on the extent to which local and state institutions reinforce the ideas.
For example, whether agricultural extension systems mainstream conservation-based production practices
among the agricultural practices they promote to farmers.

Institutional Risk: The actions of state and local institutions and governance structures that have a role to
play in influencing how infrastructure is designed and built and how urbanization takes place also are critical.
Administrative boundaries rarely coincide nicely with watershed boundaries, thus making decisions at local
levels often less than ideal from a watershed perspective. Continuing to benefit from the investments will
require internalizing watershed concerns at various levels of governance.

Technical Risk: The biggest threat to sustaining the benefits comes from inadequate operation and
maintenance of project-financed infrastructure. The MTR had revealed that Improper waste disposal was
threatening the sustainability of civil works. The project established 54 community groups and provided them
with equipment to manage enterprises that handle solid waste in their communities. To what extent they will
sustain themselves and whether solid waste is managed in other communities will matter.

Political Risk: Political commitment to manage watersheds, mainly at the state level, is also important. The
fact that eight states have organized Erosion and Watershed Management Agencies (created by Acts of
Legislature and funded by the State Annual Budget) offers hope. The project helped in laying institutional
foundations for Nigeria to address soil erosion and watershed management on its own. Apart from
developing individual capacity, the project has established data systems and knowledge institutions. Whether
they will be utilized depends on the political commitment and policies that governments at the federal and
state levels put in place.

Environmental Risk: Nigeria also faces climate risks with extreme droughts and precipitation which may
lead to reduced vegetation and inundation of erosion control structures – although they are designed to
withstand 50-year floods.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry


                                                                                                     Page 12 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Erosion & Watershed Mgt Project (P124905)



  The PDO was relevant to address the problems Nigeria was facing. The project was well designed and
  included components that could be expected to achieve the PDO. The activities included the building up
  of capabilities and provision of resources required to urgently rectify heavily eroded sites and take
  preventive measures at other sites. They were complemented with an activity to build the capability to
  address climate change as well.

  The Implementation set up was complex because it required considerable coordination between the
  states, which have the mandate to deal with land issues, and the federal government. Because the
  project was multi sectoral as well, it involved many federal and state ministries, departments and
  agencies, local governments, communities, and civil society. Effective implementation required inter-
  ministerial and Interstate coordination, collaboration, and information sharing. Project management units
  were planned for all the states to be housed in respective ministries of environment.

  Implementation by the states guided by the federal ministry also required a tiered M&E system. M&E was
  embedded with that of the government systems at state and federal levels, requiring the PMUs in the
  states to send the data to the central PPU. The results framework included key parameters to track
  progress in meeting the objectives, Recognizing the need to attribute outcomes to project activities, the
  results framework required two impact studies.

  The PAD assessed the risks and proposed mitigation measures. For example, capacity risks were
  thought to be high. The project planned to hire at least one internationally recognized expert in land
  degradation and also planned to create an expert service pool with national and international expertise.
  Considering the history of failed approaches to gully management in the southern region, project design
  risks were considered substantial. Project design therefore was guided by a review of best practices and
  lessons learned in Nigeria and elsewhere.

  The project was appraised in such a way that it was likely to achieve the planned objectives. How the
  work would be implemented was also thought through. The PAD anticipated and planned to address
  difficulties in implementation and M&E. However, the project seems to have been very conservative in
  setting the targets for activity one despite increase due to AF. Nearly all of them have been exceeded to
  a significant degree.

  The overall rating of Bank Performance at entry is Satisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Supervisory inputs were as planned. Joint implementation support missions took place semiannually; a
 total of 21 missions throughout the 10 years of the project’s operation. They were complemented by
 technical field missions by the country office staff. The composition of the supervision missions reflected
 the technical and fiduciary requirements of the project, by including specialists in financial management,
 procurement, and safeguards in all the missions. Additionally, cameras and drones were used to monitor
 work at numerous sites when travel was curtailed.


                                                                                                   Page 13 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Erosion & Watershed Mgt Project (P124905)



 The ICR notes that the Bank team’s regular engagement with the borrower helped in developing a mature
 relationship, which contributed to building commitment and ownership both at the federal and state levels.
 The commitment was reflected by their timely allocation of counterpart funds for payment of compensation,
 the selection of participating states in a transparent manner, absence of ineligible expenditures in
 procurement despite the large number of complex transactions and the commissioning of numerous project
 reviews and evaluations, including a comprehensive and objective borrower completion report.

 Following encouraging performance in the first seven states, the supervision team and management
 responded to the client’s request to expand the scope of the project by conducting a comprehensive review
 that justified additional funding for considerable expansion of the project's scope. The project also
 implemented an exit strategy over the last 12 months by monitoring physical progress and disbursements
 to accelerate site completion resolving outstanding Grievance redressal mechanism (GRM) complaints,
 identifying measures to reduce occupational health and community risk. The overall rating at Supervision is
 Satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The results framework included indicators of outputs and the expected outcome, adequate to capture the
 theory of change. One indicator captured the outcomes of the PDO statement; it was a slightly modified
 version of the PDO itself. The indicators were clear and measurable except for the key outcome indicator
 which required qualitative assessment. The framework depended on two impact studies to examine the
 causal impact of the project and its intervention on key outcomes. The framework suggested collecting
 information on additional physical impact indicators as background information to the project’s planned
 impact evaluation and suggested baseline characterization of erosion-related sites that would benefit from
 project activities.

 The project seems to have been very conservative in setting the targets for activity one despite increasing
 some of them at AF. Nearly all of them have been exceeded to a significant degree.



b. M&E Implementation
  M&E was implemented by individual state units in participating states. State units collected and fed
  technical, financial and fiduciary information to the central M&E at the federal PMU. The M&E system
  also included a comprehensive image database documenting situations before, during, and after




                                                                                                  Page 14 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Erosion & Watershed Mgt Project (P124905)



  interventions. During COVID, virtual reality 360-degree cameras and droners were used to remotely
  monitor progress.

  All the indicators in the results framework have been collected and reported, except for the key PDO
  indicator, as noted above. The ICR notes that the limited connection between physical progress and
  contractual obligations of the M&E system resulted in significant difficulties in keeping track of actual and
  pending payments for individual contracts. However, this was subsequently addressed.

  The M&E efforts can be sustained past the project as they are mainstreamed in the state and federal
  units, but they are unlikely to be as they pertain largely to project outputs.

  Marginal modifications were made to the framework. Key among them was the change in the definition of
  one PDO indicator, requiring treated sites to include those in which 100 percent of the planned measures
  have been implemented. But all the targets were changed with additional funding.

  The ICR notes that the mid-term review and impact evaluation were conducted in 2022.



c. M&E Utilization
  The M&E system was designed and implemented to adequately fulfill the state level and consolidated
  information requirements of project management and supervision as well as to assess the achievement
  of results. The information was utilized for dissemination and communication, as well as to provide
  important inputs into external evaluations such as the MTR and the impact evaluation conducted in
  2022. However, the ICR doesn’t offer any information from the impact evaluation or any information on
  physical impact indicators.

  The designed framework, including the suggested impact studies to be implemented in phases was
  adequate to monitor activities, measure outcomes and link outputs to activities. The framework was
  implemented as planned by units embedded in state and federal systems as planned. M&E informed the
  MTR, restructuring for additional financing, and the impact study, although the details are not available.
  The rating, therefore, is substantial.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was categorized as a Category A project, and it triggered 8 safeguards: Environmental
   Assessment (OP/BP 4.01); Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04); Forests (OP/BP 4.36); Pest Management (OP
   4.09); Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11); Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12); Safety of Dams
   (OP/BP 4.37); and Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP).




                                                                                                     Page 15 of 19
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  Erosion & Watershed Mgt Project (P124905)



The project had in place a checklist for screening subprojects to ensure compliance with the Bank’s social
and environmental safeguards policies. Furthermore, all site-specific interventions identified for funding by
the project had Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs) prepared and disclosed and were
fully implemented. A total number of 136 ESMPs/Environmental and Social Impact Assessments (ESIAs)
were prepared and disclosed during project implementation. The project also deployed 360-degree cameras
for environmental and safeguards compliance performance monitoring and incident investigations, even in
remote areas.

Environmental specialists were employed by the project at national and state levels making them
responsible and accountable for compliance and enforcement of safeguards, and they were required to
provide monthly and quarterly reports to the Federal Program Management Unit (FPMU) and state project
implementation units.

Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01): The project prepared Environmental and Social Management
Framework (ESMF) and Resettlement policy Frameworks (RPF), disclosed, and implemented them.

Forests (OP/BP 4.36): No major deforestation took place at the project sites except for minor clearances
required to erect project structures and campsites. No cases of air, water, and land pollution were reported
across the project’s locations.

Occupational Health and Safety (OHS) issues were reported including three fatalities which triggered the
Environmental and Social Incident Reporting Toolkit (ESIRT).The findings of the root cause analyses
carried out showed that they were not systemic issues. To address the OHS issues, the projects conducted
a series of capacity building in OHS/Construction Health and Safety (CHS) for Federal Project Management
Unit (FPMU) and State Project Management Unit (SPMU) staff and all contractors.

The project complied with OP 4.01 and OP 4.12 by preparing a Resettlement Policy Framework and an
Environmental and Social Management Framework at project preparation. The corresponding applicable
Resettlement Action Plans (RAP) and Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMP) were prepared
to address site-specific social risks. At closing, 21 states had fully implemented their RAPs. Two states
could not locate some PAPs (32) for which an escrow account was opened and funded with counterpart
funding. One state was still implementing its RAP with the compensation fund in an escrow account.

Given the need to track Implementation of RAPs and resolve grievances at multiple sites, a database of the
status of all RAPs state wise was developed. Cumulatively as of October 31st, 2022, 9,696 project Affected
Persons (PAPs) were compensated, and 94 RAPs were fully implemented.

Specific information is not available from the ICR on actions taken related to Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04),
Pest Management (OP 4.09), Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11), Projects on International
Waterways (OP/BP), and Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37).

Two environmental and social audits were conducted by third party consultants. The findings of both audits
were both satisfactory, which corroborated the findings of various supervisory missions.

The additional financing did not trigger any new safeguards policies, and the existing instruments were all
updated accordingly to reflect the new set of activities and inclusion of additional states.




                                                                                               Page 16 of 19
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Erosion & Watershed Mgt Project (P124905)




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management

  The project had adequate financial management (FM) arrangements with qualified staff, who had
  knowledge of the Bank’s FM/disbursement procedures, engaged performing FM functions. Approved
  annual work plans were used as the basis for implementing project activities.

  The quality of accounting and financial reporting was unacceptable at the beginning of the project but it
  improved over the life of the project. The consolidated interim financial reports (CIFRs) submitted at the
  beginning was unacceptable to the Bank. The project regularly submitted Interim financial reports (IFRs) to
  the Bank, although occasionally late. The project also regularly submitted annual audited financial
  statements to the Bank. The project delivered an acceptable final CIFR on August 26, 2022.

  The auditors issued an unqualified opinion on the audited financial statements for all years. The
  performance of the auditors was found acceptable to the Bank.

  The Bank’s FM team regularly supervised the project’s financial management. It routinely rectified the
  issues that it identified, such as unretired advances, inadequate documentation, and questionable
  expenditures. At project closure, there were no outstanding issues. However, the project closed its grace
  period with unexpected demands for funding post-closure as four states did not provide accurate and
  timely information on commitments.

  At the end of the project, some states had more funds in their designated accounts (DA) than
  commitments, while others did not have enough because of poor monitoring of disbursement between
  January 2021 and June 2022. Enormous efforts were made to recover the excess funds and redirect them
  to states that needed them. There were unexpected demands for funding post-closure. Some States did
  not provide accurate and timely information on commitments, even up to the Fiduciary Workshop held
  June 6-10, 2022. Four states that had earlier indicated that they had sufficient funds, later sent in payment
  requests post-closing far in excess of available funds. The project therefore closed with a cost overrun of
  around USD 16 million. The FM rating was Satisfactory at project closing.

  Procurement.

  Procurement practices too were unacceptable in some states in the beginning. The states, where the
  practices were acceptable were asked to help in improving capacity in other states. The quality of the
  procurement documents, bidding documents, RFP and evaluation reports improved over the lifetime of the
  projects.

  Systematic Tracking of Exchanges in Procurement (STEP), required by the Bank to process procurement
  in all IPF projects, was also initiated. However, the challenge was that the SPMUs were not making post
  procurement review of activities in the STEP. The Bank followed up with SPMUs to ensure that they did as
  required. By project closure, procurement, including post procurement activities required in STEP, were
  substantially complete.

  At project closure, no mis-procurement had been recorded. The procurement rating was Satisfactory at
  project closing.


                                                                                                  Page 17 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Erosion & Watershed Mgt Project (P124905)




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   Two project activities may have benefited women in particular. The project distributed improved cookstoves
   to over 8,000 households, which would have reduced women’s exposure to air pollution from cooking and
   save their time spent on firewood collection. The provision of potable drinking water systems in selected
   communities improved access to drinking water, would also have reduced the time women spent on
   fetching water.



11. Ratings
                                                                              Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                   IEG
                                                                              Disagreements/Comment
                                                                              Insufficient evidence of
Outcome                        Satisfactory         Moderately Satisfactory
                                                                              outcomes achieved
Bank Performance               Satisfactory         Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                 Substantial          Substantial

Quality of ICR                 ---                  Modest


12. Lessons

The following lessons are derived from the ICR with some modification of language.

      Where projects are required to supervise structural work sites in numerous distant
       areas, remote monitoring through the use of technologies such as 360 degree
       cameras, drones and satellite imagery can complement physical monitoring, reduce
       costs, and enable supervision where it may not be possible because of restricted
       travel. The project used remote monitoring when travel was restricted during COVID. The
       project implementing units were able to remotely check the work done by contractors who
       were paid by the percentage of work done.
      In decentralized operations, an M&E system that tracks both physical progress and
       financial transactions (such as physical completion percentage and financial
       payments made), in addition to the results framework indicators, can strengthen both
       monitoring and financial management. The weak connection between physical progress
       and financial transactions in the system caused significant difficulties in tracking pending
       payments during the last 12 months of the project when substantial work was completed.
      Where subunits such as states implement the projects but without a fixed share of
       funds allocated to them, setting up an allocation mechanism that is based on states
       meeting certain fund-use criteria, can reward states that utilize funds and ensure

                                                                                                 Page 18 of 19
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Erosion & Watershed Mgt Project (P124905)



         effective use of funds. Using statements of expenditures (SoE) instead of Interim Financial
         reports (IFRs) can also avoid large balances from initial advances remaining unutilized in
         some states.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR comprehensively overviews project activities, outputs, and outcomes. It also nicely lays out the
complex situation under which the project was implemented, having many states implement it under the
guidance of the federal ministry, particularly with COVID-19-related travel restrictions, and the innovative ways
the project overcame the difficulties. The ICR is internally consistent and adheres to the guidelines.

The evidence offered on the outcomes, however, is inadequate. More information was potentially available from
the impact study. The report is silent on the impact study except to note that it was done even though the
project design recommended using the analysis of the impact study to demonstrate results for some key
indicators. The evidence presented in the ICR comes exclusively from the M&E results indicators. Mainly
because of limiting itself to indicators from the results framework, the report lacks a results orientation to
connect project outputs to outcomes and suggest how the project may have made a difference to communities
and the resources. More information could have made the analysis richer and the evidence more robust.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Modest




                                                                                                    Page 19 of 19
