     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DR Dist. Grid Moderniz & Loss Reduction (P147277)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0023554

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P147277                                    DR Dist. Grid Moderniz & Loss Reduction

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Dominican Republic                         Energy & Extractives


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-85630                                 31-Dec-2020                                        112,219,480.63

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 15-Dec-2015                                30-Nov-2022

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                          120,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                           112,219,480.63                                               0.00

 Actual                                       112,219,480.63                                               0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Dileep M. Wagle            Christopher David             Ramachandra Jammi              IEGSD (Unit 4)
                            Nelson




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The project’s development objectives were “to improve the financial viability of the electricity distribution
   companies (EDEs) by reducing energy losses and increasing revenue collections in the circuits rehabilitated
   under the Project and consequently increase the supply of electricity”. This was as per the Loan Agreement,
   December 29, 2015, Schedule 1, p.6, as well as the Project Appraisal Document (PAD), p.5.




                                                                                                  Page 1 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DR Dist. Grid Moderniz & Loss Reduction (P147277)



   In the analysis that follows, the PDO can be parsed as follows: (i) “to improve the financial viability of the
   electricity distribution companies by reducing energy losses and increasing revenue collections in the circuits
   rehabilitated under the Project, and (ii) to increase the supply of electricity”.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Component 1: Rehabilitation of selected distribution circuits and upgrading of metering systems and
   implementation of Environmental Management Systems (EMS) for the EDEs (Estimated cost at appraisal:
   US$103.63 million; Actual cost at closing: US$97.9 million). The component was intended to support the
   rehabilitation of circuits selected by each EDE, including: (i) Grid Rehabilitation and Modernization, (ii)
   Macro and micro metering systems and loss reduction monitoring, (iii) Smart grid remote metering systems,
   and (iv) EMS for residue sites following international best practices for hazardous waste management.

   Component 2: Citizen engagement and community participation (Estimated cost as appraisal: US$4.56
   million; Actual cost at closing: US$4.48 million). The component supported implementation of a Social
   Management Strategy (SMS) aimed at restoring the confidence between users and EDEs, increasing cash
   collection levels and promoting efficient and safe use of electricity. The component included, inter alia,
   training of the communities, the signing of social compacts between the EDEs and the communities, and
   customer service satisfaction surveys.

   Component 3: Commercial management and project management (Estimated cost at appraisal:
   US$11.16 million; Actual cost at closing: US$9.6 million). This component provided support for: (i) the
   refurbishing and upgrade of existing offices and technical assistance (TA) to monitor the business cycle; (ii)
   IT platform for CDEEE and the EDEs, and forecasting and demand analysis. Integration of CDEEE and
   EDEs IT systems through fiber optic, support demand forecasting and setup of a data center at CDEEE; (iii)
   institutional strengthening and coordination, monitoring of the grid modernization, and electrical loss
   reduction, including technical advisory services to CDEEE and the EDEs in project management, monitoring
   and evaluation, and support to EDEs in developing financial accounting reports in accordance with best
   international reporting standards.

   Component 4: Complementary tariff study (Estimated cost at appraisal: US$350,000; Actual cost at
   closing: US$278,927). The study was complementary to an on-going IDB-supported study to weigh the
   social implications of changes in tariff design and setting, and recommend mitigation measures.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   All of the project’s financing was provided through an IBRD credit of US$120 million followed. No other
   development partners were involved in the financing of the project. Actual project costs at closing were just
   over US$112 million, or about 93 percent of the aggregate project cost.


                                                                                                    Page 2 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DR Dist. Grid Moderniz & Loss Reduction (P147277)



   Borrower contribution

   No borrower contribution was envisaged at appraisal, nor did any take place subsequently.

   Dates

   The project was approved on December 15, 2015, becoming effective on January 27, 2017. The original
   closing date was December 31, 2020. However, this date was extended through restructuring, first to
   August 31, 2022, and again to November 30, 2022. The first extension was on account of the delay that
   took place in reaching effectiveness (13 months after signing), and delays resulting from the impact of the
   Covid 19 pandemic. The second extension was to allow time to finish two contracts: equipment for an IT
   Data Center and the safe disposal of Polychlorinated Biphenyls (PCBs). Minor changes were made to the
   targets for two results indicators (for CRI and ASAI), to account for the delay in implementation. In addition,
   one indicator, related to the integrated environmental management system, had to be dropped because the
   Government had initiated a process to liquidate CDEEE, leaving no institutional structure in place to
   integrate with nor the need to do so.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country and Sector Context

The Dominican Republic had experienced a fairly rapid growth rate – of 5.3 percent per annum on average
– between 1991 and 2014, among the highest rates in Latin America and the Caribbean. This sustained
growth rate had not translated into a reduction of poverty. The percentage of the population living in
moderate poverty increased from 32 percent in 2000 to 41 percent in 2013 – above the average in the
region. The energy sector was a critical engine of growth for the country, but faced many challenges, most
important of which were: (a) a high level of losses (ranging from 30 to 36 percent) due to theft of electricity
and low quality of distribution networks, (b) unreliability of service, (c) high cost of energy production due to
a mostly fuel oil-based generation matrix, (d) a weak governance framework, (e) inefficient targeting of
subsidies, and (f) high vulnerability to external shocks (natural disasters and price of oil). Power outages in
the network – despite reduction of blackouts - were six times higher than the regional average. The
governance of the sector had undergone several transformations but the reforms had been undermined by
low levels of transparency and accountability.

The country’s 1,875 MW electricity market consisted of separate generation, transmission and distribution
companies. Of the installed generation capacity, 67 percent was privately owned, with the remainder being
in public-private and solely public sector hands. Over 37 percent of electricity was generated using fuel oil
and 31 percent using natural gas. Coal (14 percent), hydro (13 percent) and wind (4 percent) accounted for
the reminder of fuel sources. The Electricity Transmission Company (ETED) was the public company in
charge of electricity transmission, and three state-owned regional distribution companies (EDE Norte, EDE
Sur and EDE Este), coordinated by a public holding company, the Corporation of Dominican State
Electricity Companies (CDEEE). A key factor in the performance of the electricity sector was the

                                                                                                       Page 3 of 14
                       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                       DR Dist. Grid Moderniz & Loss Reduction (P147277)



governance of state-owned utilities. The EDEs had been originally privatized but later sold back to the
Government in 2009 because of their poor financial situation – the result of a large proportion of unbilled
and unpaid energy, on account of a lack of metering and theft. All three EDEs were financially
unsustainable due to a combination of electricity retail tariffs set below cost recovery levels, high technical
and commercial losses, and poor revenue collection, and the Government had to subsidize the power
sector deficit to keep them afloat.

In response to the sector crisis, CDEEE developed a Strategic Electricity Sector Plan (2013-16), focusing
on three pillars: (i) Modification of the generation matrix, (ii) Loss reduction, and (iii) Management
efficiency. CDEEE set a loss reduction target of 6 percent, planned the following measures: (a)
Rehabilitation of networks and installation of meters for existing clients as well illegal connections, (b)
Remote metering and macro metering, (c) community outreach activities, (d) improvement of commercial
management and infrastructure, and (e) institutional strengthening.

Alignment with Country Strategies

The project was part of the country’s “Distribution Grid Modernization and Electrical Loss Reduction
Program”, which was supported by the World Bank, the European Investment Bank, the IDB and the OPEC
Fund for International Development. The overall objective of the Program was to reduce levels of
distribution system losses from 32.1 percent to 25.2 percent in four years (2015-20). The Program was
designed by CDEEE to ensure complementary investments by development partners. The project was also
aligned with the country’s National Development Strategy for 2030 and with the World Bank’s Country
Partnership Strategy (CPS, 2015-18), which was designed to support the Government’s efforts to make
growth sustainable and more inclusive. Specifically, the second strategic results area of the CPS focused
on improving access to efficient and reliable electrical distribution networks, ICT and other infrastructure – a
core outcome of this results area being to ensure improved efficiency and reliability of the electricity sector,
measured among other things by a reduction of commercial losses.

The project’s development objectives were also consistent with the Government’s Strategic Electricity
Sector Plan for 2013-16, and continued to be consistent with the World Bank’s Country Partnership
Strategy (CPS) for FY15-18, whose validity extended to project closing. Results Area 2 of the CPS focused
on “Improving access to efficient and reliable electrical distribution networks, ICT and other
infrastructure”. Key outcomes here for the electricity sector were improved efficiency and reliability,
measured among other things by a reduction in commercial losses and provision of a more reliable and
continuous supply of electricity. The engagement was expected to build on ongoing work to rehabilitate
distribution lines to improve electricity supply and strengthen incentives for payment for services through
community outreach and similar measures, and greater focus on governance of distribution companies, and
achieving greater transparency and efficiency.

Based on this, the relevance of the project’s objectives is assessed as High.



Rating Relevance TBL




Rating
High




                                                                                                         Page 4 of 14
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  DR Dist. Grid Moderniz & Loss Reduction (P147277)



   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               “To improve the financial viability of the electricity distribution companies by reducing energy losses and
               increasing revenue collections in the circuits rehabilitated under the Project”

               Rationale
               Theory of Change (TOC)

               The project was designed to reduce energy losses and increase revenue collections. Project activities aimed
               to rehabilitate selected distribution circuits and upgrade metering systems, improve commercial management
               and loss reduction program, support citizen engagement and community participation in implementing a
               Social Management Strategy, and undertake an electricity tariffs study. These activities were expected to
               lead to outcomes such as improved financial viability of the electricity distribution companies by reducing
               energy losses and increasing revenue collections in the circuits rehabilitated under the project, thereby
               contributing to enhanced supply of electricity.

               While the activities were broadly appropriate to achieving the desired outcomes, the theory of change (TOC)
               discussion in the ICR does not specifically analyze whether they were of adequate scale to create a critical
               mass for change.

               Indicators used to measure the achievement of objectives were consistent with the above results chain. For
               PDO Indicator 1 (financial viability), outcome indicators measured the increase in the Cash Recovery Index
               (CRI) at the rehabilitated circuits of each EDE. For PDO2 (supply of electricity), the indicator measured the
               increase in Average Service Availability Index (ASAI) in the rehabilitated circuits.

               Key assumptions underlying the TOC included: (i) sustained political support in improving the performance of
               the sector and in reducing losses, (ii) that the high cost of energy production would be reduced through
               investments aimed at a more efficient generation matrix, and (iii) that CDEEE and EDEs would have better
               capacity to manage a large number of contracts in terms of administrative monitoring and technical oversight.

               Outputs

               - Some 600 km of distribution networks were rehabilitated, against a revised target of 687 km (87 percent
               achievement).

               - The number of ‘remotely metered’ clients at the EDEs reached 112,896, against a (revised) target of
               130,770, or 86 percent achievement.

               - 61,120 illegal users were converted by closing to legitimate paying clients. This was against a (revised)
               target of 71,320, or 85.7 percent achievement.




                                                                                                                  Page 5 of 14
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   DR Dist. Grid Moderniz & Loss Reduction (P147277)



The failure to achieve the target for all three of the above indicators was on account of changes in mature and
scale of some of the circuits to be rehabilitated, and the fact that one of the sub-projects was not completed
by project closing.

- The number of ‘social compacts’ signed by EDEs with the communities was 18 by project closing, which
fully achieved the target of 18.

- The complementary tariff study (complementary to an on-going IDB-supported study), designed to weigh
the social implications of changes in tariff design/setting, was launched and completed by project closing.



Outcomes

The Cost Recovery Index (CRI) at the rehabilitated circuits of each EDE was used as the primary indicator to
assess the improvement in financial viability of the electricity distribution companies. The CRI accordingly
increased from a 2015 baseline of 59.00 to 75.20, against a (revised) target of 83.20 (original target was
83.60) – an achievement level of 90.4 percent. The target had been adjusted on account of initial delays in
implementation, when some of the circuits originally considered at appraisal had experienced some changes,
while some circuits with high losses had to be urgently rehabilitated and for that reason were reassigned to
projects financed by other IFIs.

Based on this and the progress made in rehabilitating distribution networks, remote metering, community
social compacts and formalization of illegal users, whilst taking into account the shortfalls in achieving target
goals, efficacy of this objective is rated Substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
“To increase the supply of electricity”

Rationale
The theory of change applicable to this objective is the same as for Objective 1. Relevant activities to meet
this objective included commercial management and loss reduction programs, along with the installation of an
IT Data Center.

Outputs

- The Energy Recovery Index (ERI) at the rehabilitated circuits of each EDE increased from a baseline of
58.70 in 2015 to 76.00 at project closing, against a (revised) target of 82.70 (originally 83.10).

- Installation of an IT Data Center was completed by project closing.


                                                                                                     Page 6 of 14
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                DR Dist. Grid Moderniz & Loss Reduction (P147277)




                            Outcomes

                            The Average Service Availability Index (ASAI) increased in the rehabilitated circuits from a base of 71.30 in
                            2015 to 98.70 at project closing, higher (102 percent) than the revised target of 96.50 (which was in turn
                            higher than the original target of 95.90). To this extent, the project was successful in expanding availability of
                            electricity supply.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            As seen from the above, the project substantially achieved its two objectives. Progress was made in terms of
                            increasing the financial viability of the electricity distribution companies, through infrastructure rehabilitation
                            investments and achieving improvements in revenue collection. Though most indicators for Objective 1 fell
                            somewhat short of their targets, there was clear progression towards the targets, good evidence of continued
                            performance and strong alignment with objective 2 is terms of the project theory. For Objective 2,
                            achievement of the ASAI target indicated that availability of electricity service did improve on account of the
                            reduction of losses, and this improvement was proof that the project exceeded expectations.

                            Based on this, Overall Efficacy is rated Substantial.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



   5. Efficiency
   Economic efficiency:

   The economic internal rate of return (EIRR) for the project at closing was estimated at 5.6 percent, with a Net
   Present Value (NPV) of - US$21.1 million, based on a 10 percent discount rate, compared to the estimated rate
   at appraisal of 16.4 percent and NPV of US$22 million at the same discount rate. The lower economic rate of
   return at project completion was on account (a) of a lower level of energy purchased and billed, i.e. a smaller
   size of market for the rehabilitated circuits relative to that estimated in the PAD, and (b) a lower projected level
   of loss reduction (23.5 percent), in comparison to the PAD’s assumption of 25.4 percent.



                                                                                                                                  Page 7 of 14
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      DR Dist. Grid Moderniz & Loss Reduction (P147277)



Financial returns estimated were of the order of 12.6 percent ex-post and an NPV of US15.31 million, as
compared to the projected rate in the PAD of 27.5 percent and US$67.3 million, respectively.

Operational/Administrative Efficiency:

The ICR did not assess Operational and Administrative efficiency. However, it is noted that the project’s closing
date was extended by two years on account of a 13-month delay in effectiveness and delays on account of the
impact of Covid-19.

The project’s results were achieved at a total cost of US$112.22 million, which was slightly lower than the
estimated cost of US$120 million. However, this was partly on account of a slight reduction in the scope of the
project, reflected in a revision downwards of most indicator targets – especially the number of km of distribution
networks rehabilitated.

Based on the above, the project’s efficiency can be considered to be Modest.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      0
 Appraisal                                                 5.60
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      0
 ICR Estimate                                              16.40
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The project’s development objectives were highly relevant to the needs of the Dominican Republic’s energy
sector and remain so. Its overall efficacy is rated Substantial, and its efficiency was rated Modest, on the basis
of the project economic analysis. As such, its overall outcome is rated Moderately Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome


                                                                                                      Page 8 of 14
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      DR Dist. Grid Moderniz & Loss Reduction (P147277)



Key risks to development outcome relate to institutional, social and pricing issues. For instance, recent rising
inflation caused the Government to freeze electricity prices so as to cushion the impact on households: the
medium-term effects of which are indeterminate. Similarly, the medium-term effects of the aftermath of
Covid-19 could also have sustained effects on the ability to maintain operational and commercial
management of the EDEs, which call for continued participation of local communities.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The design of the project was based on a sound assessment of the electricity sector and formulated in a
  way that directly addressed a concern of high relevance to the state – namely the precarious financial
  situation of the EDEs and the urgent need to reduce distribution losses (ICR, p.20). Preparatory work
  was reported by the ICR as fairly thorough, including assessment of safeguards, economic and financial
  viability, and of the capacity of executing agencies to implement fiduciary and other responsibilities,
  taking into account lessons learnt from prior operations. Implementation arrangements were based on
  the capacity and experience of the existing PIU, which had previously implemented a World Bank
  electricity project andf other IFI operations.

  Arrangements for M&E, procurement and overall implementation planning were reported to be
  appropriate, although – given the size of the main procurement package – a more advanced level of
  preparation of the bidding documents would have helped move things along more smoothly. Also, the
  project’s schedule and disbursement profile appeared to be optimistic, given Congress’ loan ratification
  requirements.

  Other than this, important governance and other risks were identified, as was institutional capacity, and
  specific measures incorporated into the project design to address them. The impact of the Covid-19
  pandemic could not realistically have been anticipated.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The project appears to have been adequately supervised. The Bank team conducted 13 bi-annual
 supervision missions over a seven-year period, despite the constraints imposed by the Covid-19 pandemic.
 The team engaged effectively with the PIU, keeping a focus on the project’s development
 outcomes. Reporting on the project appears to have been objective and timely (ICR, p.21), monitoring
 taking place vis-à-vis the results framework.




                                                                                                     Page 9 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DR Dist. Grid Moderniz & Loss Reduction (P147277)



 Supervision of safeguards and fiduciary appears to have been satisfactory, with adequate resources
 having been allocated. However, the absence of a World Bank financial management specialist was
 something of an impediment to smooth implementation.

 The ICR reports that the Bank’s overall dialogue with the Borrower and related agencies was constructive
 and useful in overcoming implementation obstacles. The project was restructured twice, in a timely
 fashion, to try and adapt better to changing conditions. The ICR also reports that a follow-on project is
 under preparation, to continue to address the development challenges that the project was addressing.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 M&E design and arrangements appear to have been generally adequate. Though there were only two
 outcome indicators, these were adequate to capture the nature and expected progress of (financial and
 technical) of the PDO. Together with the intermediate indicators, the overall set of indicators were able to
 reflect well the progress of the project. Targets established by the results framework (RF) were
 measurable, and relatively unambiguous.

 Baseline values for each indicator were provided, along with cumulative target values for the initial four
 years of implementation. However, the ICR notes (p. 17) that the quality of the RF could have been
 improved through incorporation of additional intermediate indicators designed to track the pace of
 implementation of construction/rehabilitation works, and also of the supporting activities such as social
 management.



b. M&E Implementation
  The responsibilities of all parties involved with M&E were well established by the Project Operational
  Manual (POM). Under the PIU’s coordination, the EDEs collected data on the rehabilitation subprojects
  and other components. The PIU submitted quarterly progress reports to the World Bank on achievement
  of the results indicators, and of contracts and safeguards compliance. Some shortcomings were
  observed in regard to the monitoring of contracts (ICR, p.17).



c. M&E Utilization
  Data reporting by the PIU was regularly reflected in Implementation Status and Results Reports (ISRs),
  and were used by the Bank to identify problems and inform management on potential problems in

                                                                                                    Page 10 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DR Dist. Grid Moderniz & Loss Reduction (P147277)



  various areas. According to the ICR (p.17), cumulative target values were however not made use of –
  apparently on account of a constraint set by the ISR format).



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as Safeguards Category B, triggering the following policies: (a) Environmental
   Assessment (OP 4.01), (b) Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11), and (c) Natural Habitats (OP/BP
   4.04). No social safeguard policies were triggered. The works involved mainly right-of-ways of the
   rehabilitated distribution lines and installation of new metering systems. An Environmental Impact
   Assessment was undertaken during project preparation for all circuits to be rehabilitated – most of which
   were located in urban areas.

   A sum of US$2.4 million was included in the project’s components to finance strengthening of each EDE’s
   environmental safety unit created for the purpose of the project, as well as implementation of an
   Environmental Management System (EMS) for improving the performance of the EDEs in this area – as for
   instance with storage and disposal of hazardous waste.

   The PIU prepared quarterly reports on the status of environmental, safety and health issues, to facilitate
   monitoring of the project’s compliance with the World Bank’s safeguards requirements and standards.

   A Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM), administered by CDEEE and the EDEs, was put in place, and
   was available to all parties that felt that their rights had been adversely affected by the project. In total, 210
   complaints were presented to six contractors, all of which were processed according to the GRM, with 170
   resulting in corrective actions.

   According to the ICR (pgs. 18-19), the EDEs reported that use of the Bank’s safeguards policies made a
   significant difference in terms of the utilities’ practices in dealing with environmental issues. The ICR also
   notes that project’s environmental performance was rated either satisfactory or moderately satisfactory in
   ISRs throughout the implementation period, closing with a satisfactory rating.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   A Financial management (FM) assessment was undertaken at appraisal of CDEEE, the fiduciary entity and
   coordinator of the project. It confirmed that its FM department was adequately staffed, with appropriate
   systems and controls in place. Fiduciary tasks for all components were handled by the PIU, except for
   Component 4, which was handled by SIE (for which purpose, SIE staff was strengthened through training
   and installation of FM information systems prior to processing disbursements.

   The project’s FM performance was adequate overall during the implementation period in terms of staffing,

                                                                                                       Page 11 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DR Dist. Grid Moderniz & Loss Reduction (P147277)



   budgeting, reporting, accounting and external audit. Recommendations were generally implemented on an
   ongoing basis. External audits did not identify reportable conditions, nor qualified opinions. FM
   performance was rated moderately satisfactory during most of the implementation period and satisfactory
   by closing.

   Procurement activities were carried out in accordance with the World Bank’s guidelines for procurement of
   goods and works (2011; revised 2014). CDEEE was responsible for all procurement activities, through its
   PIU, barring the tariff study, which was managed by SIEE. Given SIE’s lack of experience of World Bank
   procurement requirements, an experienced specialist was hired to strengthen capacity in this regard. Also,
   a procurement strategy was prepared and agreed upon during project preparation. The PIU was
   responsible for preparing all procurement documents and for signing contracts (to be overseen by the
   EDEs). This included complete bidding document packages, management of the entire procurement
   process, and preparation of supply and service contracts. CDEEE and the EDEs had responsibility for
   evaluation of proposals and contract award recommendations, with the EDEs being responsible for
   preparing technical specifications, managing contracts and supervising construction works. Staffs of both
   the PIU and the EDEs received training in procurement and contract management.

   The main procurement activity was the International Competitive Bidding (ICB) and execution package (of
   around US$100 million) for 18 lots of circu9its to be rehabilitated. Discussions on the relevant bidding
   documents began during preparation, but agreement on a World Bank procurement-compliant document
   was not reached until mid-2017, resulting in considerable implementation delay. Once agreement was
   reached, however, subsequent implementation proceeded relatively smoothly.

   Delays also resulted from the impact of the Covid-19 pandemic, affecting most project activities once the
   Government declared a state of emergency that slowed down works and commercial activities. The ICR
   mentions (p.20) that a post-review identified some weaknesses in procurement activities. Some contract
   activities had been extended and paid for without the prior signing of appropriate contract amendments,
   requiring the Bank to implement an action plan involving the hiring of a specialized consultant to undertake
   a field assessment and verify that the extensions and amendments were technically justified and
   satisfactorily completed.

   Apart from these initial delays, the ICR mentions that procurement responsibilities were handled
   satisfactorily, being rated either moderately satisfactory or satisfactory during implementation, and closing
   with a satisfactory rating.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                      IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment


                                                                                                    Page 12 of 14
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       DR Dist. Grid Moderniz & Loss Reduction (P147277)



                                  Moderately
Outcome                                                 Moderately Satisfactory
                                  Satisfactory
Bank Performance                  Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                    Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                    ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

IEG derives the following lessons drawn from the ICR:

1. Achieving sustainability in distribution systems characterized by long-standing issues of
high energy losses calls for a multidisciplinary effort: As illustrated by the project, the vicious
circle of ‘no service, no payment’ culture needs to be broken, requiring a continuous commercial and
social management effort, combined with technical monitoring, and with the active and coordinated
participation of the distribution utilities and the affected communities. In areas where clients will be
formalized, it is essential to monitor developments closely in order to avoid the influence/pressure of
new or returning fraudulent initiatives. The Government’s political will plays an especially important
role. Loss reduction projects require sustained support over the medium term, and a continued
effort in strengthening institutions.

2. Managing a large number of simultaneous contracts within a single project requires
effective monitoring practices and tools: As illustrated by the project, these included adequate
institutional arrangements (including staff capacity and quick access to information), ability to
monitor contracts effectively, and the use of software to monitor all contract activities in the field in
an integrated and comprehensive manner, so as to strengthen controls and achieve more efficient
technical and administrative processes. In addition, a close working relationship between the
Borrower and the World Bank is helpful in identifying problems early. The maintenance of rigorous
construction records is essential in monitoring progress of works (and to help resolve any conflicts
between contractors and utilities). Finally, it is a good idea for contracts to incorporate strong
efficiency incentives, especially in their payment schedules.

3. Adequate and timely procurement support by the World Bank (in terms of capacity and
expertise) can be critical during initial stages of implementation: This is especially important
when, as in the case of the project, a significant part of the project’s procurement relies on a single
main package. The early preparation and approval of high quality and timely set of bidding
documents, and the contribution of the Bank’s relevant specialized staff, can help determine the
eventual success of the project.




13. Assessment Recommended?

  No


                                                                                                       Page 13 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DR Dist. Grid Moderniz & Loss Reduction (P147277)



14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is well written, concise and internally consistent and provides a fair amount of detail on implementation
issues. The theory of change is appropriate and the achievement of objectives is adequately analyzed –
although it would have benefited from greater detail on the performance of individual indicators, especially
intermediate indicators. Strengths and weaknesses in the M&E system are highlighted and discussed. Overall,
the narrative appears to support the ratings and available evidence.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                   Page 14 of 14
