     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Bhutan Programmatic DPC Series (P164290)



                                                                              Report Number: ICRR0023278

1. Program Information



 Country                                  Practice Area (Lead)
 Bhutan                                   Macroeconomics, Trade and Investment

 Programmatic DPF

 Planned Operations                        Approved Operations
 3                                         3

 Operation ID                              Operation Name
 P164290                                   Bhutan Programmatic DPC Series




 L/C/TF Number(s)                        Closing Date (Original)                  Total Financing (USD)
 IDA-62080                               28-Feb-2019                                         29,202,766.05

 Bank Approval Date                      Closing Date (Actual)
 30-Mar-2018                             28-Feb-2019
                                         IBRD/IDA (USD)                              Co-financing (USD)

 Original Commitment                            30,000,000.00                                           0.00

 Revised Commitment                             30,000,000.00                                           0.00

 Actual                                         29,202,766.05                                           0.00




P168166_TBL
 Country                                  Practice Area (Lead)
 Bhutan                                   Macroeconomics, Trade and Investment

 Operation ID                             Operation Name
 P168166                                  Bhutan - DPC2 ( P168166 )




                                                                                               Page 1 of 29
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Bhutan Programmatic DPC Series (P164290)




 L/C/TF Number(s)                        Closing Date (Original)                    Total Financing (USD)
 IDA-62080,IDA-64420                     30-Jun-2020                                             30154971.12

 Bank Approval Date                      Closing Date (Actual)
 21-Jun-2019                             30-Jun-2020

                                         IBRD/IDA (USD)                                Co-financing (USD)

 Original Commitment                            30,000,000.00                                             0.00

 Revised Commitment                             30,000,000.00                                             0.00

 Actual                                         30,154,971.12                                             0.00



 P171780_TBL
 Country                                  Practice Area (Lead)
 Bhutan                                   Macroeconomics, Trade and Investment

 Operation ID                             Operation Name
 P171780                                  Bhutan - DPC 3 ( P171780 )


 L/C/TF Number(s)                        Closing Date (Original)                    Total Financing (USD)
 IDA-62080,IDA-65860                     30-Jun-2021                                             39820916.07

 Bank Approval Date                      Closing Date (Actual)
 23-Apr-2020                             30-Jun-2021

                                         IBRD/IDA (USD)                                Co-financing (USD)

 Original Commitment                            40,000,000.00                                             0.00

 Revised Commitment                             40,000,000.00                                             0.00

 Actual                                         39,820,916.07                                             0.00



 Prepared by               Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Melissa Metz              Judyth L. Twigg              Jennifer L. Keller              IEGEC




2. Program Objectives and Pillars/Policy Areas
EVOBJ_TBL

                                                                                                 Page 2 of 29
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Bhutan Programmatic DPC Series (P164290)



a. Objectives

The objective of the Bhutan Strengthening Fiscal Management and Private Sector Employment Opportunities
Development Policy Credit series was to support the government in its efforts to strengthen the policy framework
to improve fiscal management and enhance policies to promote private sector employment opportunities. The
objective of each of the three operations was the same.

For the purpose of this review, IEG considers that the operations had two objectives:

1. Strengthen the policy framework to improve fiscal management

2. Enhance policies to promote private sector employment opportunities


b. Pillars/Policy Areas
Each of the three operations had two pillars, reflecting the two objectives above.

Pillar 1 on strengthening the policy framework to improve fiscal management had 10 prior actions, which,
according to the Program Documents, attempted to stabilize hydropower inflows into the budget; increase
domestic revenue mobilization; and improve public financial management (and ultimately the quality of
government spending). Note that this grouping is for ease of presentation, but IEG has not assessed sub-
objectives.

Pillar 2 on enhancing policies to promote private sector employment opportunities had 19 prior actions,
which, according to the Program Documents, attempted to support economic diversification; increase access to
finance; improve labor force skills and human capital; and ensure that development is environmentally
sustainable and inclusive. Note that this grouping is for ease of presentation, but IEG has not assessed sub-
objectives.


c. Comments on Program Cost, Financing and Dates

The series consisted of three IDA credit operations for a total of US$100 million:

      DPC 1 was approved on March 30, 2018 for US$30 million, became effective on May 24, 2018,
       disbursed US$29.2 million, and closed on February 28, 2019.
      DPC 2 was approved on June 21, 2019 for US$30 million, became effective on June 24, 2019,
       disbursed US$30.2 million, and closed on June 30, 2020.
      DPC 3 was approved on April 23, 2020 for US$40 million, became effective on May 4, 2020, disbursed
       US$39.8 million, and closed on June 30, 2021.

Differences between approved and disbursed amounts were due to changes in the USD/XDR exchange rate.


3. Relevance of Design



                                                                                                    Page 3 of 29
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Bhutan Programmatic DPC Series (P164290)



a. Relevance of Objectives

The program’s objectives had strong relevance to the country’s development challenges. At the time this
series was prepared, Bhutan needed to smooth fiscal expenditure and increase fiscal revenue. The main
challenges were:

      Revenue from hydropower and its impact on expenditures: The Royal Government of Bhutan (RGoB)
       depends on hydropower for a substantial amount of its revenues (20 percent in 2016). The Public
       Finance Act (2007) stipulates that the cost of recurrent expenditure must be met from the internal
       resources of the country. However, this rule does not constrain recurrent spending when there is a
       spike in revenues. These spikes happen every time a large hydropower project is on streamed, and in
       the past the RGoB has implemented pro-cyclical fiscal policy, leading to large fluctuations in
       aggregate demand.
      Loss of revenue and pressure on Bhutan’s balance of payments due to introduction of the Goods and
       Services Tax (GST) in India: Before India’s introduction of the GST in July 2017, the Government of
       India collected and refunded annually to Bhutan the tax that India levied on the goods it exported to
       Bhutan. The remittance of the excise duty rebate has a time lag of 2 years. When India introduced its
       GST, it phased out these excise duty rebates. The World Bank estimated that government revenues
       would decrease from 13.4 percent of GDP prior to India’s reform, to 11.8 percent of GDP in
       FY2018/19. Further, the introduction of GST in India makes Bhutan’s imports from India cheaper and
       its exports to India more expensive, creating more pressure on Bhutan’s current account and
       negatively affecting its balance of payments.
      Tax collection is low by international standards and has been on a declining trend relative to GDP.
       Tax revenue as a percent of GDP declined from 15.1 percent in 2012 to 13.0 percent in 2016 (the
       baseline year for this series’ results framework) and 12.5 percent in 2017. Taxes on goods and
       services were 18 percent of government revenue in 2016, compared to 35.7 percent on average in
       lower-middle income countries. (A similar gap exists in neighboring years.) Domestic revenues cover
       only about 65 percent of government spending, the rest being financed by donor financing.

Policies to promote private sector employment opportunities were also a priority for the country. The country
opened its economy to the world relatively recently with foreign direct investment permitted only from 2002,
and the policy and institutional framework to facilitate growth of private enterprises is incipient. State-owned
enterprises dominate the economy, including in manufacturing, energy, financial, and other sectors, putting
the majority of private firms – which are micro and small – at a competitive disadvantage. The public sector
has been the primary source of employment for educated Bhutanese, but its capacity to absorb a growing
workforce is eroding. A growing number of educated Bhutanese are seeking urban employment
opportunities, and youth unemployment is high. In 2021, the overall unemployment rate was relatively low at
4.8 percent, but the youth unemployment rate reached 20.9 percent, and 28.6 percent among urban youth.
Unemployment has increased since 2017. Notably, the unemployment rate is highest among people with
middle secondary education, higher secondary education, or a bachelor’s degree.

A focus on fiscal management and private sector employment opportunities is also consistent with
government strategies (11th Five-Year Plan 2013–18, Economic Development Policy of 2010 and 2016, and
12th Five-Year Plan 2018–23) and the World Bank Group’s FY15-19 and FY21-24 Country Partnership
Frameworks (CPFs), which recognize the challenges described above. The operation is relevant to the
following objectives of the FY15-FY19 CPF: strengthened fiscal efficiency; strengthened systems for public



                                                                                                     Page 4 of 29
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Bhutan Programmatic DPC Series (P164290)



financial management and procurement; improved business environment; and increased efficiency and
access to financial services. The overarching priority of the most recent CPF is job creation.


b. Relevance of Prior Actions

Rationale

Table 1. Prior Actions and the indicative triggers (ITs)

 DPC1                                 DPC2                                DPC3
 Pillar/Objective 1: Strengthen the policy framework to improve fiscal management
 A. Stabilize hydropower inflows into the budget
                                                                          PA 3: The Recipient, through its Ministry
                                                                          of Finance (MoF), has amended the
                                                                          “Bhutan Economic Stabilization Fund
                                                                          Rules and Regulations (2018)” through
 PA 1: Parliament approves the        PA 2: Cabinet has approved the the issuance and publication on the
 establishment of a stabilization     governance framework of the         MoF’s website of the “BESF Rules and
 fund.                                stabilization fund.                 Regulations 2020” to stabilize
                                                                          hydropower revenue inflows into the
                                                                          national budget; as evidenced by the
                                                                          notification Ref MOF/FS-35/2019-
                                                                          20/DMEA/1068, dated January 22, 2020.
 B. Increase domestic revenue mobilization
                                                                          PA 5: The Recipient has submitted the
 PA 4: Cabinet has approved the                                           Goods and Services Tax (GST) Bill for
 introduction of GST [goods and                                           Royal Assent, following Parliamentary
 services tax].                                                           Approval. [Adjusted from “The GST Act is
                                                                          gazetted”]
 PA 6: MoF issues administrative
 measures to minimize impact on
 revenues in response to India’s
 GST introduction.
 C. Improve public financial management (and ultimately the quality of government spending)
                                      PA 7: The Ministry of Finance       PA 8: The Recipient, through its MoF,
                                      (MoF) has issued a notification to has established interconnectivity of
                                      rollout the electronic public       new/existing PFM information systems
                                      expenditure management system for automated exchange of data; as
                                      (e-PEMS) which includes the         evidenced by the notification Ref
                                      electronic payment functionality to MOF/DPA/e-payment/2019/318, dated
                                      all budgetary bodies.               September 9, 2019.
                                      PA 9: MoF has approved
                                      amendments to the existing
                                      Procurement Rules and



                                                                                                   Page 5 of 29
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Bhutan Programmatic DPC Series (P164290)



                                    Regulations 2009, including
                                    environmental considerations.
                                                                          PA 10: The Recipient, through its MoF,
                                                                          has adopted the cash-based International
                                                                          Public Sector Accounting Standards
                                                                          (IPSAS) beginning with the annual
                                                                          financial statement for FY 2019-2020 as
                                                                          evidenced by the notification Ref
                                                                          MOF/DPA(IPSAS)/2019-20/7006, dated
                                                                          January 13, 2020.
Pillar/Objective 2: Enhance policies to promote private sector employment opportunities
A. Support economic diversification
PA 11: The Ministry of Economic
Affairs (MoEA) has approved
Guidelines for Operationalization of
Business Incubation Center for
Cottage and Small Industries (CSI).
PA 12: The Cabinet has approved
the Renewable Natural Resources
(RNR) Marketing Policy for
agricultural products.
                                     PA 13: The Royal Monetary
                                     Authority (RMA) has
                                     operationalized the Global
                                     Interchange for Financial
                                     Transactions (GIFT) to facilitate e-
                                     payments and support e-
                                     commerce.
                                                                          PA 14: The Royal Monetary Authority’s
                                                                          Executive Committee, has approved the
                                                                          “Payment Systems Oversight
                                                                          Framework” for the National Payments
                                                                          System, which establishes a dedicated
                                                                          unit for this purpose.
                                                                          PA 15: The Cabinet has approved the
                                                                          revised Foreign Direct Investment (FDI)
                                                                          Policy on July 8, 2019.
                                                                          PA 16: The Cabinet has approved the
                                                                          National Competition Policy on January
                                                                          21, 2020.
B. Increase access to finance
PA 17: The RMA Board has             PA 18: The RMA Executive
approved Amendment to Credit         Committee has approved the
Information Bureau Rules and         Supervision Manual for CIB and
Regulations 2017.                    data providers.



                                                                                                  Page 6 of 29
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Bhutan Programmatic DPC Series (P164290)



PA 19: The RMA Board has
approved E-money issuer Rules
and Regulations 2017.
C. Improve labor force skills and human capital
PA20: The Ministry of Education
has approved the International
School Guidelines 2017.
                                    PA 21: The Ministry of Education
                                    has approved the Non-Formal
                                    Education Equivalency
                                    Framework. [Moved from DPC3]
                                    PA 22: The Cabinet has approved
                                    the waiving of cut-off points for
                                    admission of class X passed
                                    students into class XI in public and
                                    private schools.
                                                                           PA 23: The Ministry of Education has
                                                                           approved the Bhutan Professional
                                                                           Standards for Teachers. [Adjusted from
                                                                           “Cabinet approves the Teachers
                                                                           Standards Policy”, moved from DPC2,
                                                                           and Teacher Professional Development
                                                                           Program removed]
                                   PA 24: The Ministry of Health has
                                                                      PA 25: The Ministry of Health has
                                   approved the Accelerating
                                                                      approved the Operational Manual for
                                   Maternal and Child Health
                                                                      implementing the Accelerating Mother
                                   Program for investing in human
                                                                      and Child Health Program.
                                   capital.
D. Ensure that development is environmentally sustainable and inclusive
PA 26: The Ministry of Economic
Affairs (MoEA) has approved
National Energy Efficiency and
Conservation Policy.
                                                                      PA 27: The Cabinet has approved the
                                                                      National Energy Efficiency and
                                                                      Conservation Policy.
                                                                      PA 28: The Cabinet has approved the
                                                                      National Climate Change Policy.
                                                                      PA 29: The Recipient, (i) through its
                                                                      Cabinet, has approved the National
                                                                      Gender Equality Policy on January 21,
                                                                      2020; and (ii) through the National
                                                                      Commission for Women and Children,
                                                                      has approved the Standard Operating
                                                                      Procedures for the Prevention of Gender-
                                                                      Based Violence.


                                                                                                    Page 7 of 29
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Bhutan Programmatic DPC Series (P164290)




Objective 1: Strengthen the policy framework to improve fiscal management

The fiscal management pillar overall had a strong results chain linking the prior actions to the achievement of
the related objectives. The prior actions on stabilizing hydropower inflows to the budget and on increasing
domestic revenue mobilizations addressed critical constraints and made a credible contribution to achieving
the objectives. The PAs were also generally sequenced appropriately. The PAs in the area of fiscal
management, with the ultimate goal of improving the quality of government spending, were more modest and
omitted addressing some important constraints, as described below.

A. Stabilize hydropower inflows into the budget

PA1, PA2, PA3: Bhutan faced macroeconomic instability stemming from the structure of hydropower projects
(long, debt-financed construction periods followed by large inflows of revenue when operations and exports
commenced). Spikes in revenue from new hydropower plants coming into operation led to pro-cyclical fiscal
policy. Stabilizing budgetary revenues by decoupling them from volatile hydropower revenues was important
for preventing boom and bust cycles. The PAs supported the government to implement a tool to directly
address the need to stabilize hydropower revenue inflows into the budget by supporting the establishment
and operationalization of a stabilization fund in a sequential way across the three DPCs. DPC1 (PA1)
supported establishment of the fund. DPC2 (PA2) supported its governance framework, which included: (i)
sources of revenue for the fund; (ii) conditions for the use of fund resources; (iii) procedures for transfer to
and withdrawal from the fund; (iv) investment policy; (v) governance framework; and (vi) internal control
systems and oversight mechanisms. DPC3 (PA3) supported establishment of the rules governing transfers
into and out of the stabilization fund (fiscal rule), a critical aspect to ensure the fund plays its stabilizing role.
This is consistent with best practice for establishing funds to manage revenue from natural resource-based
economic activity. Thus, the prior actions have a clear results chain to achievement of the related objective
and are critical to addressing a key constraint for the country. Thus, relevance of PAs 1, 2, and 3 is Highly
Satisfactory.

B. Increase domestic revenue mobilization

PA4 and PA5: To put government revenues on a more sustainable path due to both the general need for
more government revenue and the specific loss of tax revenue from Bhutanese goods exported to India due
to India’s introduction of GST and cessation of excise tax remittances to India, Bhutan needed to introduce its
own GST system. This DPC series supported the introduction of a GST in Bhutan – its approval by Cabinet
(PA4) and its submission for Royal Assent following Parliamentary approval (PA5). The GST replaces the
existing sales tax, which has numerous gaps and inefficiencies, and closes the gap in revenue created when
India ceased remitting excise duty rebates to RGoB. Thus, the introduction of GST was critical for Bhutan’s
fiscal situation. The relevance of PAs 4 and 5 is Satisfactory.

PA6: The administrative measures to minimize impact on revenues in response to India’s GST introduction
supported by the series (PA6) comprised a new rule on the valuation, collection, and deposit of sales tax on
vehicles. The valuation changed from the point of entry into the country to the point of sale. This increases
the value of the vehicle and results in higher revenues. A focus on the tax on vehicles is relevant given that
this is a prominent import from India. This was a relevant prior action but is narrow compared to the
challenge of increasing tax revenue. The relevance of PA6 is Satisfactory.

C. Improve public financial management (and ultimately the quality of government spending)


                                                                                                         Page 8 of 29
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Bhutan Programmatic DPC Series (P164290)



Public Financial Management Systems

The prior actions in this area aimed to improve public financial management with the broader aim of
improving the quality of government spending, which is particularly important in Bhutan’s fiscally constrained
environment (as described above). The 2016 PEFA report identified a need to improve transparency,
predictability, and control in budget administration, and accounting and reporting. Prior to the DPC series, the
government used many stand-alone PFM systems that were not integrated. The DPC Program Documents
stated that the “lack of an integrated PFM system constrains transparency, accountability and budget
execution” and that establishing interconnectivity between the different PFM systems would achieve an
integrated financial management information system (IFMIS) and “is expected to improve information
exchange, commitment controls and cash management." The prior actions in this area were consistent with
the government’s 2017 PFM Reform Action Plan.

PA7 supported the government to include an electronic payment functionality in the public expenditure
management system (PEMS), which is one step toward connecting PEMS with other PFM systems including
revenue management, procurement, and budget and achieving an integrated financial management
information system. PA7 supported the Ministry of Finance’s action to roll out the electronic PEMS (e-PEMS),
which was expected to significantly improve efficiency in the overall government financial management
system and enable PEMS to interconnect with other PFM systems including revenue management,
procurement and budget. PA7 was an important step along the results chain to improving PFM, but was only
one step toward addressing the constraint presented lack of an integrated PFM system. Interconnection of
additional systems would be needed in order to fully address this constraint. Relevance of PA7 is Moderately
Satisfactory.

PA8 also contributed to the results chain of improving PFM, as it supported MoF’s issuance of an instruction
(“notification”) to connect other PFM systems with e-PEMS (“establish interconnectivity”). The expectation
was that systems for revenue management, procurement and budget would be interconnected with e-PEMS.
While the drafting of the prior action states that interconnectivity has been established, the Program
Document makes it clear that the notification supported by the PA is only the initiation of the process (DPC3
PD, paragraph 52). Thus, the prior action was weak and did not support the actual integration of the systems.
A more relevant PA would be to recognize when interconnection is actually achieved. Relevance of PA8 is
Moderately Unsatisfactory. A better prior action would have been to recognize the when the systems were
actually interconnected.

Public Procurement

PA9: The Program Documents indicated that a new public procurement law was needed because the lack of
such a law had resulted in weak enforcement of procurement rules, putting at risk the efficiency and
transparency of budget planning and execution. PA9 supported updated procurement rules and regulations to
modernize the procurement system, update standard bidding documents, reflect environmental
considerations (through the requirement to specify environmentally friendly equipment, goods, or materials
when preparing bidding documents), and encourage the use of electronic government procurement.
However, without stronger enforcement of procurement rules, new procurement rules would not necessarily
improve public procurement in practice. Relevance of PA9 is Moderately Unsatisfactory.

Accounting Standards




                                                                                                    Page 9 of 29
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Bhutan Programmatic DPC Series (P164290)



PA10 required the adoption of cash-based “International Public Sector Accounting Standards (IPSAS)." to
produce budget data that was internationally comparable, as the accounting standards in use before the
reform was not internationally comparable. The DPC3 Program Document states that this was one of the
major ongoing PFM reform initiatives undertaken by the Ministry of Finance, and that it was expected to
increase transparency and comparability of Bhutan’s public financial statements. Relevance of PA10 is
Satisfactory.

Objective 2: Enhance policies to promote private sector employment opportunities.

A. Support economic diversification

The DPC series supported several reforms to increase capacity and competitiveness in the private sector.
Two reforms were critical: a revised Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) Policy that addressed weaknesses
previously identified, and a Competition Policy that provides a first step to level the playing field between
private and state-owned enterprises operating in competitive markets. Other prior actions (e.g., incubating
micro and small businesses, improving agricultural marketing) were relevant to the country’s needs, but there
is a weak link to moving along the results chain to strengthening private sector job creation.

PA11: Approval of the Guidelines for Operationalization of Business Incubation Center for Cottage and Small
Industries (CSI) (PA11) aimed to increase capacity of aspiring entrepreneurs by providing training in business
operations (including financing, sales, and marketing). While the capacity of the private sector is a constraint
to its development that should be addressed (see IEG’s PPAR), the results chain of this prior action is
weak. The Program Documents did not discuss if the training was informed by a needs analysis or
consultations with the private sector, or more broadly whether the training meets identified needs of the
private sector. Further, training aspiring entrepreneurs in business operations including financing, sales and
marketing is a very early step in the results chain of developing businesses that have the capacity to grow
and create the types of jobs that Bhutan needs. Relevance of PA11 is Moderately Unsatisfactory.

PA12: Approval of the Renewable Natural Resources (RNR) Marketing Policy for agricultural products by the
Cabinet (PA12) to address constraints in the marketing of agricultural products. The Program Document (PD)
states that the Policy would ensure commercialization of crops, enhance fair pricing of agriculture products,
and improve market access to increase Bhutan’s agriculture exports, but neither the PD nor the ICR
discusses how it would do this. Relevance of PA12 is Moderately Unsatisfactory. It is unclear how it would
improve the functioning of markets in agriculture, or links to employment opportunities.

PA13 and PA 14: The series supported two PAs to improve Bhutan’s payment systems: PA13 supported the
Royal Monetary Authority (RMA) to operationalize the Global Interchange for Financial Transactions (GIFT)
to facilitate e-payments and support e-commerce. PA14 supported the RMA to approve the “Payment
Systems Oversight Framework” for the National Payments System. PA13 established an international
payment gateway that supports e-commerce and makes the following improvements over the previous
system (according to the Program Document): instant settlement of funds, reduced default and settlement
risk, settling of bulk transactions in real time, easy traceability and safety measures for the movement of
funds, and a calendar feature to view future and past transactions. PA14 established an oversight and
supervision framework for the national payment system where one did not previously exist. The main
objective of the framework is “to ensure the smooth functioning of the payment system by reducing declined
transactions and technical issues in the transfer of funds” (DPC3 Program Document). Improving payment
systems does not have a direct link to achieving the ambitious objective of enhancing policies to promote
private sector employment opportunities. The Program Document asserts that the PAs will contribute to an


                                                                                                   Page 10 of 29
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Bhutan Programmatic DPC Series (P164290)



improved environment for private sector development but does not explain how. Presumably, these actions
can contribute to the growth of the digital economy, and thus job creation, but neither the Program Document
nor the ICR state this or assess how this is relevant to the Bhutan context. The relevance of PA 13 and PA 14
is Moderately Satisfactory.

PA 15: Cabinet approval of the revised Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) policy (PA15) addressed key
weaknesses in Bhutan’s gradual process of opening to foreign investment. Prior to the reform, FDI was
limited by: a prohibition on FDI in some sectors; minimum levels of investment required for an investment to
be approved; requirements for a joint venture with a local partner; and a requirement that investment in
infrastructure must be through a public-private partnership (PPP) in selected infrastructure sub-sectors. The
process of gaining approval for a foreign investment was complex, involving multiple government
ministries/agencies, and the process of obtaining business investor visas was complex. The reform opened
more sectors to FDI inflows (selected small-scale production and manufacturing activities); removed or
reduced (depending on the sub-sector) the minimum level of investment required in the information
technology (IT sector) and enabled 100% foreign ownership shares in the sector; removed the restriction that
investment in infrastructure must be through a public-private partnership (PPP) in selected infrastructure sub-
sectors; streamlined the FDI approval process within a single window at the Ministry of Economic Affairs; and
facilitated the provision of business investor visas. This reform made progress on areas that had been
identified as needing improvements, including in the 2020 SCD and the PPAR for the previous DPC series.
However, without clarity on the relationship between prospective investment and employment opportunities
(in the context of an assessment of the most binding constraints to FDI), the relevance of this PA is is
Moderately Satisfactory.

PA16: Cabinet approval of the National Competition Policy (PA16) was a modest step toward addressing a
critical constraint to the development of Bhutan’s private sector – the crowding out of the private sector by
state-owned enterprises (SOEs). Commercially oriented SOEs operate in the manufacturing, energy,
financial, and other competitive sectors. Curtailing SOEs’ activities in competitive markets is critical for
increasing private sector job creation. The PPAR of the preceding DPC series identified the lack of
addressing SOEs’ role in the economy as a critical omission of that series. The prior action in the present
series included provisions to limit monopolies except on social or security considerations. It provided a basis
for government action to overcome uncompetitive market practices, and the Policy states that it is applicable
to SOEs. However, the Program Documents do not mention its application for SOEs, and indications are that
it would applied only to the private sector for which there are no indications that poor competition practices
were an issue. Additionally, no arrangements were made to support implementation of the Competition Policy
(from the Bank or other development partners), and such implementation support is needed given Bhutan’s
low capacity. The relevance of PA16 is thus Moderately Satisfactory.

B. Increase Access to Finance

It should be noted that the original design of the DPC series (as envisaged at the time the first operation was
approved) had a sharper focus on policies that had a more direct impact on enterprise access to finance,
which is needed for private sector employment creation. The first operation in this series had included
triggers to address these issues: Parliamentary approval of the Insolvency Act that would establish an
insolvency framework, and amendments to the Moveable and Immoveable Property Act (MIPA) that would
enable moveable assets to be used as collateral. Along with improved insolvency procedures, the
amendments to MIPA would help ease firms’ collateral constraints, which was a major constraint to access to
finance (see IEG’s 2023 PPAR). Submission of both pieces of legislation to Parliament had been supported
by the FY15-17 DPC series, but they were not adopted, and still have not been adopted. The present series

                                                                                                  Page 11 of 29
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Bhutan Programmatic DPC Series (P164290)



had also included a trigger on the issuance of rules and regulations that would facilitate external commercial
borrowings. These triggers were dropped, and weakened the series’ relevance regarding its second
objective. Therefore, the scope of the DPC-supported reforms on the access to finance aspects needed to
promote private sector employment creation was much narrower than envisioned when DPC1 was approved.
While IEG highlights this for transparency, nevertheless, the relevance of the PAs has been assessed based
on the strength of each PA; the narrowing of the focus described here does not impact IEG’s ratings.

PA17 and PA 18: The DPC series aimed to improve the functioning of the Credit Information Bureau through
amendments to its Rules and Regulations (PA17) and adoption of its Supervision Manual (PA18). Regarding
PA17, it is not clear what improvements the amendments to the CIB’s Rules and Regulations made; some of
the improvements claimed in the Program Document for DPC1 were supported under the previous DPC
series. Without clarity on the nature of the problem to be addressed, the extent to which it was one of the
main constraints to the functioning of businesses (and thus to employment creation), the relevance of PA17 is
Unsatisfactory. Regarding PA18, it is not clear what problem this prior action was intended to address in
practice (what problem did the lack of a supervision manual cause and how did it impact employment
opportunities in the economy more generally?). The relevance of PA18 is Moderately Unsatisfactory. The
PPAR for the previous series, dated November 2022, found that the CIB has not had a significant impact on
access to finance.

PA19: The e-money issuer Rules and Regulations established legal regulations for provision of mobile
banking and payments services that had not existed before in Bhutan. This was an early step toward
improving access to finance, particularly among the unbanked, but it has a weak link to generating private
sector employment opportunities. The relevance of PA19 is Moderately Satisfactory.

C. Improve labor force skills and human capital

The lack of skilled labor was the second most frequently cited constraint in the 2017 Bhutan Investment
Climate Assessment. It should be noted that the original design of the DPC focused more directly on policies
that would affect private sector employment. They included approval by Cabinet of the revised National
Human Resource Development Policy (trigger for DPC2) and amendments of the Labor and Employment Act
to develop channels for skilled migration while also investing in building the skills of the adult population
(trigger for DPC3). These triggers were dropped from the later operations. Therefore, the scope of the DPC-
supported reforms on skills was much narrower than envisioned when DPC1 was approved. The ICR notes
that the dropped triggers would have been more impactful than the actual prior actions supported by the
series as the PAs required a long results chain before they could be expected to impact private employment
outcomes. The PAs are assessed individually below, based on their merits. The adjustment in the design of
the series has not influenced IEG’s assessment of the relevance of the individual prior actions.

PA20 supported approval of the International School Guidelines 2017, which were intended to enable
introduction of best international practices in education and provide a demonstration effect for other schools
to emulate. Its contribution to the results chain toward improving labor force skills is minor and speculative. It
is also not clear what subsequent efforts would be required to ensure that effective standards would be
implemented. Its relevance is Unsatisfactory.

PA21 supported the approval of the Non-Formal Education (NFE) Equivalency Framework, which creates
equivalency among formal, non-formal, and vocational education in learning, skills, and recognition of
competencies. NFE is important for individuals who did not complete formal education, to acquire basic
competencies in literacy, numeracy, and vocational skills. The reform was expected to increase livelihood


                                                                                                     Page 12 of 29
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Bhutan Programmatic DPC Series (P164290)



and skilled job opportunities for all, and particularly for women, who comprise the majority of participants in
the NFE system. It is early in the results chain toward improving labor force skills, and steps required for its
effectiveness are unclear. Its relevance is Moderately Satisfactory.

PA22 supported the removal of the requirement to obtain a certain score or greater on the Bhutan Certificate
of Secondary Examination at the end of grade 10 to move to higher secondary (grades 11 and 12) education
at public schools. After the reform, any student who passes grade 10 would be eligible for placement in
public, private, or technical and vocational education and training (TVET) institutions for further education
with full scholarship. This reform opened up higher secondary education opportunities for students, but its
contribution toward the objective of promoting private sector employment opportunities depends on other
elements that may or may not be in place, including the quality of education and its fit with labor force needs.
The relevance of this PA is Moderately Unsatisfactory.

PA23 supported the enactment of Bhutan Professional Standards for Teachers. These standards were
expected to improve the quality of teaching. The Bhutan Education Blueprint 2014-24 identified transforming
the teaching profession and improving teachers’ standards as one out of the eight major shifts required in the
education system. The Program Document states that “Current teaching and learning approaches do not help
students develop competencies in the field of critical thinking, creativity, innovation, communication and
leadership qualities” and that poorly trained teachers are having a negative impact on student outcomes.
Once the reform is implemented, teachers will be assessed across seven categories of standards, and a
performance-based element will be added to their compensation, reflecting their performance on the
assessment. This was relevant for improving the quality of education, but the PA did not guarantee
implementation of the new standards. Relevance of PA23 is Moderately Satisfactory.

PAs 24 and 25 supported the approval and operationalization of the Accelerating Maternal and Child Health
Program, a conditional cash transfer program aimed at improving child and maternal health through ante-
natal and post-natal health care through the first 1000 days of a child’s life. This program was relevant to
issues of stunting (over one-fifth of children over five in Bhutan are stunted, according to the Program
Document of DPC2) and the prevalence of anemia (27-36 percent) among women and adolescent girls.
However, its link to private sector employment opportunities is highly indirect and speculative. The relevance
of PAs 24 and 25 is Unsatisfactory.

D. Ensure that development is environmentally sustainable and inclusive

While Bhutan’s overall policy framework, as stated in its Five-Year Plans, aims for inclusive, green socio-
economic development, work remains to be done in translating these stated objectives into public policy
(according to the Program Document for DPC1). The PAs in this area aimed to help Bhutan operationalize
the focus on environmentally sustainable and inclusive development. However, the prior actions in this area
have a weak link to private sector job creation. While environmental sustainability is important in the context
of Bhutan, is not inherent in the objective to foster private sector job creation. The prior actions would be
more relevant if the objective had also included a reference to environmental sustainability.

PA26 and PA27 supported the Cabinet’s approval of the National Energy Efficiency and Conservation Policy.
This is a step in implementing the 2016 Economic Development Policy’s emphasis on energy efficiency and
conservation, and was expected to encourage improvements in energy performance (i.e., reduce energy
consumption) of major economic sectors. Neither of those PAs have an evident results chain linking to the
objectives of the operations. Relevance is rated Unsatisfactory.



                                                                                                     Page 13 of 29
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Bhutan Programmatic DPC Series (P164290)



 PA28 supported the Cabinet’s approval of the National Climate Change Policy. This Policy provides a
 framework for coordinated action to fulfil national and international obligations. It addresses carbon neutral
 development and resilience to climate change, and outlines institutional arrangements for its implementation.
 It was expected to improve data and information flows and streamline the government’s efforts related to
 climate change. The PA has no evident results chain to the objective of the operation. Relevance is rated
 Unsatisfactory.

 PA29 supported the Cabinet’s approval of the National Gender Equality Policy and the National Commission
 for Women and Children’s approval of the Standard Operating Procedures (SOP) for the Prevention of
 Gender-Based Violence. These were expected to improve gender equality by strengthening the legal
 framework. The policy focuses on: (i) supporting political and civil service representation of women; (ii)
 addressing violence against women and girls; and (iii) supporting economic empowerment to address lower
 literacy rates, labor force participation, and wage differentials between genders. This was a relevant area for
 the DPC to focus on because of declining female labor force participation (from 64 percent in 2010 to 56
 percent in 2018) and women working in lower-quality jobs than men. Gender-based violence is also of
 concern, as the Prevalence of Violence Against Women and Girls Survey conducted by NCWC in 2017
 suggested that 2 out of 5 women experience one or more forms of partner violence in their lifetime. According
 to the DPC Program Document, the SOP provides comprehensive regulatory standards for responses to and
 prevention of GBV in Bhutan in accordance with international good practice. GBV may affect women’s labor
 force participation, thus there is a link to employment opportunities. Relevance of this PA is rated Moderately
 Satisfactory.

 Overall, the relevance of the PAs in this series was Moderately Satisfactory. The relevance of PAs
 supporting objective 1 was on average Satisfactory, and the relevance of PAs supporting objective 2 was on
 average Moderately Unsatisfactory.



Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

4. Relevance of Results Indicators

Rationale

Objective 1: Strengthen the policy framework to improve fiscal management

RI#1 (Cumulative contributions to the stabilization fund) was relevant to the prior action and the PDO, as it
captured deposits into the stabilization fund. However, it failed to capture whether the fund was working properly,
as discussed below in Efficacy. The relevance of the result indicator is rated Satisfactory (S).

RI#2 (Revenues collected under GST) was highly relevant, as it captured the impact of the reform supported and
its contribution to the operation’s objectives, and the definition of the indicator and the source of data are clear.
Relevance of this RI is Highly Satisfactory (HS).




                                                                                                     Page 14 of 29
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Bhutan Programmatic DPC Series (P164290)



RI#3 (Number of budget agencies using e-PEMS) and RI#5 (Total number of Annual Financial Statements
prepared in compliance with IPSAS) captured well the reforms supported. The definition of the indicator is clear.
The relevance of RI#3 and RI#5 is Satisfactory (S).

RI#4 (Number of registered bidders in the eGP [e-government procurement] system) captured setting up the eGP
system but not its use. The definition of the indicator and the source of data are clear. The relevance of RI#4 is
rated Moderately Unsatisfactory (MU).

The impacts of PA6 (minimize the impact of India’s GST introduction on RGoB revenues) and PA8 (establishing
interconnectivity of new/existing PFM information systems for automated exchange of data) were not measured
by any results indicator. This was an omission especially for PA8 that supported a step in a process that the
Program Documents portrayed as critical for public financial management.

Objective 2: Enhance policies to promote private sector employment opportunities

RI#6 (Number of CSIs under incubation) measured the implementation of the Business Incubation Center for
Cottage and Small Industries. It measures only an input into improving private sector employment opportunities,
but not movement along the results chain that is needed to create employment. The definition of and source of
data for the indicator is clear. Its relevance is Moderately Unsatisfactory (MU).

RI#7 (Value of non-cash transactions in the Bhutanese economy) has a weak link to creating private sector
employment (the PDO), although it can be a proxy to measure growth in the digital economy, which can
contribute to such employment. The definition of the indicator is clear. Its relevance is Moderately Satisfactory
(MS).

RI#8 (Cumulative non-hydro FDI inflows into Bhutan) is relevant, as it reflects both the implementation of the
revised FDI rules and the objective of promoting private sector employment. However, FDI is determined a range
of other factors besides RGoB investment policies. Relevance of this RI is Moderately Satisfactory (MS).

RI#9 (Number of entities reporting to CIB [Credit Information Bureau]) has a weak link to creating private sector
employment. It captures an input that can contribute to increasing access to finance, but not outcomes with a
credible link to employment. The definition of and source of data for the indicator are clear. Its relevance is
Moderately Unsatisfactory (MU).

RI#10 (Transition to higher secondary schooling) has a weak link to creating private sector employment, as it
does not measure whether skills are improving to meet the private sector’s demand for labor. In fact, according to
the 2020 SCD, most unemployed people in Bhutan have middle or higher secondary education. The result
indicator does not measure whether the quality and relevance of higher secondary education will match labor
market needs. The RI is a relevant measure of the impact of the associated PA (waiving of cut-off points for
admission of class X passed students into class XI). The definition of the indicator is clear. Its relevance is
Moderately Unsatisfactory (MU).

RI#11 (Proportion of pregnant women who complete all 8 antenatal care (ANC) visits) is not related to private
sector employment. Its definition is clear. Its relevance is Unsatisfactory (U).

RI#12 (Proportion of Public-School Teachers categorized as either Beginning or Proficient by the new Bhutan
Professional Standards for Teachers) has a weak link to creating private sector employment, as it does not
measure whether skills are improving to meet the private sector’s demand for labor. It is a relevant measure of
the associated PA. The definition of the indicator is clear. Its relevance is Moderately Unsatisfactory (MU).

                                                                                                   Page 15 of 29
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Bhutan Programmatic DPC Series (P164290)



RI#13 (Share of LED lights in total lightbulb imports) and is relevant for measuring the impact of the related PA
but is not related to private sector employment generation. Measurement of the indicator is clear. Its relevance is
Unsatisfactory (MU).

RI#14 (Number of female candidates contesting in local elections) is somewhat relevant for measuring the impact
of the related PA, although the number of female candidates contesting elections is not related to private sector
employment generation. Measurement of the indicator is clear. Its relevance is Unsatisfactory (U).

The impact of the following PAs were not tracked by any result indicator:

      Cabinet approval of the Renewable Natural Resources (RNR) Marketing Policy (PA 12), National
       Competition Policy (PA 16), and the National Climate Change Policy (PA 28)
      Ministry of Education approval of the International School Guidelines and the Non-Formal Education
       Equivalency Framework (PAs 20 and 21)
      Cabinet approval of the National Climate Change Policy (PA 28).

The lack of an indicator to measure the outcome of the National Competition Policy is an important omission, as it
is a key policy given the country context and objective.

Table: Relevance and Achievement Rating for each Results Indicator

                                       Baseline     Target

                                    (2016           (2021        Actual value   Actual change
RI             Associated           unless          unless                      in RI relative to
description    PA(s)      RI        otherwise       otherwise    as of target   targeted          RI achievement
                          relevance specified)      specified)   date[1]        change            rating


Objective 1: Strengthen the policy framework to improve fiscal
management
                                                                                                 Modest. The
                                                                                                 indicator
                                                                                                 was substantiall
RI#1:
                                                                                                 y achieved
Cumulative
                                       0 percent                                                 but the
contributions PA 1, PA 2,                           0.5 percent 0.44 percent of
                          S            of GDP                                   0%               stabilization fund
to the        PA 3                                  of GDP      GDP (2021)
                                       (2017)                                                    is not functioning
stabilization
                                                                                                 as expected, as
fund
                                                                                                 described in the
                                                                                                 text of this
                                                                                                 ICRR.
RI#2:          PA 4, PA 5 HS           0 (Sales     At least     0 (2021)       0%               Negligible
Revenues                               tax was      13.5
collected                              12.8         percent of                                   (not
under GST                              percent of   FY2016                                       implemented)
                                       FY2016       revenues
                                       revenues

                                                                                                    Page 16 of 29
        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
        Bhutan Programmatic DPC Series (P164290)



                                       excluding
                                       grants)


RI#3: Number                                       All 10        All 20 districts
of budget                              0           ministries, and all 205
agencies       PA 7         S                      20 districts, sub-districts    100%               High
using e-                                           and 205       are using the
PEMS                                               sub-districts system.
RI#4: Number
of registered
bidders in the                                                                                       [High] While the
eGP [e-                                                           4,988                              target was
                                                                                    713% greater
government PA 9             MU         0           At least 700                                      exceeded, the
                                                                                    than target
procurement]                                                                                         relevance of the
system                                                                                               RI is MU.


RI#5: Total                                                0
number of
Annual                                                     (Due to
Financial                                                  COVID-19,                                 Negligible (not
              PA 10     S          0           1                                    0%
Statements                                                 IPSAS                                     implemented)
prepared in                                                introduction
compliance
with IPSAS                                                 was delayed.)
Objective 2: Enhance policies to promote private sector employment
opportunities
                                                           Batch 1
                                                                                    Total:
                                                           (FY18/19): 24
                                               At least 20
                                                           (22 male, 3                            [High] While the
                                   7 total, of total, of                            210% greater
RI#6: Number                                               female)                                target was
                                   which       which at                             than target
of CSIs under PA 11     MU                                                                        exceeded, the
                                   female-     least 3
incubation                                                 Batch 2                                relevance of the
                                   owned 0 female-                                  Female-owned:
                                                           (FY19/20): 38                          RI is MU.
                                               owned                                433% greater
                                                           (25 male, 13
                                                                                    than target
                                                           female)
                                                                                    639% greater
                                                                                    than target as
RI#7: Value of
               PA 13,                                                               measured in
non-cash                               BTN 88.1
                                                At least 20                         BTN
transactions                           billion
               PA 14,       MS                  percent     BTN 781 billion                High
in the
                                                increase                    3595% greater
Bhutanese                              (2017)
               PA 19                                                        than target as
economy
                                                                            measured in %
                                                                            increase
RI#8:           PA 15       MS         BTN 9.4  At least 10 Net FDI inflows 11% of the     Negligible


                                                                                                       Page 17 of 29
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Bhutan Programmatic DPC Series (P164290)



Cumulative                          billion    percent       in 2017-2021 targeted
non-hydro                           [inflows   increase      were US$3.1 increase
FDI inflows                         from 06/07               million, only a
into Bhutan                         to 15/16]                1.1% increase.



                                    According                Given data
                                    to WDI                   availability
                                    data, net                issues, as
                                    FDI inflows              discussed with
                                    from 2007-               the ICR team,
                                    2016 were                IEG used the
                                    US$288.4                 data in US$
                                    million                  from the World
                                                             Development
                                                             Indicators
                                                             database. Note
                                                             this does not
                                                             separate out
                                                             hydro FDI
                                                             inflows.
                                                                                387% greater
                                                                                than target as
                                                                                measured in
RI#9: Number                                                                    number of
                                                                                                 [High] While the
of entities                                                                     entities
             PA                                   At least 10                                    target was
reporting to
             17,      PA   MU       988           percent     4,202                              exceeded, the
CIB [Credit                                                                     or
             18                                   increase                                       relevance of the
Information
                                                                                                 RI is MU.
Bureau]                                                                     3770% greater
                                                                            than target as
                                                                            measured in %
                                                                            increase
RI#10:        PA 22        MU       Girls: 72.8 Girls: At    Girls: 96.67   As of 2019:     Modest (the
Transition to                       percent     least 80     percent                        years preceding
higher                                          percent                     Girls: 21%      2021 showed
secondary                           Boys: 71.7               Boys: 89.7 and greater than    that the reform
schooling                           percent     Boys: At     percent        target          can have the
                                                least 80                                    desired impact)
                                    (2018)      percent      (2019)         Boys: 12%
                                                                            greater than
                                                             Girls: 70      target
                                                             percent
                                                                            As of 2021:
                                                             Boys: 70
                                                             percent (2021) 13% less than
                                                                            target for both

                                                                                                   Page 18 of 29
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Bhutan Programmatic DPC Series (P164290)



                                                             due to COVID-
                                                             19
                                                             75 percent in
                                                             2021, based on
                                                             the District

                                                           Health
                                                           Information
                                                           System (DHIS).
                                                           The actual                         [High] The
RI#11:                                                     value is not                       desired outcome
Proportion of                                              directly                           was achieved,
pregnant       PA                   26 percent             comparable                         but not through
                                               At least 30                 150% greater
women who 24,           PA   U                             with the                           the DPC-
                                               percent                     than target
complete all 8 25                   (2018)                 baseline, which                    supported
antenatal care                                             was obtained                       program, which
(ANC) visits                                               through the                        has not been
                                                           National Health                    implemented.
                                                           Survey in
                                                           2012. The
                                                           AMCH program
                                                           has not been
                                                           implemented
                                                           due to COVID-
                                                           19.
RI#12:
Proportion of
Public-School
Teachers
categorized
                                                                                              Negligible
as either
                                                At least 50
Beginning or    PA 23        MU     0                       0                 0
                                                percent                                       (not
Proficient by
                                                                                              implemented)
the new
Bhutan
Professional
Standards for
Teachers
RI#13: Share                                                                                  [High] The target
of LED lights   PA 26,                                                                        was achieved,
                                                                              1480% greater
in total                     U      1 percent   5 percent    79 percent                       but the
                                                                              than target
lightbulb       PA 27                                                                         relevance of the
imports                                                                                       RI is U.
RI#14:          PA 29        U      555         At least 5   502              Actual is lower Negligible
Number of                                       percent                       than the
female                                          increase                      baseline, so no (reduction
candidates                                                                    progress toward instead of
                                                                                              increase)

                                                                                                 Page 19 of 29
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  Bhutan Programmatic DPC Series (P164290)



    contesting in                                                                        the target was
    local elections                                                                      made.

  Note: RI achievement ratings note achievement of the targeted change for the RI. RI achievement ratings in
  brackets reflect ratings that may have been adjusted based on weak relevance of the results indicator.

  Overall, the Relevance of Results Indicators is Moderately Satisfactory. The relevance of indicators supporting
  objective 1 is Satisfactory, while the relevance of indicators supporting objective 2 is Moderately Unsatisfactory.


  Rating

  Moderately Satisfactory

   5. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               Strengthen the policy framework to improve fiscal management

               Rationale
               Efficacy of this objective is rated Moderately Unsatisfactory. The government has contributed into the
               stabilization fund, but the fund has not been implemented as expected, and the GST has not been
               implemented (see discussion below). Results indicators data show that electronic payments have been rolled
               out to all levels of government and bidders are registered in the eGP portal, but do not show that all PFM
               systems have been integrated as the operation intended. Other evidence shows that a notification has gone
               out to government entities to prepare financial statements based on IPSAS, but no financial statements have
               been prepared using it so far.

               A. Stabilize hydropower inflows into the budget

               The stabilization fund has not been implemented as set out in the governance framework (PA2) or the fiscal
               rules (PA3). The fund was set up and the government has contributed into it, but the framework governing
               how the funds are used, including fund’s governance framework and the establishment of an independent
               governing board, have not been implemented. The published rules and regulations supported under DPC3
               are no longer available on the MoF website. MoF states that the lack of progress is due to the COVID-19
               pandemic, which resulted in higher spending needs, thereby eliminating available resources that would have
               been contributed to the fund in the absence of the pandemic, and that the governance framework has not
               been fully implemented because withdrawals from the fund have not taken place and are not planned to take
               place in the near term. However, transfers to and from the fund need to follow specific procedures and be
               approved by the governing board. Such procedures have not been followed. MoF states that the governance
               framework will be updated and implemented before withdrawals take place. RI1 was substantially achieved;
               however, actual progress is considered Modest given these issues.



                                                                                                            Page 20 of 29
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Bhutan Programmatic DPC Series (P164290)



B. Increase domestic revenue mobilization

Although the GST was approved by Parliament as recognized in PA4, received Royal Assent, and the GST
Act specified that the GST would have to be implemented within one year of approval (i.e., by July 2021), the
GST has not been implemented. Implementation of the GST was delayed due to delays in the development of
an integrated IT system for revenue administration; the Covid-19 pandemic; and high rates of inflation and
economic uncertainty due to the Russian invasion of Ukraine and lingering effects of the pandemic. An
amendment to the GST Act in June 2022 removed the reference to a specific implementation date in the law,
and instead states that the law will come into effect when the GST system is ready and Parliament approves
its enforcement. RI2 achievement is rated Negligible as the tax was not implemented.

C. Improve public financial management (and ultimately the quality of government spending)

The results indicators in this area measured:

      The number of budget agencies using e-PEMS (RI3)
      The number of registered bidders in the e-government procurement system (RI4), which has
       moderately unsatisfactory relevance as it is not directly relevant to measuring the outcome of the
       updated procurement rules.
      The total number of Annual Financial Statements prepared in compliance with IPSAS (RI5).

Results:

The results indicators show that all 20 districts and all 205 sub-districts are using e-PEMS, nearly 5,000
bidders have been registered in the e-government procurement system, and no Annual Financial Statements
have been prepared in compliance with IPSAS. Thus, achievement of RI3 is rated High, and achievement of
RI5 is rated Negligible. Because of low relevance of RI4 (RI relevance rated MU), achievement of RI4 does
not constitute strong evidence of progress toward the objective. These results show little progress towards
the outcome of improved fiscal management per the objective of the series.



Rating
Moderately Unsatisfactory



OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Enhance policies to promote private sector employment opportunities

Rationale
Efficacy of this objective is rated Moderately Unsatisfactory. There is little evidence of progress toward
enhancing the policy framework to promote growth in private sector employment.




                                                                                                Page 21 of 29
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Bhutan Programmatic DPC Series (P164290)



A. Support economic diversification

RI6 shows that the incubation center for CSIs is incubating CSIs (exceeding targets). However, the relevance
of this indicator is Moderately Unsatisfactory as it does not capture outcomes related to the objective of
promoting private sector employment growth: any economic outcomes related to the incubation of CSIs (e.g.
increased employment or sales). Achievement of RI6 therefore does not constitute strong evidence of
progress toward the objective.

There is no measure of the degree to which the agricultural marketing policy is being implemented or
successful.

Non-cash payments greatly exceeded their target (RI7), indicating that electronic payment systems are
working. This may plausibly contribute to the development of the digital economy and thus private sector
employment growth.

The revised FDI Policy was an important improvement. However. FDI did not increase as expected. Bhutan’s
share of global FDI during the target range, 2017-2021, was below its share of global FDI during the baseline
range, 2007-2016. RI8 achievement is rated Negligible.

There is no measure of or information on the implementation of the Competition Policy and its impact on
employment opportunities.

B. Increase access to finance

The only results indicator in this area is the number of entities reporting to the Credit Information Bureau
(RI9). This is an input measure in the results chain of improving access to finance (to contribute to private
sector employment growth). Although more entities are reporting to it, there is no information on its use to
actually expand access to finance by enterprises. The results indicator does not measure access to finance or
how these PAs contribute to private sector employment opportunities. While the target was exceeded,
achievement of RI9 does not constitute strong evidence of progress toward the objective.

C. Improve labor force skills and human capital

There was some improvement in the transition to higher secondary schooling before the Covid-19 pandemic
(RI10). This transition improved by 24 percentage points and reached nearly 100 percent for girls, and
improved by 18 percentage points and reached almost 90 percent for boys. After the Covid-19 pandemic, the
proportion was 70 percent for both genders. However, this indicator is a weak measure of the objective of
enhancing policies to promote private sector employment opportunities. Achievement of RI10 therefore does
not constitute strong evidence of progress toward the objective.

Two human capital programs were not implemented, the first of which has particular importance for the
quality of schooling, leading to labor force skills:

      Bhutan Professional Standards for Teachers: This reform has not yet been implemented, and the
       government has signaled that it might go in a different direction through the Clean Wage Bill, which
       revised compensation and benefits for public servants and brought a performance component into
       their compensation. No progress was registered on the results indicator measuring the categorization
       of teachers according to these standards (RI12). Achievement is rated Negligible.

                                                                                               Page 22 of 29
                        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                        Bhutan Programmatic DPC Series (P164290)




                           Accelerating Maternal and Child Health Program: As of October 2022, implementation of this program
                            was on hold due to the Covid-19 pandemic and the lack of domestic government revenue to fund it
                            over the long term. Since then, the Bank is funding a pilot of the program through grants. It is unclear
                            whether the government will fully roll out the program after those pilots. The associated results
                            indicator (RI11) was achieved, but through a different program that was not supported through the
                            DPC. Achievement of RI11 therefore does not constitute strong evidence of progress toward the
                            objective.

                      D. Ensure that development is environmentally sustainable and inclusive

                  The result indicator on energy efficiency (RI13) was narrow and is not relevant to private sector employment..
                  It was achieved, but achievement of RI13 does not constitute strong evidence of progress toward the
                  objective.

                  The indicator on gender equity (RI14) was a narrow measure, had low relevance, and was not achieved
                  (Negligible).

                  There was no measurement of the outcomes of the Climate Change Policy.



                  Rating
                  Moderately Unsatisfactory




OVERALL EFF TBL OLD




Overall Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
Rationale

With both objectives rated Moderately Unsatisfactory, the overall efficacy rating is Moderately Unsatisfactory.



Overall Efficacy Rating

Moderately Unsatisfactory

6. Outcome

Rationale




                                                                                                                       Page 23 of 29
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Bhutan Programmatic DPC Series (P164290)



The relevance of Prior Actions was rated Moderately Satisfactory, and overall Efficacy was rated Moderately
Unsatisfactory. Therefore, the overall outcome is Moderately Unsatisfactory.


a. Rating

Moderately Unsatisfactory

7. Risk to Development Outcome

The experience of this series has shown that there is a non-negligible risk that the Royal Government of Bhutan
may reconsider reforms or be slow to implement them. This was the case for the hydropower revenue
stabilization fund and Goods and Services Tax – which were core to the series’ objectives – in addition to other
reforms supported as described above. However, achievements in this series were modest, so any backtracking
would be from relatively modest progress.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Bank Performance – Design

Rationale

The DPC series was complex and included prior actions linked to many different reform agendas, including
several outside of the scope of the PDOs. A more focused operation, for example, with a greater concentration
on leveling the playing field between state-owned enterprises and the private sector, would have had greater
impact. Bank performance is rated on the established criteria as set out below:

Extent to which Bank staff have drawn on lessons learned from prior experience in design of the operation or
series: The first operation drew from a thin set of lessons; it only drew from the PLR’s lesson that found that
programmatic development policy lending, combined with relevant analytical work and technical assistance, had
been effective. The ICR from the previous DPC series (Fiscal Sustainability and Investment Climate) was dated
June 2019, after both DPC1 and DPC2 of this series were approved (March 2018 and May 2019, respectively),
missing an opportunity to learn from experience. That ICR identified several lessons that should have been
applied to the present series: the need for a reform champion for the DPC series in government, “focusing on a
few key areas of reforms will have greater impact," and the need to support reform implementation (the lesson
identified that this should be through strengthened technical capacity; this ICRR has a slightly different read as
will be described below). While the Program Documents for DPC2 and DPC3 state that they drew on some of
these lessons, they did not “focus on fewer key areas” as the PDs stated or incorporate sufficient
implementation support.

Adequacy of the analytical underpinnings of PAs and Results Indicators (including their role in articulating the
underlying results chain: The prior actions that were relevant to the objectives were well informed by analytical




                                                                                                    Page 24 of 29
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Bhutan Programmatic DPC Series (P164290)



work. However, several of the reforms supported were not in areas central to achieving the development
objective, as discussed in the section on Relevance of PAs.

Extent to which the PD identified the main risks and constraints to achieving PDOs, and the quality and depth of
the discussion of the main risks, and Extent to which operation drew upon consultations with relevant major
stakeholders and development partners or envisaged collaboration: The risk assessment omitted a key
characteristic of Bhutan: the government is deliberative and unhurried when implementing reforms. This results
in a more gradual pace of reform than is implied in the design of the DPC series. The ICR notes that the
program underestimated political risk. A credible mitigation mechanism in such cases is not to build capacity
selectively (as stated in the Program Documents), but to: (1) ensure that there is sufficient government
ownership of the reform agenda (and by main opposition parties if elections are coming up), and (2) closely
accompany the government on its implementation of all of the reforms in the program. For (1), the DPC series
relied on the government’s own consultative process including opposition parties. For (2), the DPC series did not
ensure that complementary implementation support would be provided (by the Bank or other development
partners) to all of reforms supported by prior actions. The ICR highlighted as examples two areas in which
implementation support was provided, but this was on a very limited set of reforms. The ICR also noted the
limited experience, understanding of the instrument, and capacity of the Department of Macroeconomic Affairs.
The series supported adoption of many policies (agricultural marketing, competition, energy efficiency, climate
change, and gender-related) that each required implementation of a substantial agenda, and for which very little
information is available on the status of implementation. The Program Documents reflect some consultation and
coordination with development partners, including the International Monetary Fund and Asian Development
Bank, but provide few specifics.



Rating

Moderately Unsatisfactory

b. Bank Performance – Implementation

Rationale

The only aide memoires saved in Bank internal systems were from during the preparation process of the first
and third operations in the series, and the latter was in draft form.

The ICR assessed that implementation support was “substantive and satisfactory” based on support to GST
preparation during and after the DPC series and support to design of the rules of the stabilization fund, but
provides no evidence of implementation support in other areas.

IEG has confirmed that implementation support or analytics and dialogue beyond the end of the DPC series
were provided by the Bank related to the following. Some of these were in the form of additional policy advice
rather than specific implementation support.

      Integrating the stabilization rules into the macroeconomic framework (however, as of June 2023, the
       fiscal rules for the stabilization fund have not been implemented, according to the Public Expenditure
       Review). (Policy advice)


                                                                                                   Page 25 of 29
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Bhutan Programmatic DPC Series (P164290)



      Developing the GST Rules and Regulations, which was a prior action in the FY21 COVID-19 response
         DPC. (Policy advice)
      Implementation of the electronic Government Procurement (e-GP) system. (Implementation)
      Development of Integrated Financial Management Information System (IFMIS) Dashboard and the
         electronic Daily Allowance and Travel System (eDATS) in all government agencies (but not yet full
         interoperability of an IFMIS). (Implementation)
        Implementation of the national payments system. (Implementation)
        Supporting the development of the Credit Information Bureau (however, this focuses on individuals, not
         firms). (Implementation)
        A broad range of activities related to education and skills, through the Bhutan Human Capital Recovery
         and Resilience PforR. (Implementation)
        Implementing the Accelerating Maternal and Child Health program, through the Accelerating Maternal
         and Child Health Outcomes Project. (Implementation)
        Aspects related to the National Energy Efficiency and Conservation Policy and National Climate Change
         Policy, through support to REDD+ activities (forest conservation) and Country Environment Analysis
         (CEA) for Building Back a Better and Environmentally Sustainable Bhutan ASA (P176555) 2021-2024.
         (Policy advice)

The Bank aimed to further support implementation of the Goods and Services Tax (GST) and International
Public Sector Accounting Standards (IPSAS) but faced obstacles in doing so, including the inability of
consultants to travel to Bhutan to support these areas due to travel restrictions related to the COVID-19
pandemic.

The Bank was engaged in providing some advice on FDI policy and investment treaties and advice on the
development of the cottage and small industries sector (CSI), which included advice on improving the support
provided by incubation centers and other aspects of the entrepreneurship ecosystem. However, most of these
activities ended by early 2020, and they mainly consisted of policy advice rather than direct implementation
support. Thus they are not strong evidence of Bank support to implementation of actions in this series, which
lasted through June 2021. There is no evidence that the Bank provided, or ensured that other institutions would
provide, implementation support for the agricultural marketing policy or competition policy.

While the Bank provided implementation support or continued dialogue in areas related to fiscal management,
payment systems, and human capital, its implementation support for activities that support an improved
environment for private sector employment opportunities was weak compared to that related to fiscal
management. The adaptation carried out by the series consisted of weakening prior actions in areas in which
reforms would not be ready according to the series’ timeline, particularly during preparation of the second and
third operations. While this was realistic, it shifted the nature of the program, most importantly from a focus on
improving labor market skills – a major constraint – to broader aspects of human capital – less of a constraint,
particularly in light of the series’ objectives. This may have been avoided by being more selective and intentional
on the reform agenda supported, and by having a more in-depth understanding of the government’s reform
ownership in each specific area supported by the series.

The ICR notes the following, which IEG agrees with: More time was needed before advancing to the next
operation, and reform implementation would have benefited from a broader lending and TA engagement. The
Bank also did not adequately strengthen the Ministry of Finance’s understanding of the DPC instrument, despite
having provided DPC funding for almost a decade. Although MoF’s lack of understanding was driven mainly by



                                                                                                    Page 26 of 29
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Bhutan Programmatic DPC Series (P164290)



staff turnover/rotations, there should be mechanisms for increasing staff’s understanding so that it does not
negatively impact the implementation of DPCs.



Rating

Moderately Unsatisfactory

c. Overall Bank Performance

Rationale

Bank Performance in design and implementation are rated Moderately Unsatisfactory. Therefore, overall Bank
Performance is rated Moderately Unsatisfactory.


Overall Bank Performance Rating

Moderately Unsatisfactory

9. Other Impacts

a. Social and Poverty

The ICR states that the poverty, gender and social impacts of the operation were “likely” positive, but do not
provide evidence of any such impacts. Such impacts rest on the operation having had “increased public
spending efficiency and the overall fiscal envelope." Based on the evidence on the DPC series’ results, it is not
clear that the series increased public spending efficiency and the overall fiscal envelope.



b. Environmental

The ICR states that the national energy efficiency and climate change policies have resulted in the adoption of
environmentally aware policy measures and investments, including the development of energy efficiency codes
and energy auditing and reporting guidelines for the building and industry sector, as well as programs to
promote LED lightbulbs and electric vehicles. However, the ICR did not include concrete evidence of this, and
IEG is unable to independently verify it.



c. Gender

Covered above under (a) along with social and poverty.



                                                                                                   Page 27 of 29
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Bhutan Programmatic DPC Series (P164290)



d. Other

Not applicable



10. Quality of ICR

Rationale

The ICR provides a candid reflection on the outcomes of the series, but lacked clarity and depth. It did not
adequately assess the relevance of prior actions to the series’ objectives. It does not provide data on PAs that
were not measured by the results framework (i.e. agricultural marketing or competition policy), and it does not
discuss the degree of implementation of the Competition Policy or the revised FDI policy, among others. It
provided little discussion of implementation support to the broad agenda covered by the prior actions. In sum, it
does not provide a full view of the results chain of each of the reforms supported by the series’ prior actions. The
lessons were sound and appropriate, and similar to the conclusions of this ICRR.


a. Rating

Modest

11. Ratings
                                                                                   Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                    IEG
                                                                                   Disagreement/Comments
                                 Moderately            Moderately
Outcome
                                 Unsatisfactory        Unsatisfactory
                                                                                   Weaknesses in broad scope of
                                                                                   design (lack of selectivity), lack
                                 Moderately            Moderately
Bank Performance                                                                   of integrating lessons in practice,
                                 Satisfactory          Unsatisfactory
                                                                                   weak implementation support for
                                                                                   private sector job creation.
Relevance of Results
                                 ---                   Moderately Satisfactory
Indicators
Quality of ICR                   ---                   Modest


12. Lessons

The main lessons of this series were well captured in the ICR. IEG particularly highlights that DPCs in Bhutan
should be much more selective, focusing on critical constraints to achieving development outcomes, where the
government has appetite to implement reforms.




                                                                                                      Page 28 of 29
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Bhutan Programmatic DPC Series (P164290)



IEG emphasizes that the design of DPCs in Bhutan needs to be informed by close collaboration with the
government and a realistic understanding of its appetite for reform, and should be very focused.

Further, each policy area supported by prior actions should be accompanied by complementary support
(advisory services, investment project financing, or support from other donors) that is directly tailored to support
the implementation of the associated reform that it is supporting.

While the lessons in the ICR broadly capture these issues, they do not emphasize level of selectivity or the in-
depth understanding of government ownership that IEG highlights here. Particularly, given the need for
substantial implementation support, a DPO might not be the most suitable instrument for Bhutan.


13. Project Performance Assessment Report (PPAR) Recommended?

No




                                                                                                      Page 29 of 29
