     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GZ-Gaza Solid Waste Management (P121648)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0023653

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P121648                                     GZ-Gaza Solid Waste Management

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 West Bank and Gaza                          Urban, Resilience and Land


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-16835,TF-B3582,TF-B3583,TF-B3584 30-Jun-2022                                                 13,248,434.83

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 31-Mar-2014                                 31-Dec-2022

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            13,250,000.00                                    13,250,000.00

 Revised Commitment                             13,248,994.00                                    13,248,994.00

 Actual                                         13,248,434.83                                    13,248,434.83




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Katharina Ferl              Vibecke Dixon                 Avjeet Singh                   IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Project Appraisal Document (PAD) (p. vi) and the Financing Agreement of April 24, 2014 (p.
   7), the objective of the project was “to improve solid waste management services in the Gaza Strip through
   provision of more efficient, environmentally and socially sound waste management systems”.

   When the project received Additional Financing (AF) in August 2020, the objective of the project was slightly
   modified to “to improve solid waste management services in the Gaza Strip” since this wording was the one


                                                                                                   Page 1 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GZ-Gaza Solid Waste Management (P121648)



   stated in the original grant agreement. This Review will use the wording stated in the PAD and the 2014
   Financing Agreement to assess the different dimensions of solid waste management services.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project included four components:

   Component 1: Solid Waste Transfer and Disposal Facilities (appraisal estimate US$7.69 million,
   actual US$8.58 million): This component was to finance: a) construction of a new sanitary landfill; b)
   construction of two transfer stations; c) provision of operational equipment for the sanitary landfill and two
   transfer stations; d) access roads to landfill and transfer stations; e) sanitary closure of existing dump site; f)
   Abbreviated Resettlement Action Plan (ARAP) implementation; and g) land acquisition for the first-stage
   development of Al-Fukhari (Sofa) landfill and transfer stations.

   Component 2: Institutional Strengthening (appraisal estimate US$0.70 million, actual US$0.72
   million): This component was to finance: a) capacity building for the Joint Services Council for Khan
   Younis, Rafah and Middle Area Governorates, Technical Operations Unit (TOU).; b) capacity building for
   participating municipalities; and c) capacity and implementation of Citizen Engagement mechanisms.

   Component 3: Primary Collection and Resource Recovery (appraisal estimate US$0.04 million,
   actual US$0.04 million): This component was to finance: a) studies to optimize primary collection services
   in the Gaza Strip; b) supply of waste collection equipment; c) studies for waste recovery; and d) pilot
   investments for recycling and composting.

   Component 4: Project Management (appraisal estimate US$1.57 million, actual US$3.91 million): This
   component was to finance: a) Municipal Development and Lending Fund’s (MDLF’s) administrative fees and
   establishment of a Project Development and Safeguards Unit (PDSU) to manage project implementation; b)
   consultants for landfill design review and value engineering, construction supervision and contract
   management; c) operational and maintenance for the landfill and transfer stations; and d) other independent
   consultancies.

   When the project received Additional Financing in 2021, the following activities were added under
   component 4: i) improving solid waste service delivery and ii) strengthening the financial sustainability of the
   Joint Services Council for Khan Younis, Rafah, and Middle Area (JSC-KRM) by supporting cost recovery.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project Cost: The project was estimated to cost US$32.60 million. Actual cost was US$32.59 million.



                                                                                                        Page 2 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GZ-Gaza Solid Waste Management (P121648)



   Financing: The project was financed by a World Bank Trust Fund (TF-16835) for US$10.0 million (of which
   US$9.99 million was disbursed), a World Bank Trust Fund (TF-B3548) for US$1.25 million (which
   completely disbursed), a World Bank Trust Fund (TF-B3582) for US$1.0 million (of which US$998,994
   disbursed), and a World Bank Trust Fund (TF-B3583) for US$13.25 million (of which US$13.24 million was
   disbursed).

   The project also received the following co-financing: i) US$16.3 million from the French Agency for
   Development, ii) US$500,000 from the Islamic Development Bank, and iii) US$200,000 from the UN
   Development Program. All this financing materialized.

   Borrower Contribution: The Borrower was to contribute US$2.35 million, which materialized.

   Dates: The project was restructured three times:

         On April 6, 2018, the project was restructured to i) extend the closing date of the Trust Fund from
          November 30, 2019, to November 30, 2020, to provide operational and institutional strengthening
          support to enhance sustainability of the system and revised project results indicators; ii) reallocate
          funds among components and disbursement categories in the trust fund agreement; iii) revise
          Results Framework to better reflect the type of interventions and their expected outcomes; and iv)
          clarify certain interventions by expanding their description in the loan agreement.
         On April 30, 2021, the project received Additional Financing for US$3.25 million. Also, the project
          was restructured to i) slightly revise the PDO to ensure consistency in all documents; ii) extend the
          project’s closing date from November 30, 2020, to June 30, 2022 to align the closing dates of the
          parent project and the Additional Financing; iii) reallocate funds between disbursement categories
          and components; and iv) revise the Results Framework to include indicators to reflect activities
          related to citizen engagement, gender, and Global Partnership for Results Based Approach
          (GPRBA).
         On June 28, 2022, the project was restructured to i) extend the closing date from June 30, 2022, to
          December 31, 2022, to allow for the completion of project activities, particularly for the three critical
          infrastructure construction activities related to the closure works at Dair El-Balah and Sofa
          dumpsites, and the installation of a leachate pre-treatment system at the Al-Fukhari landfill. The
          implementation of these three contracts was delayed due to the time the Israeli authorities took to
          approve the import of the required construction materials into Gaza and security-related work
          stoppage ordinances at the project site.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country and sector context. According to the PAD (p. 1), at the time of appraisal, after years of robust
economic growth in West Bank and Gaza (WB&G), economic activity in the Palestinian Territories,
especially in the West Bank, had been declining. Since 2012, growth had been driven primarily by large
inflows of donor aid that enabled the expansion of the public sector. A significant decline in donor aid in
2012, combined with Israeli restrictions, had a negative effect on the economy. Also, the 2014 conflict in
Gaza, in addition to the closure of tunnels with Egypt, severely impacted the Palestinian economy resulting


                                                                                                       Page 3 of 15
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      GZ-Gaza Solid Waste Management (P121648)



               in a 15 percent reduction in Gross Domestic Product (GDP). Furthermore, the restrictions on access to and
               from Gaza resulted in significant constraints to economic activity, increasing poverty for Gaza’s residents.

               According to the PAD (p. 2) the generation and disposal of solid waste in the Palestinian Territories was a
               well-recognized development concern given the volume of waste generated. Between 2010 and 2014,
               households generated 3.9 kg per day in the West Bank, and 2.7 kg in the Gaza Strip, totaling 78,644 tons
               of solid waste per month. The Gaza Strip covered about 365 km2 and was a densely populated area with
               approximately 4,380 persons per km2. The density of Gaza’s population had direct impact on the
               generation and management of waste. Primary collection of waste in the Gaza Strip was the responsibility
               of its 25 municipalities in conjunction with coordinators of refugee camps. However, the municipalities faced
               several challenges in terms of waste management, including: i) methods of primary waste collection were
               both inefficient and ad-hoc; ii) the fleet of municipality-owned waste compactor trucks was largely obsolete
               and in need of replacement; iii) improper disposal of waste at dumpsites; iv) open-air burning; and v) solid
               waste collection and managed disposal was the largest cost item in municipal budgets.

               Alignment with the Government Strategy. The objective of the project supported the Palestinian
               Authorities (PA’s) National Strategy for Solid Waste Management (2017-2022), which defined targets for
               improved coverage, disposal, and recycling and included the following objectives: i) effective and
               environmentally safe management of solid waste services; ii) attaining financial sustainability and efficient
               solid waste services and activities; and iii) principles and mechanisms suitable for managing medical,
               hazardous, and special waste.

               Alignment with the World Bank Strategy. The objective of the project was in line with the World Bank
               Group’s Assistance Strategy (2022-2025) for the West Bank and Gaza, especially objective 1.2 “support
               service providers to be finally sustainable,” and Objective 2.3 “improve infrastructure through Bank
               investment that leverages donors’ resources and attracts private sector investment.” Furthermore, the
               objective of the project also supported the Bank’s Middle East and North Africa (MENA) regional strategy
               under strategic pillar one “renewing the social contract” by improving quality services and citizen
               engagement.

               Given the highly fragile situation, the PDO was pitched at an appropriate level.

               Overall, the relevance of the objective is rated High.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective


                                                                                                                    Page 4 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   GZ-Gaza Solid Waste Management (P121648)



To improve solid waste management services in the Gaza Strip through provision of more efficient,
environmentally and socially sound waste management systems

Rationale
Theory of Change: The project’s theory of change stated that project inputs/activities such as constructing a
new sanitary landfill and two transfer stations, closing an existing dump site, improving primary collection,
increasing fee collection, integrating waste pickers into inclusion programs, as well as developing strategies
to optimize primary collection and waste recovery and a strategy to eliminate random dumping sites were to
result in several outputs. These outputs were to include a new sanitary landfill and two transfer stations
constructed, existing dump site closed, improved primary collection, increased fee collection, waste pickers
integrated into inclusion programs, and strategies to optimize primary collection and waste recovery, as well
as a strategy to eliminate random dumping sites developed. These outputs were to result in the outcome of
improved solid waste management services in the Gaza Strip.

The theory of change was sound and logic.

Provision of more efficient waste management systems

Outputs:

      A plan for the elimination of random dumping in the targeted area was created by the end of the
         project, achieving the target of creating such plan.
      A strategy plan for optimizing waste recovery in the targeted area was created by the end of the
         project, achieving the target of creating such plan.
        A strategy plan for the optimization of primary collection and transportation of solid waste in the
         targeted areas was created by the end of the project, achieving the target of creating such plan.
        JSC assumed agreed responsibilities for the management of the upgraded transfer and disposal
         services, achieving the target of JSC assuming such responsibilities.
        Improved protocols and procedures as defined in the Standard Operating Procedures for all JSC
         services were adopted, achieving the target of approving these protocols and procedures. This was a
         Results Based Financing (RBF) indicator.
        299 training days were provided to the Technical Operations Unit and other JSC-KRM staff and Board
         members as part of the targeted capacity building activities, exceeding the target of 150 training days.
        19 service contracts were signed with member municipalities and UNWRA, achieving the target of 18
         contracts.
        A new JSC bylaw was approved, and operational plans were defined, achieving the target of the
         bylaw being approved and operational plans being defined.

Outcomes:

      In 2014, 15 percent of fees were collected annually within the JSC towards cost recovery, which
       increased to 71.12 percent in 2022, exceeding the target of 60 percent. This was an RBF indicator.
      Through the project funding, 70 percent of low-capacity containers were replaced in the JSC-KRM
       service area. Also, the construction and the location of the transfer station in Rafah resulted in an
       increase of 63 percent in secondary waste collection (from 53,926 tons in 2018 to 88,018 tons in



                                                                                                   Page 5 of 15
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  GZ-Gaza Solid Waste Management (P121648)



        2021) and 33.3 percent savings from fuel consumption. Without the transfer station, secondary waste
        collection would have cost the JSC 33 percent more (US$58,617 per year).

Provision of more environmentally sound waste management systems

Outputs:

     Two transfer stations in targeted area were constructed and were fully equipped and operational by
        the end of the project, achieving the target of two transfer stations.
       Existing dumpsites at Sofa and Dier el Balah were closed, achieving the target of closing these two
        sites.
       An interim cell was constructed in a sanitary manner to accommodate incoming Municipal Solid Waste
        (MSW) from target areas during the construction of the new sanitary landfill, achieving the target of
        constructing an interim cell.
       A sanitary landfill in the Southern Gaza Strip (Sofa/Al-Fukhari) was constructed and became
        operational, achieving the target of this sanitary landfill being constructed and operational.
       The project was able to create industrial and municipal disposal capacity of 2.6 million metric ton,
        exceeding the original target of 300,000 and the revised target of 2.35 million.

Outcomes:

     Three major dumpsites were closed totaling 12.5 hectares, exceeding the original target of three
      hectares and the revised target of 10 hectares of contaminated land being managed.
     96.31 percent of solid waste was collected from the targeted populations and disposed in a new
      sanitary landfill developed under the project, exceeding the target of 80 percent.
     Using an advanced (conservative) Landfill Gas (LFG) generation model (UBCiModel©), and a
      methane global warming potential (GWP) of 25. Assuming a gas capture efficiency of 75 percent
      (starting 2022) and a 25-year lifespan for the installed LFG management system at the Deir Al Balah
      and Old Sofa landfills, total methane capture for these two landfills was calculated to be 19,331 tons
      and 7,076 tons, respectively. These methane emission reductions potentially resulted in a reduction
      of 483,000 and 176,900 tons of CO2-e Green House Gas (GHG) emission.
     Approximately 641,549 tons of waste was diverted from dumping to being disposed to a sanitary
      landfill since commissioning of the new landfill in 2019 to the end of 2022. This outcome did not have
      a target.

Provision of more socially sound waste management systems:

Outputs:

     51,200 temporary jobs were created (person-day) under the various activities of component 1, not
      achieving the original target of 100,000 jobs and exceeding the revised target of 40,000 jobs.
     56 percent of intended beneficiaries were aware of project information and investments, exceeding the
      target of 50 percent of beneficiaries.
     A women’s committee was established, achieving the target of participation and role of women in
      decision making of the JSC-KRM through formation of a women’s committee being increased.



                                                                                                Page 6 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   GZ-Gaza Solid Waste Management (P121648)



Outcomes:

        16 waste pickers’ who depended on the existing solid waste context were integrated into inclusion
         programs, not achieving the original target of 18 waste pickers and achieving the revised target of 16
         waste pickers. New economic opportunities ranged from remaining in the waste management sector
         by working with municipalities in primary collection to new opportunities including breeding livestock
         and other trades.
        Citizens’ satisfaction with JSC-KRM performance increased from 57 percent in 2017 to 91 percent in
         2022, achieving the target of 90 percent of citizens being satisfied with JSC-KRM’s performance.
        The 2020 Baseline Beneficiary Impact Assessment (BIA) surveyed 420 beneficiary households living
         in the governorates directly surrounding the Project areas, who are broken down according to different
         demographic variables.
              o 86.7 percent of beneficiaries reported that there were no random dump sites or waste piles
                 near their residences. 74.3 percent of beneficiaries were satisfied with waste collection and
                 disposal practices. 54.7 percent of beneficiaries expressed an increase in satisfaction in terms
                 of availability and sufficiency of street containers. Finally, 68.8 percent of beneficiaries reported
                 that waste collection containers in their area were in good condition. The ICR provides no
                 target values for the beneficiary survey results.

The project also measured project management with the following indicators:

        In total, the project benefitted 948,000 beneficiaries, exceeding the target of 886,000 beneficiaries. 49
           percent of those beneficiaries were female, achieving the target of 49 percent being female.
          100 percent of results-based payments received for achieving service improvement related targets
           were made, exceeding the target of 80 percent. This was a RBF indicator.
          MDLF-PDSU maintained adequate staffing for project management, environmental and social
           safeguards, and fiduciary staff throughout the life of the project, achieving the target of maintaining
           such staff.
          Interim Financial Reports (IFRs) and Progress Reports were submitted to financing partners in a
           timely and satisfactory manner, achieving the target of submitting these reports.
          96 percent of grievances were responded to in a timely manner, exceeding the target of 90 percent of
           grievances.

The project was able to exceed its target for fees being collected annually within the JSC towards cost
recovery. Also, the project was able to make major achievements in regard to closing major dumpsites and
collecting solid waste from the targeted populations and disposing of it in a new sanitary landfill. Finally, the
Citizens’ satisfaction with JSC-KRM performance increased, the project was able to achieve its revised target
for waste pickers being integrated into inclusion programs. These achievements at the outcome level indicate
that the objective “to improve solid waste management services in the Gaza Strip was achieved, and the
overall achievement of the project's objective is thus rated as HIgh.



Rating
High



                                                                                                       Page 7 of 15
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                GZ-Gaza Solid Waste Management (P121648)



OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Overall, the efficacy of the project is rated High.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            High



   5. Efficiency
   Economic efficiency:

   The PAD and the ICR did not conduct a traditional economic analysis. The PAD (p. 12) based its economic
   analysis on a 2012 feasibility study for the entire Gaza Strip, covering a larger geographic scope than the project
   had. Therefore, the analysis did not provide sufficient evidence about the project's economic efficiency.

   The ICR (p. 16) assessed the economic benefits of the project in different ways:

   As stated in the section above, the project used an advanced (conservative) Landfill Gas (LFG) generation
   model (UBCiModel©) and a methane global warming potential (GWP) of 25. Assuming a gas capture efficiency
   of 75 percent (starting 2022) and a 25-year lifespan for the installed LFG management system at the Deir Al
   Balah and Old Sofa landfills, total methane capture for these two landfills was calculated to be 19,331 tons and
   7,076 tons, respectively. These methane emission reductions potentially resulted in a reduction of 483,000 and
   176,900 tons of CO2-e Greenhouse Gas (GHG) emission. Applying a carbon price of US$60/ton with a 4
   percent value increase annually and a discount rate of 8 percent, the ICR (para. 45) estimated a Net Present
   Value (NPV) of US$18.91 million for Dier Al Balah (with a capital benefit of US$18.85) and US$7.44 million for
   Old SAfa (with a per capita benefit of US$7.42). The NPV for both dumpsites was US$26.35 million, with a total
   cost for dumpsite closure of US$3.44 million, resulting in a benefit-cost ratio of 7.66. This analysis indicates that
   these investments were worthwhile.

   The ICR (para. 49) also conducted a financial analysis, which found that the JSC-KRM was able to increase its
   revenue. Fees collected from the 17 member municipalities increased from 50 percent in 2020 to 71 percent by
   2022, while its operational costs increased by 18 percent starting in 2018 due to shifting from open dumping to
   sanitary waste management. The gap between actual cost and revenue decreased from 36 percent in 2019 to
   21 percent by 2022, indicating efficiency gains, which, according to the ICR, are expected to increase due to the
   improvements in billing and collection from municipalities. By the time of project closure, the percentage of
   operational costs covered by JSC's resources had increased from 50 percent to 71 percent.

   According to the ICR (para. 50), the project was also able to significantly reduce the cost of medical waste
   treatment due to the rehabilitation of the Khan Younis transfer station and the upgrade of equipment. The
   average medical waste treatment cost was reduced from ILS 10.5/kg (US$2.87) in 2018 to ILS 1.07/kg
   (US$0.29) in 2022, indicating significant efficiency gains.



                                                                                                                Page 8 of 15
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       GZ-Gaza Solid Waste Management (P121648)



Operational efficiency:

The project was able to save costs as a result of adjustments due to the UNDP’s inability to stick with the
agreement for financing an interim cell. Also, the project encountered issues with excavated soil from the new
landfill construction and the need to adjust the project design to accommodate short-term cells. Furthermore, the
original project design had to be adjusted to accommodate the offsite transportation and storage of the
excavated soil. The project’s new approach resulted in a significantly lower cost, accommodation of more
incoming waste, and higher safety. The UNDP’s short-term cell was estimated to cost US$3.6 million, while the
project constructed a more robust and higher capacity cell for US$1.57 million. Overall, landfill construction was
completed within the original budget of approximately US$12 million (despite an increase in the project’s original
scope).

The project’s implementation period was extended three times by 35 months because of implementation
challenges. These challenges included removing the excavated soil to an alternative location, addressing issues
of scattered waste and illegal dumping through the provision of fencing around the landfill construction site,
creating a designated cell for disposing of incoming waste in the interim period before the landfill was
constructed, and ensuring the safety and restoring the livelihood of the waste pickers at the dump site through
successful retraining and job placement. Also, the project experienced delays due to the COVID-19 pandemic,
requiring a six-month extension of the implementation period.

Overall, the project’s efficiency rating is Substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                 Rate Available?           Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     0
 Appraisal                                                  0
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     0
 ICR Estimate                                               0
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The Relevance of the objective was High given the objective’s alignment with the World Bank Group’s
Assistance Strategy (2022-2025) and the Government Strategy for the West Bank and Gaza. Efficacy was High
since the project met or exceeded its targets, and Efficiency was Substantial. Therefore, the project’s overall
outcome rating is Highly Satisfactory.



                                                                                                     Page 9 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      GZ-Gaza Solid Waste Management (P121648)



a. Outcome Rating
   Highly Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The project’s risk to development outcomes can be classified into the following categories:

Political/Government commitment: The ICR (para. 100) stated that the PA remains committed to
sustaining the development outcomes. The JSC-KRM is adequately maintaining the infrastructure built under
the project. However, the political situation is extremely volatile in the West Bank and Gaza, especially given
the recent outbreaks of violence, putting the sustainability of the project outcomes at a high risk.

Economic/Financial: The economic situation also remains volatile in the West Bank and Gaza, resulting in
high levels of poverty and unemployment, especially in Gaza. According to the ICR (para. 99), the fiscal
stability of the PA remains vulnerable due to the failed peace process, the economic impact of the COVID-19
pandemic, and the continuous decline in donor financing. There is a new Bank operation in the pipeline
(P500392, financing amount of US$17 million), which aims to build on the outcomes of this project
and support critical infrastructure and the development of an effective legal, financial, and institutional
framework for integrated solid waste management system in West Bank and Gaza.

Technical: According to the ICR (para. 101) while the project was able to build capacity of local partner
institutions, operating an upgraded solid waste system might be challenging given its complexity and
financial needs. Continuous capacity building will be necessary for various entities responsible for solid
waste management. The Bank is conducting a technical assistance assessment for the solid waste sector in
the West Bank and Gaza to develop a sector-wide strategic roadmap to identify an investment pipeline,
policy reforms, institutional development interventions, and areas of capacity building.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project design was built on lessons learned from two Bank-financed Solid Waste Management
  (SWM) projects in the Northern and Southern West Bank. These lessons included the importance of
  having a solid Operations and Maintenance (O&M) plan post-completion of sanitary infrastructure, the
  need for well-defined Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs), and the importance of improving the
  leachate management system based on the operational issues encountered in the West Bank.

  According to the PAD (p. 12), the Bank team identified relevant risks and rated stakeholder, governance,
  capacity, and social and environmental risks as High. In addition, the overall implementation risk was
  also rated High due to a) the limited Palestinian Authority’s control over the Gaza Strip; b) the limitations
  on materials and persons entering the Gaza Strip, subject to permissions issued by the Government of
  Israel; c) proximity of the new landfill to the borders with Israel; and d) delays in finalizing the
  compensation to landfill land owners. The Bank team identified mitigation measures such as close
  dialogue and collaboration with key stakeholders. Also, project implementation was to invest sufficient

                                                                                                     Page 10 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GZ-Gaza Solid Waste Management (P121648)



  resources in public awareness programs within the beneficiary municipalities to ensure beneficiary
  support and participation in project implementation. Furthermore, the award of the works contract for the
  construction of the landfill was conditioned with finalizing the compensation to the landfill landowners.
  However, mitigation measures were not sufficient given the fragile context, resulting in implementation
  delays.

  When the project received Additional Financing in 2021, a results-based financing (RBF) approach was
  introduced to maximize the benefits for a more sustainable and long-term impact. The project’s Results
  Framework was adequate (see section 9a for more details).



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The Bank team conducted a total of 19 supervision support missions. During the Covid-19 pandemic, the
 Bank team held virtual meetings with the project agencies. The Bank team had three different Task Team
 Leaders (TTLs) throughout implementation, and the team included all the necessary expertise and ensured
 continuity with most of the team staying on the project. Also, Implementation status and results reports
 (ISRs) were submitted in a timely manner to identify implementation bottlenecks and next steps. The ICR
 (para. 97) stated that the Bank team regularly engaged with the Coordination of Government Activities in
 the Territories at the Israeli ministry of Defense (COGAT) to follow up on approvals for the import of
 construction materials required for project activities.

 The Bank team restructured the project three times. The first restructuring addressed the delays and
 implementation challenges identified during the mid-term review. The Bank negotiated with the Israeli
 authorities to get permission to import certain building materials into Gaza. Also, the Bank team addressed
 several challenges, such as removing the excavated soil to an alternative location, providing fencing
 around the landfill construction site to avoid scattered waste and illegal dumping, creating a designated cell
 for disposing of incoming waste in the interim period before the landfill was constructed, and ensuring the
 safety and restoring the livelihood of the waste pickers at the dump site through successful retraining and
 job placement.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization



                                                                                                    Page 11 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GZ-Gaza Solid Waste Management (P121648)



a. M&E Design
 The project’s objective was clearly specified and the theory of change and how key activities and outputs
 were to lead to the intended outcome was well defined and reflected in the Results Framework.

 The Results Framework included a substantial number of indicators with five PDO indicators and 23
 intermediate outcome indicators, which encompassed all outcomes of the PDO statement. Also, the
 selected indicators were specific, measurable, and adequate to capture the component’s contributions
 toward achieving the project's objective. Furthermore, the M&E system was built on the M&E system
 developed under a previous Bank project and further strengthened under this project.

 According to the PAD (p. 11), the Project Development and Safeguards Unit (PDSU) was responsible for
 all M&E-related activities, such as overseeing data aggregation and periodic reporting on progress.



b. M&E Implementation
  According to the ICR (para. 79) the project produced timely semi-annual M&E reports and annual
  progress reports, which included status updates from the fields as well as on financial management,
  procurement, and safeguards. Data was collected, and indicators were updated as per agreed frequency.
  Furthermore, a beneficiary assessment was conducted at the beginning, mid-term, and end of project
  implementation.

  The Results Framework was revised twice during project restructurings to make the targets realistic. The
  target of PDO indicator 2 (Contaminated land managed or dump-sites closed under the project) was
  increased, and the target of PDO indicator 4 (“waste pickers whose lives depend on the existing SW
  context integrated into inclusion programs”) was slightly decreased. The target of one intermediate
  outcome indicator (“industrial and municipal waste disposal capacity created under the project”) was
  increased. In comparison, the target of one intermediate outcome indicator (“temporary jobs created
  under the various activities of component 1”) was reduced.

  According to the ICR (para. 80), the Independent Verification Agent was used to link funding to results
  achieved and used clear verification protocols that were easy to understand by all parties. Also, the Bank
  team (October 7, 2023) stated that progress was regularly reported by the PDSU bi-annually following the
  implementation support missions. Also, the update was reported during the bi-weekly progress review
  meetings with the Bank team.



c. M&E Utilization
  According to the ICR (para. 81), the project’s M&E data was used to track implementation progress and
  identify and address implementation bottlenecks. Also, M&E data informed the three project
  restructurings. Moreover, as part of the AF, Results-based financing payments were utilized based on
  specific service improvements and financial targets, which provided additional incentives to JSC-KRM to
  improve service quality delivery and to increase fee collection.




                                                                                                 Page 12 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GZ-Gaza Solid Waste Management (P121648)




  M&E Quality Rating
  High

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as category A and triggered three safeguard policies; OP/BP 4.01 (Environmental
   Assessment), OP/BP 4.09 (Pest Management) and OP/BP 4.12 (Involuntary Resettlement).

   The Bank’s safeguard policies OP /BP 4.01 (Environmental Assessment) was triggered due to the project’s
   activities related to the landfill and transfer stations. The project prepared an Environmental and Social
   Impact Assessment (ESIA), and an Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP). The ESIA was
   prepared in a participatory manner to fully engage all stakeholder groups.

   When the project received Additional Financing, OP/BP 4.09 (Pest Management) was triggered due to the
   need to use pesticides in landfills operations. The project addressed all safeguard policies appropriately and
   the project’s environmental safeguard performance was rated Satisfactory throughout implementation.

   The project also triggered OP/BP 4.12 (Involuntary Resettlement) due to the adverse impact that was
   expected on landowners at the Al-Fukhari landfill and the vulnerable group of waste pickers. The project
   prepared to Abbreviated Resettlement Action Plans (ARAPs) which were consulted upon with affected
   parties and a broader stakeholder group. When the project received Additional Financing, additional social
   safeguard instruments were prepared such as a compensation plan for Namsawi site rehabilitation and a
   voluntary land purchase plan for the closure of the Deir Al Balah disposal site.

   According to the Bank team (October 7, 2023) the project experienced delays in 2016/17 as a result of land
   acquisition and compensation for the Sofa landfill. As a result, safeguard compliance was rated Moderately
   Satisfactory. However, by April 2021, the project’s safeguard compliance was rated as Satisfactory for all
   three policies until project closure.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management:

   The project had adequate financial management (FM) arrangements in place. The MDLF was responsible
   for the project’s FM and project disbursements and had an adequate computerized financial system in
   place and qualified staff. The ICR (para. 92) stated that unaudited Interim Financial Reports were of
   acceptable format and mainly were provided in a timely manner. The audit reports of the external auditor
   had clean opinions.

   According to the ICR (para. 91), while the Additional Financing followed the same disbursement
   arrangements, the results-based payments under the GPRBA grant had a different arrangement. The
   MDLF would receive and use the results-based payments to directly pay contractors, suppliers, and


                                                                                                   Page 13 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GZ-Gaza Solid Waste Management (P121648)



   service providers. The amounts paid were dependent on the amounts that had been allocated for each
   indicator. An Independent Verification Agent (IVA) was responsible for verifying the results.

   Procurement:

   The project followed the Bank’s procurement guidelines, according to the ICR (para. 88). The PDSU, a
   separate, semi-autonomous entity reporting to the MDLF Executive Manager, was responsible for the
   project’s procurement performance. In total, 70 contracts for works, goods, and consultancy services were
   procured and implemented successfully. The Bank’s supervision found that procurement processing and
   contract management was performed in an overall satisfactory manner.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   NA



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Highly Satisfactory   Highly Satisfactory

Bank Performance                Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                  High                  High

Quality of ICR                  ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR (p. 27-28) provided several lessons learned, which were adapted by IEG:

      Flexibility and adaptability of project design and implementation might positively
       impact the project outcomes in challenging and volatile environments such as Gaza.
       In this project, when implementation experienced delays due to risks to the safety of
       contractors and the lengthy and difficult approval process for certain types of construction
       materials, the Bank team was able to work closely with the counterpart and find solutions to
       address these implementation bottlenecks.
      Combining infrastructure investments with institutional capacity building might
       improve the sustainability of project outcomes. This project demonstrated that building
       infrastructure in a fragile environment with limited financial resources requires institutional
       capacity building to own, operate, and maintain the infrastructure after project closure.

                                                                                                    Page 14 of 15
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       GZ-Gaza Solid Waste Management (P121648)



        Using Results-based Financing (RBF) can positively impact service quality and
         delivery. In this project, when the project received AF, RBF payments were based on
         specific service improvements and financial targets, which provided additional incentives to
         JSC-KRM to improve service quality delivery and to increase fee collection.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provided an adequate overview of project preparation and implementation and included useful lessons
learned. Also, the ICR was sufficiently outcome-driven. The ICR did not include a traditional economic analysis.
However, it utilized other means of economic analysis, such as cost-benefit analysis, GHG emissions, and
financial analysis, to justify economic efficiency.

There were minor shortcomings. The ICR was quite repetitive and could have been made more concise.
Moreover, the discussion in the efficacy section of the ICR main text did not adequately reflect the achievement
of the indicators included in the project’s Results Framework.

Overall, the quality of the ICR is rated as Substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                   Page 15 of 15
