     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Social Health Insurance Project (P152625)



                                                                                    Report Number: ICRR0023276

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P152625                                     Social Health Insurance Project

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Kazakhstan                                  Health, Nutrition & Population


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)                 Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-86170                                  30-Jun-2021                                            43,647,901.51

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 27-Apr-2016                                 31-Mar-2022

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                        Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                             80,000,000.00                                                 0.00

 Revised Commitment                              45,600,000.00                                                 0.00

 Actual                                          43,647,901.51                                                 0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator           Group
 Judyth L. Twigg             Salim J. Habayeb              Eduardo Fernandez                IEGHC (Unit 2)
                                                           Maldonado




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Loan Agreement (p. 6), the project's objective was "to improve accessibility, quality and
   efficiency of health service delivery, and reduce financial risks to the population that are caused by serious
   health problems."

   A December 2018 restructuring reduced the targets for two outcome indicators, but achievement exceeded
   both the original and revised targets in one case and failed to achieve either the original or revised target in


                                                                                                      Page 1 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Social Health Insurance Project (P152625)



   the other case. A split rating would therefore not affect the assessment of achievement of any of the
   objectives. The split rating methodology is not used for this review.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  24-Dec-2018

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project contained three components:

   1. Supporting implementation of the national mandatory Social Health Insurance (MSHI) system
   (appraisal: US$16.63 million, with a US$14.68 million contribution from the Bank; actual: US$5.03 million).
   This component was to support the design, implementation, and management of the MSHI system.
   Following the November 16, 2015 passage of the MSHI law, this component was to support the Ministry of
   Health and Social Development (MoHSD) in developing and implementing the functions and systems that
   were critical for its implementation: revenue forecasting, collection of funds, budget planning, institutional
   operational support for the Social Health Insurance Fund (SHIF), improvement of benefits packages, and
   integrating an MSHI information technology system into the existing e-Health system. The component was
   also to support fine-tuning and strengthening of existing health service purchasing and payment
   arrangements, including strengthening purchasing of pharmaceuticals and health technologies, and
   improving financial control mechanisms and technical audits for the SHIF.

   2. Strengthening health service delivery to support implementation of the national mandatory SHI system
   (appraisal: US$62.94 million, with a US$54.9 million contribution from the Bank; actual: US$35.39 million).
   This component was to support development of the health facility network, featuring restructuring of the
   network of health care providers on the basis of master planning, taking into account priority development of
   primary health care and the use of public-private partnership mechanisms, and strengthening public health
   functions and the promotion of healthy lifestyles. The component was also to support the establishment of a
   comprehensive system of quality management of health services through standardization protocols,
   development of health technology assessments, expansion of disease management programs,
   accreditation of health care institutions, improvement of the formulary system under the Joint Commission
   on Quality of Health Services umbrella, and introduction of corporate governance and management
   principles for health organizations. Finally, the component was to develop an effective human resources
   policy for the health sector through establishment of strategic partnerships with leading academic centers
   on modernization of medical education and introduction of modern human resources technologies for
   personnel management. At a 2021 restructuring, in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, some funds were



                                                                                                     Page 2 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Social Health Insurance Project (P152625)



   reprogrammed under this component to strengthen active surveillance and diagnostics of infectious
   diseases (COVID-19, influenza, enteroviruses).

   3. Project management, monitoring and evaluation (M&E), and communications strategy (appraisal:
   US$10.43 million, with a US$10.42 million contribution from the Bank; actual: US$4.46 million). This
   component was to support a Project Management Unit (PMU) to provide day-to-day project management,
   including fiduciary, administrative, and M&E tasks. It was to support a platform of citizen engagement to
   foster openness, feedback, and dialogue with the public through annual multi-stakeholder forums, a
   community monitoring mechanism, and a proactive grievance redress mechanism.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   The project was approved on April 27, 2016, and became effective on June 27, 2017. It was to be financed
   by a US$80 million investment loan from the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development. The
   government was to contribute US$10 million, bringing total estimated project costs to US$90 million.
   The mid-term review was held in June 2020. The project underwent restructurings in December 2018, June
   2021, and February 2022, including cancellation of US$34.4 million in February 2022 due to savings in
   technical assistance and training activities and cancelled and/or terminated contracts. Intermediate
   indicators were adjusted at the 2018 and 2021 restructurings, and the targets for two outcome indicators
   were reduced in scope at the 2018 restructuring to levels that were considered more realistic. The closing
   date was extended at the June 2021 restructuring from June 30, 2021, to March 31, 2022 because of the
   COVID-19 pandemic and resulting reallocation of some project funds to strengthening
   epidemiological surveillance. The final project cost was US$44.88 million, of which the Bank contributed
   US$43.65 million and the government US$1.23 million. Differences between appraised and actual costs (in
   addition to the 2022 cancellation of funds) were due to exchange rate fluctuations. The project closed on
   March 31, 2022.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The objectives were relevant to country context at appraisal. Kazakhstan was still in the early stages of the
demographic transition, with key health indicators lagging behind those of similar countries in the region
with comparable gross domestic product (GDP) per capita. Life expectancy was lower (seven years lower
for males than in comparator countries), and the infant mortality rate and deaths from cardiovascular
diseases and from cervical cancer were substantially higher (PAD, pp. 2-3). Total expenditures on health
(3.8 percent of GDP) were well below average for Organisation for Economic Cooperation and
Development (OECD) countries (9.4 percent of GDP). Out-of-pocket expenditures covered about one-third
of total health expenditures, with the government budget covering the rest. There were high levels of
inefficiency in the allocation of public sector resources across social services, including health services.
Most health expenditures were linked to hospital admissions, where 16 percent of the number of
admissions and 18 percent of the total number of inpatient days were due to potentially avoidable
hospitalizations. Payment incentives needed to be adjusted to encourage the use of ambulatory services



                                                                                                    Page 3 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Social Health Insurance Project (P152625)



where medically appropriate, expand effective health promotion and primary services that are responsive to
local patient needs, optimize inpatient services, and improve performance at all levels of the health system.

The objectives have remained relevant to government strategy. At appraisal, the government sought to
allocate a progressively higher share of national wealth for health care in order to reduce the gap with
OECD standards. Health sector reform was a key component of the long-term Kazakhstan 2050 Strategy,
which emphasized that "the health of the nation is the basis of our successful future." The Strategy
proposed health care modernization through the introduction of standards for clinical protocols, equipment,
and supplies across medical institutions to improve the quality of services and ultimately health outcomes.
The Densaulyk National Health Strategy 2016-2019 focused on cost-effective preventive interventions as
part of a guaranteed benefits package and measures to ensure long-term sustainability in health care
financing, with a particular focus on addressing the increasing burden of non-communicable diseases and
their associated future costs. The government also sought to introduce MSHI that would allow for the broad
consolidation of funds -- reflecting the principle of "shared responsibility for health" among the state,
employers, and employees -- to cover the costs of health services, protect the population from
impoverishing out-of-pocket payments, improve the efficiency of the health system based on the priority
development of primary health care, and ensure sustainable financing of health care. The 2021-2025
"Healthy Nation" National Project for 2021-2025 contains four objectives -- increasing the availability and
quality of medical care, forming a modern system of epidemiological forecasting and response, developing
a domestic pharmaceutical industry, and increasing the proportion of the population leading a healthy
lifestyle -- that continue to reflect the project's priorities. It is noteworthy, however, that the explicitly stated
objective from the 2016-2019 strategy on improving health system efficiency was dropped from the primary
objectives of the 2021-2025 "Healthy Nation," and there was a shift in "Healthy Nation" to other stated
objectives focusing on the pharmaceutical industry and healthy lifestyles, reducing somewhat the tightness
of alignment between the project's objectives and national strategy.

Finally, the objectives were appropriately framed given the Bank's history of engagement with Kazakhstan's
health sector, and they were relevant to Bank strategy at appraisal and at closure. The Bank had supported
a mandatory health insurance scheme in Kazakhstan in the late 1990s that collapsed due to employers'
inability to cover payroll taxes, the government's inability to collect contributions from the self-employed,
oblasts' inability to contribute on behalf of socially vulnerable groups, and mismanagement of funds (PAD,
p. 5). Following that failure, the Bank supported the Kazakhstan Health Sector Technology Transfer and
Institutional Reform project (2008-2017), which built institutional capacity and experience with health sector
reform. As part of preparation for this project, the Bank provided extensive advisory services on social
health insurance design, commented on Kazakhstan's draft SHI legislation, and provided technical
oversight to MoHSD's actuarial costing for the health sector. The FY2012-2017 Country Partnership
Strategy contained an Area of Engagement on "Strengthening Governance and Improving Efficiency in
Public Services Delivery," with outcomes on "Improving Governance" and "Sharpening the Strategic
Approach to Health Care Reforms." The Bank's 2018 Systematic Country Diagnostic contained a Strategic
Pillar on projective and adaptive human and natural capital, citing the need to improve the quality of health
care and enhance equity in access to care. The FY2020-2025 Country Partnership Framework has a Focus
Area on "Strengthening Human Capital," an objective to increase access to quality health services and
social protection, and results indicators on the rollout of SHI and the percentage of low-income households
spending more than ten percent of their total expenditures on health services and non-food goods.




                                                                                                           Page 4 of 19
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Social Health Insurance Project (P152625)



               Given strong relevance to country context, government strategy, and Bank strategy, but the shift in stated
               objectives in the most recent government health strategy that departed somewhat from the project's
               objectives, relevance is rated Substantial.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Improve accessibility of health service delivery

                             Rationale
                             The theory of change for this objective held that restructuring the health facility network, implementing an
                             integrated network for health services delivery, building and renovating health facilities, and implementing
                             social health insurance would improve the accessibility of health service delivery, especially for lower-income
                             populations.



                             Outputs

                             The MSHI program was put in place, with passage of the Law on Social Health Insurance in 2015, adoption of
                             an amended Law in 2016, an implementation Road Map approved in 2017, and key implementation
                             benchmarks having been achieved as planned. The insurance package was defined and approved in June
                             2019, and the state guaranteed benefits package (SGBP) was expanded and better defined. Health facilities
                             now receive payments for services contracted by SHIF, rather than directly from the government budget. The
                             project provided methodological and institutional support for SHIF, particularly to strengthen its autonomy in
                             managing funds, focusing on actuarial modeling, risk management systems, information systems, revenue
                             forecasting, needs-based budget planning, health services planning and purchasing (including automation of
                             processes), provider payment mechanisms, purchasing of pharmaceuticals, financial control mechanisms,
                             and monitoring of health services quality. Recommendations provided under the Bank's technical assistance
                             have been incorporated into government decrees and MoHSD orders.

                             The percent of the population for whom SHIF received MSHI contributions/subsidies increased from zero in
                             2015 to 91.4 percent in 2022, exceeding the original target of 60 percent and the revised target of 86 percent.

                             119 health facilities were constructed, renovated, and/or equipped, exceeding the original target of 50
                             facilities but not meeting the revised target of 250 facilities. The ICR (p. 20) noted that the number of service
                             providers for rehabilitation treatment increased from 64 in 2019 to 618 in 2021, and the number of conditions


                                                                                                                                 Page 5 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Social Health Insurance Project (P152625)



included in the outpatient drug provision program increased from 45 to 138 over this time period. The ICR did
not explain why data only for these specific services were provided.

The share of public sector financing for the following services increased from 2019 to 2021: from 11 percent
to 74 percent for consultation and diagnostic services; from 26 percent to 80 percent for dental care for some
population categories; from 4 percent to 43 percent for rehabilitation treatment; from 15 percent to 44 percent
for outpatient drug provision; and from 7 percent to 18 percent for high-tech tertiary care. Again, the ICR did
not explain why data only for these specific services were provided.



Outcomes

The ICR (p. 14) provided bar charts generally illustrating that there was flat utilization of primary health care
services (measured as per capita outpatient visits) in 2016 and 2017, declining utilization in 2018 through
2021, and recovery in utilization rates -- though not to 2016-2017 levels -- in 2021. The charts also indicated
that there was wide regional variation in primary care utilization rates across the country. Similar bar charts
showed that diabetes and circulatory system screening coverage increased at the national level from 2015
through 2019 but then declined in the pandemic years of 2020 and 2021. Exact data supporting these charts
were not provided in the ICR, but the project team later provided data points for 2016 through 2021 at the
national and regional levels confirming the trends for each of these indicators. These results were likely
affected by lockdowns and prioritization of health care service delivery in favor of COVID-19 prevention and
treatment services. It is noteworthy that per capita outpatient visits declined in 2019, prior to the pandemic,
and that no data were provided that captured access to COVID-19 services (which could reasonably
contribute to achievement of this objective). Separately, however (p. 20), the ICR noted that the number of
consultative and diagnostic services increased from 28.4 million services to 41.1 million services from 2020 to
2021; the ICR does not indicate whether COVID-19 consultations and testing contributed to this increase.

The percentage of all surgeries included in the "outpatient elective surgeries" list actually performed as
outpatient surgeries in project-supported hospitals and outpatient facilities increased from 5 percent in 2015
to 43.2 percent in early 2020, then declined to 28 percent in early 2021 and 31.4 percent in 2022, not
achieving the original target of 50 percent or the revised target of 40 percent. The ICR explained that the later
decline was due to lockdowns during COVID-19.

The World Health Organization Global Universal Health Coverage (UHC) Monitoring Report for 2021 showed
that the UHC service coverage index for Kazakhstan improved from 71 in 2015 to 76 in 2019. This index
includes service coverage elements for reproductive, maternal, newborn, and child health, infectious
diseases, and non-communicable diseases.



Although the project supported a new financing mechanism that should have increased accessibility of health
services, and data were provided demonstrating that a large majority of the population received support
through this mechanism, the outcome data do not indicate that there was increased access to health
services. Achievement of this objective is therefore rated Modest.




                                                                                                   Page 6 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Social Health Insurance Project (P152625)




Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Improve quality of health service delivery

Rationale
The theory of change for this objective held that improved standards for health care services and clinical
protocols, the use of Health Technology Assessments, the expansion of disease management programs, the
improvement of medical education standards, the accreditation of health care organizations, and the
establishment of strategic partnerships with leading academic institutions would lead to improved quality of
health care services. In addition, contractual provisions for health services providers under MSHI were to
include incentives to improve the quality of services.



Outputs

As part of a second phase of MSHI reform in 2020, SHIF contracts with providers for selected health services
incorporated elements of quality of care.

Medical colleges and universities were reorganized and strengthened through strategic partnerships with
foreign medical universities. The number of educational programs developed and implemented in medical
educational institutions using competence-based approaches and professional standards through strategic
partnerships increased from one in 2015 to 21 in 2022, exceeding the original target of 5 programs and
meeting the revised target of 22 programs.

Strategic and regulatory frameworks, guidelines, and standard operating procedures were developed and
implemented in the areas of state quality assurance, independent quality assessments, internal quality audits,
accreditation, licensing, and certification. Key adjustments were made in contracting methods to include
incentives for health services providers to improve quality of care.

17 fully functional regional primary health care excellence centers were established, exceeding the original
target of 16 centers and meeting the target of 17 centers. The ICR (p. 16) noted, however, that the
effectiveness of these centers "remains to be seen." New disease management programs for arterial
hypertension, diabetes, and chronic heart failure were launched nationwide. Five new protocols were
developed for intensive care in obstetrics and neonatology, meeting the target. Emergency medical services
were strengthened through development of infrastructure, equipment, staffing, and guidelines.

10,074 health personnel received training, exceeding the original target of 3,400 personnel and the revised
target of 9,800 personnel. The ICR (p. 14) presented bar charts, without accompanying source data, on the
number of physicians and care staff per 10,000 population, showing significant regional variation but little
change during the project period.




                                                                                                 Page 7 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Social Health Insurance Project (P152625)



The project procured 491 mechanical ventilators and 87 kinetic respiratory therapy devices to support the
government's response to the COVID-19 pandemic.



Outcomes

The percentage of all contracted inpatient services subject to technical audit annually increased from 20
percent in 2015 to 56.8 percent in 2022, exceeding both the original target of 40 percent and the revised
target of 30 percent. No information was provided on the results of those audits.

The number of regions implementing evidence-based disease management programs, including incentives
for health providers and patients, increased from 2 in 2015 to 17 in 2022, exceeding the original target of 16
regions and meeting the revised target of 17 regions.

The percentage of patients reporting improved health services improved from 40.4 percent in the third quarter
of 2020 to 49.2 percent in March 2022, not reaching the original target of 70 percent, but achieving the
revised target of a 10 percent increase over a 22.5 percent baseline (24.75 percent). The percentage of
respondents to a patient survey who "highly appreciated" the transparency, credibility, and effectiveness of
the complaints handing system for health care organizations improved from 71 percent in August 2020 to
87.1 percent in early 2021, surpassing the target of 60 percent. The utility of these survey results is
compromised by the baselines having been set during the early part of the COVID-19 pandemic in the
summer of 2020, which is likely to have produced patient satisfaction results outside the norm.



Without adequate survey data on patient satisfaction or on the results of technical audits, assessment of
achievement of this objective rests on the implementation of evidence-based disease management programs.
Given the importance of such programs, achievement of the objective is rated Substantial based on
meeting of this target, but it is noted that more evidence on actual improvements in quality of health services
as a result of these programs would have been desirable.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
Improve efficiency of health service delivery

Rationale
The theory of change for this objective held that increasing allocations to primary and outpatient care and
expanding primary and secondary prevention services, changing incentive structures to providers to
encourage increased provision of primary and preventive services, and expanding the use of information
technology across the health system would improve the efficiency of health service delivery by delivering care


                                                                                                  Page 8 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Social Health Insurance Project (P152625)



at the least expensive medically appropriate level and preventing/detecting diseases before they progress to
more advanced stages that are more expensive to treat.



Outputs

A key element of financing provided through the SHIF included strengthening of (i) provider payment methods
to incentivize prioritizing of preventive and primary care and (ii) purchasing of pharmaceuticals and health
technologies. The SHIF started exercising strategic purchasing, collecting contributions from employers as of
mid-2017. As of 2018, funds supporting the SGBP, which previously flowed directly to health providers in
amounts based on historic budgets, are now channeled to providers through the SHIF. Provider payments are
now based on capitation and some fee-for-service (for primary care), diagnosis-related groups for hospital
admissions, and fee-for-service for some specific ambulatory hospital and other services. Health providers
now have autonomy to use part of the received funds to implement adjustments in services delivery and
provide incentives to staff.

Public health and health information services were strengthened, including the development of morbidity and
mortality forecasting models for selected non-communicable diseases, the implementation of a national
Global Adult Tobacco Survey, the drafting of legislation on biological safety, improvements in data collection
for health information reporting, and support for Kazakhstan becoming a member of the International Health
Terminology Standards Development Organization.

The project supported expansion of electronic hospital patient registries, business processes for the
identification of population categories for insurance, integration of patient treatment schemes into the
pharmaceutical supply information system, improvement of the catchment area population registry, and other
information technology activities. The SHIF and Ministry of Health information systems were integrated.
However, a unified registry of human resources for health was not implemented as planned.



Outcomes

The share of public health expenditure on primary care, consultation and diagnostic care, and outpatient
drugs increased from 35 percent in 2015 to 48.8 percent in 2022, exceeding the target of 40 percent.

As noted under Objective 1, the percentage of all surgeries included in the "outpatient elective surgeries" list
actually performed as outpatient surgeries in project-supported hospitals and outpatient facilities increased
from 5 percent in 2015 to 43.2 percent in early 2020, then declined to 28 percent in early 2021 and 31.4
percent in 2022, not achieving the original target of 50 percent or the revised target of 40 percent. This
indicator is a reasonable measure of health system efficiency as well as access to health services. The ICR
(p. 14) explained that the later decline in 2021 and 2022 was due to lockdowns during COVID-19 (personnel
shortages, inadequacy of outpatient medical equipment, and postponement of elective surgeries), but it did
not explain why outpatient surgeries had not returned to early 2020 levels by 2022.




                                                                                                    Page 9 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Social Health Insurance Project (P152625)



Based on the shift in overall health expenditures toward provision of primary care, achievement of this
objective is rated Substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 4
Objective
Reduce financial risks to the population that are caused by serious health problems

Rationale
The theory of change for this objective held that improvements in functions and systems critical for
implementation of the MSHI program, including revenue forecasting and budget planning; improvement of the
benefits package, purchasing, and payment arrangements; enhancements to financial control mechanisms;
information system improvements and technical audits; training and capacity building; and support for citizen
engagement, public information, and awareness activities on MSHI, would lead to more effective
management and operation of the SHIF, improved premium collection, expansion of health care benefits
packages, and integration of the MSHI system with e-Health. These changes, in turn, would expand both the
public resources available for payment for health services and the number of drugs and services covered by
public insurance, reducing the prevalence of out-of-pocket payments for health care and therefore
the financial risks to the population caused by serious health problems. There were no specific interventions
reported, however, that targeted segments of the population who had been disproportionately affected by
high out-of-pocket payments or who were lower-income and therefore more vulnerable to impoverishment by
high out-of-pocket payments.



Outputs

Incentives were put in place to encourage population enrollment to MSHI, which increased coverage for
provision of prescription drugs at the outpatient level and expanded the list of covered medical conditions
from 45 to 138.

The SHIF started implementing annual external financial audits and now has a positive balance between
revenues and expenditures.



Outcomes

In addition to the results reported under Objective 1:

The percentage of the bottom 40 percent of households spending 10 percent or more on health services and
non-food goods in the health sector out of their total expenditures on paid services and non-food goods
showed a deteriorating trend by increasing from 10.5 percent in 2015 to 24.6 percent in 2022, not achieving

                                                                                                 Page 10 of 19
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Social Health Insurance Project (P152625)



                            the original target of 6.5 percent or the revised target of 12. 8 percent. The project team later added that this
                            deterioration may have been due to increases in hospital care costs, which rose by 74 percent between 2019
                            and 2022, faster than the increase in per capita income over the same period (51 percent). The team further
                            noted that this increase in hospital care costs may have been exacerbated by the COVID-19 pandemic. The
                            team reported an increase in public hospital operational costs for general medical practice and specialized
                            medical practice of 138 percent and 94 percent, respectively, and in private operational costs for general
                            medical practice and specialized medical practice of 195 percent and 153 percent, respectively, between
                            2019 and 2022. The team's data did not indicate whether there were peaks in hospital costs associated with
                            the maximum levels of COVID-19 incidence and mortality in 2020 and 2021, and whether these costs
                            declined as cases receded in 2022.

                            The overall share of out-of-pocket expenditures within total current health expenditure declined from 35.6
                            percent in 2016 to 33.8 percent in 2019 and 27.5 percent in 2020. The project team later added that this
                            decline continued to 26.5 percent in 2021. The ICR (p. 22) cautioned that the 2020 figure should be
                            interpreted within the context of government mobilization of emergency funds to respond to the COVID-19
                            pandemic. It noted that "more time is needed to adequately observe the effect of MSHI on financial
                            protection." There are also attribution issues with the reported slight decrease between 2016 and 2020, as the
                            rollout of MSHI took place in 2019/2020 (ICR, p. 22).

                            The ICR reported that the share of drug expenditures within out-of-pocket payments declined from 62.6
                            percent in 2016 to 60.6 percent in 2019. The project team later added that, more recently, hospital care has
                            constituted 49.4 percent of private health expenditures, and pharmaceuticals have constituted 47.6 percent of
                            private health expenditures. In a context of an overall increasing burden of health expenditures for the bottom
                            two income quintiles, this trend on drug expenditures is not meaningful in illustrating reducing financial risks to
                            households.



                            With the poor having experienced a considerable increase in the burden of out-of-pocket expenditure on
                            health care over the project's lifetime, even in the context of government provision of emergency financing for
                            COVID-19, achievement of this objective is rated Negligible.



                            Rating
                            Negligible


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Based on substantial achievement of the efficiency objective, substantial achievement (but barely so) of the
                            quality objective, modest achievement of the access objective, and negligible achievement (based on
                            regression from baseline) of the objective to reduce financial risks to the population from health expenditures,
                            overall efficacy is rated Modest.



                                                                                                                                Page 11 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Social Health Insurance Project (P152625)




  Overall Efficacy Rating                                    Primary Reason
  Modest                                                     Low achievement


 5. Efficiency
Noting that it was not possible to quantify all of the economic benefits potentially generated by the project, the
PAD (Annex 7) conservatively estimated a net present value (NPV) of disability-adjusted life years (DALYs)
gained due to improved access and quality of services at US$110.9 million for the five-year period 2017-2021,
and US$335.7 million for the ten-year period 2017-2026. The NPV of efficiency gains due to transferring some
surgeries from inpatient to outpatient care was estimated at US$40.8 million. Overall, the project's benefit-cost
ratio was estimated at 1.8 over 2017-2021, and 4.5 over 2017-2026. The assumptions underlying the analysis
were reasonable: a three percent discount rate; cost savings of 40 percent if a given surgery is performed in an
outpatient rather than inpatient setting (based on Medicare spending data from the United States); a gradually
increasing shift in the percentage of surgeries eligible as "outpatient elective surgeries" actually being performed
on an outpatient basis, to 50 percent by 2021; the monetary value of a DALY gained per year equal to per capita
GDP in that same year; and a project-attributable gradual increase in DALYs gained over the course of the
project's lifetime, to 0.3 percent by 2021. The ICR's cost-benefit analysis, using the same benefits stream and
assumptions as the PAD's, found an NPV of US$97.09 million and a benefit-cost ratio of 3.5, indicating value for
money.

The ICR's efficiency section provided minimal information on the project's implementation efficiency, other than
to note that the government's signing of the loan agreement was delayed by six months after the Board
approved the project, and that ratification by the Parliament took another seven months. It also stated (p. 23):
"The project's documents did not include adequate details on the efficiency of spending on facilities construction
and renovation, and whether or not this was the best use of resources ... The reports [also] did not show how
effective and efficient training activities were." Other sections of the ICR described significant implementation
efficiency shortcomings. Overall government processes for project preparation and implementation were
extremely complex and time-consuming (ICR, p. 33). During the year between signing of the loan agreement
and Parliamentary ratification, project design suffered from Parliamentary reallocations in the project budget to
favor local expertise over international technical assistance, and "some project activities lost their priority and
constituted a divergence from the original design" during the delay (ICR, p. 27). Changes in top management of
the MOH and staff, including four changes in the minister's position, five changes in supervising vice ministers,
and five changes in supervising department directors, "adversely affected project implementation" through
decreases in commitment and ownership, loss of institutional memory, and time spent re-orienting new
leadership on the project. "Vice Ministers' busy schedule did not allow them to thoroughly explore project details
... leading to delays on key technical, procurement, and project management aspects following the mid-term
review and lasting until project closing" (ICR, p. 27). Implementation efficiency was further hampered by multiple
changes in government organizational structure, as the Ministry of Healthcare was merged with the Ministry of
Labor and Social Protection to become the Ministry of Healthcare and Social Development in 2014, and then re-
split into two separate ministries again in 2017. The ICR (p. 28) noted that, at the time of the 2014 merger, the
minister had a social protection rather than health background, "which reduced the ministry's engagement
towards the project, thus again causing delays." Furthermore, the highly effective project coordinator left his
position to become Chair of the SHIF in mid-2020, resulting in the dismantling of the PMU technical team and
yet another loss of project momentum; the ICR (p. 28) stated that "with the loss of an effective team and team
leader, interactions between the PMU and the MoH became quite challenging." The COVID-19 pandemic also
"slowed down and adversely affected" implementation progress and delayed project restructuring, ultimately

                                                                                                      Page 12 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Social Health Insurance Project (P152625)



resulting in inability to conduct some planned procurements (equipment for maternal/child health and intensive
care units, laboratory equipment); no dissemination and teaching of project-developed clinical guidelines on
maternal and child health services; "lengthy discussions" on potential use of unallocated funds; and eventual
cancellation of US$34.4 million of the loan. In the Borrower's comments (ICR, p. 69), it was noted that a lack of
understanding and interest in the ongoing reforms among some agency subdivisions and sub-national
entities limited promotion of project activities, and the limited financial capacity of health organizations led to
suboptimal adoption of best available practices with regard to investments. As noted above, the Borrower's ICR
also reported that frequent changes in key staff diminished the overall effectiveness of implementation. Finally,
the use of time-based contracts for consulting services caused delays and poor performance for some activities,
as the modality was not thoroughly understood. Rejection of some payment requests and deliverables by
government staff created several legal cases and unresolved disputes.

Given these significant implementation inefficiencies, project efficiency is rated Modest.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      0
 Appraisal                                                   0
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      0
 ICR Estimate                                                0
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

With the objectives' strong relevance to country context, government strategy, and Bank strategy, but with
strategic shifts to new objectives as of project closing, relevance is rated Substantial. Based on substantial
achievement of the efficiency objective, substantial achievement (but barely so) of the quality objective, modest
achievement of the access objective, and negligible achievement (based on regression from baseline) of the
objective to reduce financial risks to the population from health expenditures, overall efficacy is rated Modest.
Efficiency is rated Modest due to significant implementation inefficiencies. Taken together, these ratings indicate
that there were significant shortcomings in the project's preparation, implementation, and achievement, resulting
in an overall Outcome rating of Moderately Unsatisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Unsatisfactory



                                                                                                     Page 13 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Social Health Insurance Project (P152625)




7. Risk to Development Outcome

The most significant risk to the project's outcomes lies in government plans to decentralize the financing of
some health services under the SGBP, delegating this function to the regional level. Although such
decentralization holds the promise of improving responsiveness to local populations' specific health needs, it
could lead to fragmentation in health financing, weakening of SHIF's purchasing power, and reduction in
incentives for higher quality and more efficient service provision. Simultaneously, in response to a
constrained fiscal environment, there were changes in 2022 to the methodology used to determine SHIF
contributions that substantially reduced the revenues of the MHSI system. Overall, these changes threaten
the project's achievements in improving health system efficiency and service coverage.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project's objectives, activities, and implementation arrangements were clearly articulated and
  appropriately pitched given the country's experience with health sector reform and the Bank's prior
  engagement in the sector. The Bank's advisory services informed the design of collection and pooling of
  health care revenues, the establishment of strategic purchasing arrangements, and the organization of
  social health insurance in general. Lessons were learned from prior experience and from ongoing
  analytical work (PAD, p. 11): the need for simplicity of project design (only two technical components);
  the need for development of technical, policy, and strategic development capacity of counterpart
  institutions; and the importance of a well-designed and implemented communications strategy that
  facilitated engagement of end-users across each stage of the change process. Risk assessment was
  thorough, with key identified risks stemming from implementation of a completely new health financing
  scheme and significant reforms in the health service delivery system. Macroeconomic risks related to a
  difficult external economic environment were addressed through the project's focus on reforms that would
  reduce fragmentation and increase quality and efficiency of resource allocation and service delivery. The
  risk of resistance to reform, heightened by the experience of failure with the 1996-1998 mandatory health
  insurance scheme, was to be mitigated through client/patient engagement mechanisms, a well-targeted
  communications campaign, and the building of consensus and support for reform through early
  demonstration of its effectiveness in increasing access, efficiency, and quality of services. Institutional
  capacity risks were to be addressed through training and twinning arrangements. Fiduciary performance
  risks were to be mitigated through development of a project-specific Project Operational Manual to
  document key internal control and other mechanisms, upgrades to the project's accounting software,
  capacity building of PMU and MoHSD staff, and conducting of the Bank's fiduciary support visits at
  frequent intervals. The PAD (Annexes 4 and 5) contained a detailed implementation support plan and
  distribution of responsibilities for each project component.

  However, project design did not include interventions specifically targeting segments of the population
  disproportionately affected by high out-of-pocket payments. It was implausible to expect a reduction in
  financial risks stemming from out-of-pocket expenditures for vulnerable populations without adequate



                                                                                                   Page 14 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Social Health Insurance Project (P152625)



  interventions. This constituted a moderate shortcoming in project design, producing a Quality-at-Entry
  rating of Moderately Satisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 To get the project off to a good start, a Project Launch Workshop was held in February 2018, followed by a
 flagship course the following month to orient stakeholders, including various government agencies, medical
 universities, and non-government organizations, on the context and development priorities of Kazakhstan's
 health system. The Bank team made regular and frequent support visits and "demonstrated flexibility in
 addressing various implementation challenges and in facilitating efforts to achieve development outcomes"
 (ICR, p. 31). There was "good and continuous dialogue" with government teams that provided timely
 feedback on issues as they arose and presented practical tools, especially for procurement.
 Implementation Status and Results Reports (ISRs) were candid and led to project restructurings. The
 Bank's support during the COVID-19 emergency was timely and contributed to strategic purchasing of
 ventilators, among other health interventions. Overall, the ICR describes a situation where the Bank team
 exerted significant, high-quality effort to keep the project on track despite challenges with the governing
 and institutional environment and then the COVID-19 pandemic.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The theory of change linking the project's planned activities to its desired outcomes was plausible and
 sound, with one exception: there was no information on specific interventions targeting segments of the
 population who had been disproportionately affected by high out-of-pocket payments or who were lower-
 income and therefore more vulnerable to impoverishment by high out-of-pocket health expenditures.

 Indicators and targets were developed using the Universal Health Coverage Monitoring Framework
 developed jointly by the World Health Organization and the Bank (PAD, p. 11). Output, intermediate
 outcome, and outcome indicators were extensively documented and defined in the PAD (pp. 19-30). To the
 extent possible, progress was to be monitored using routine data sources, such as those available from the
 information systems and administrative records of the MoHSD, its subordinated agencies, the Ministry of
 Finance, and the National Bank. As necessary, amendments were to be introduced to periodic data
 collection instruments of the Statistics Committee under the Ministry of National Economy (for example,

                                                                                                 Page 15 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Social Health Insurance Project (P152625)



 national household surveys). Data on most indicators was to be reported on an annual basis,
 disaggregated where possible by gender and region. The ICR (p. 29) noted appropriately that the results
 framework would have benefited from additional indicators measuring improved access and efficiency.

 MoHSD was to monitor and evaluate the progress and outcomes of reforms supported by the project in the
 context of overall monitoring of the State Health Care Development Program 2016-2019. At the operational
 level, M&E responsibility lay with assigned staff of the PMU, who were to collect, analyze, and report M&E
 data to MoHSD and the Bank as part of quarterly and annual implementation progress reporting. The PMU
 had a "strong and competent team" with experience from the predecessor project (ICR, p. 27). Monitoring
 data were also to be reviewed by a higher-level Core Coordination Team charged with providing sectoral
 policy oversight, project stewardship, and working-level coordination with concerned government agencies
 and regional authorities.



b. M&E Implementation
  Data collection, reporting, and analysis was performed by the PMU, as planned, and reports were shared
  regularly with the Bank team. The results framework was modified to adjust baselines and targets at the
  2018 and 2021 restructurings, adjusting the definitions of some indicators and adding some new
  indicators to better measure progress. The ICR did not provide information on the functioning or oversight
  of the planned Core Coordination Team.



c. M&E Utilization
  The ICR (p. 29) reported that "M&E was a key project management tool to track the progress of the
  project and take necessary actions, as needed." Regular data collection and reporting informed the
  adjustment of project activities and the results framework at the 2018 and 2021 restructurings.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was rated Environmental Assessment category C. No safeguard policies were triggered. No
   project activities were expected to lead to generation of medical waste or disposal of medical equipment or
   radioactive materials.




b. Fiduciary Compliance



                                                                                                 Page 16 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Social Health Insurance Project (P152625)



   Project financial management (FM) was the responsibility of the Department of Economy and Finance of
   the MoHSD, supported by FM and disbursement consultants. The project relied on FM arrangements
   already in place for existing projects being implemented by the MoHSD. There was full compliance with the
   FM conditions of the loan agreement. Interim unaudited financial reports and annual audit reports were
   submitted in a timely manner and were found acceptable to the Bank. FM was rated Satisfactory in
   ISRs throughout the project period.

   Procurement activities were the responsibility of the PMU. At appraisal, the Bank team recommended
   strengthening of contract management and monitoring. The PMU established and used a basic contract
   management tool, and contract management plans were developed for ten high-value contracts. At
   closure, procurement performance was downgraded to Moderately Unsatisfactory, as several unresolved
   issues had accumulated, including legal cases on non-acceptance of several deliverables. Absence of
   decisions and/or delays in decision-making related to procurement problems led to a partial cancellation
   (US$34 million) of loan funds (see Section 5).




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None reported.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                  IEG
                                                                                Disagreements/Comment
                                                                                Modest achievement of the
                                                                                access objective, negligible
                                                                                achievement (based on
                                                                                regression from baseline) of the
                                Moderately          Moderately                  objective to reduce financial
Outcome
                                Satisfactory        Unsatisfactory              risks to the population from
                                                                                health expenditures, and modest
                                                                                project efficiency based on
                                                                                significant implementation
                                                                                inefficiencies.
                                                                                Project design did not
                                                                                include interventions specifically
                                                                                targeting segments of the
Bank Performance                Satisfactory        Moderately Satisfactory
                                                                                population disproportionately
                                                                                affected by high out-of-pocket
                                                                                payments.
Quality of M&E                  Substantial         Substantial


                                                                                                  Page 17 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Social Health Insurance Project (P152625)



Quality of ICR                  ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR (pp. 33-35) provided a large number of insightful observations, lessons, and
recommendations, including:

Bank support for the strengthening of key institutions can help shape government policy
decisions on health sector reform. In this case, project activities related to the MSHI were
instrumental for SHIF to build capacity and to manage funds, which informed the government's
decisions on reforming the purchasing of health services.

Projects focusing on sectoral reform, particularly if that reform is politically challenging, may
benefit from use of the Program for Results (PforR) instrument. In this case, a PforR may have
more efficiently incentivized the Ministry of Finance to push for health financing reforms.

In situations where fundamental change in policies and processes is being supported,
analysis and reports developed within the scope of a project will be useful and sustainable
only if they are accompanied by close implementation support and actionable tools. Without a
real-life perspective, deliverables can lose their relevance and importance over time.

IEG adds one additional lesson:

Interventions intended to protect people and households from catastrophic medical
expenses are most effective if they contain elements specifically targeted to groups most
likely to experience such expenses, and/or to the poor. In this case, broader reforms of health
care financing, in the absence of such targeting, did not produce results in protecting the most
vulnerable.




13. Assessment Recommended?

  Yes
  ASSESSMENT_TABLE
  Please Explain
  This project's experiences in navigating fundamental and politically sensitive health sector reforms through
  institutional and procurement challenges and the COVID-19 pandemic could produce important lessons on
  sustaining achieved gains in access, quality, and efficiency of health services, as well as protection of the poor
  from catastrophic health expenditures.



                                                                                                    Page 18 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Social Health Insurance Project (P152625)




14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR was clear, well written, and candid. Its lessons and recommendations were insightful. However, the
document was unnecessarily lengthy and repetitive. Its theory of change presentation (p. 7) did not separate
the results chains for the access, quality, and efficiency objectives. The efficacy discussion presented some
evidence related to individual polyclinics or other relatively narrow cases that was too specific or anecdotal to
assess broader achievement of project objectives. The "Efficiency" section stated that project documents did
not provide sufficient detail to assess the project's implementation efficiency, but there was a large amount of
information on implementation efficiency in the "Key Factors During Implementation" section. The "Lessons and
Recommendations" section included important information relevant to the assessment of project efficacy and
efficiency (but that was not noted in the efficacy or efficiency discussions). The Quality of the ICR is therefore
rated Substantial, but marginally so.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                    Page 19 of 19
