     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TZ-Dar es Salaam Metropolitan Project (P123134)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0023567

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P123134                                    TZ-Dar es Salaam Metropolitan Project

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Tanzania                                   Urban, Resilience and Land


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-55850,TF-19389                         31-Dec-2020                                         292,356,279.19

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 02-Mar-2015                                02-Jan-2023

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                          300,000,000.00                                      4,371,800.00

 Revised Commitment                           304,226,000.00                                      4,337,947.43

 Actual                                       292,356,279.19                                      4,335,866.96




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Ihsan Kaler Hurcan          Ebru Karamete                Avjeet Singh                   IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to both the International Development Association (IDA) Financing Agreement (p.4) dated March
   12, 2015, and the Project Appraisal Document (p.6) dated February 6, 2015, the project objective is “to
   improve urban services and institutional capacity in the Dar es Salaam Metropolitan Area, and to
   facilitate potential emergency response.”

   At the time of project preparation, there was no official definition of a metropolitan area for Dar es Salaam
   (PAD, Footnote 15, p.6). Therefore, the project defined the metropolitan area as the Dar es Salaam Region,

                                                                                                   Page 1 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TZ-Dar es Salaam Metropolitan Project (P123134)



   one of the 30 administrative regions in Tanzania. The region was headed by a Regional Commissioner. The
   City Council and the Mayor of Dar es Salaam administered the Dar es Salaam city, the capital of the region.
   The city consisted of three districts—Ilala, Kinondoni, and Temeke—each of which was governed by their own
   Municipal Councils. The Dar es Salaam City Council and the three Municipal Councils were collectively called
   Dar Local Authorities. However, the three municipal councils reported directly to the Prime Minister’s Office,
   Regional Administration and Local Government (PMO-RALG).

   The project constituted the first phase of a Series of Projects (SOP), a programmatic approach, which was
   determined to be the best means to support the government’s long-term urban development programs for Dar
   es Salaam. The objective of the SOP was “to improve the institutional and management capacity for
   metropolitan governance and service delivery; and create an enabling environment for economic development
   and job creation” (PAD, p12).



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project consisted of four components:

   A. Priority Infrastructure. (Appraisal cost: US$172.64 million; actual cost: US$156.73 million)

   This component consisted of three subcomponents.

   A.1. Priority roads supporting public transit, mobility, and connectivity to low-income communities.
   This subcomponent was to finance the construction and improvement of priority sections of local and feeder
   roads, totaling approximately 34 kilometers (km) in the urban core areas of the Dar es Salaam Metropolitan
   Area, and the provision of maintenance equipment. The road subprojects were selected from a long list of
   priority investments of the Dar es Salaam Local Authorities (DLAs).

   A.2. Flood control and storm water drainage. This subcomponent was to finance the improvement of
   31.5 km of primary and secondary drainage system around five river basins of the Dar es Salaam
   Metropolitan Area (i.e., Sinza, Msimbazi, Gerenzani Creek, Yombo, and Kizinga) and the provision of
   maintenance equipment. The activities to be financed under this subcomponent consisted of bank
   stabilization, lining, detention ponds, and connections to the secondary network.

   A.3. Contingency for Disaster Risk Response. The goal of this subcomponent was to enhance
   preparedness for disaster, emergency, and catastrophic events and provision of rapid response to such
   events. It was to support activities (such as assessments, technical assistance, works, and purchase of
   equipment) to address natural or manmade disasters, including public health crisis. Funds would have been
   allocated to this subcomponent if a disaster had occurred.




                                                                                                     Page 2 of 22
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  TZ-Dar es Salaam Metropolitan Project (P123134)



B. Upgrading in Low-Income Communities. (Appraisal cost: US$117.21 million; actual cost: US$104.91
million)

This component was to finance activities to upgrade approximately 40 low-income communities in three
municipal councils (i.e., Ilala, Kinondoni, and Temeke Municipal Councils) through the improvement of basic
services and strengthening the capacity of the selected communities in implementing upgrading works,
such as construction and rehabilitation of road and road-related infrastructure, environmental related works
(storm water drainage, sanitation, tertiary solid waste managements, and street lights), and community
related amenities (parks, markets, and bus stands).

C. Institutional Strengthening, Capacity Building, and Urban Analytics. (Appraisal cost: US$26.00
million; actual cost: US$20.76 million)

This component consisted of six subcomponents:

C.1. Improving Metropolitan Governance and Arrangement and Systems. This subcomponent included
project activities to develop and implement a Metropolitan Governance Action Plan, such as technical
analysis for an effective metropolitan governance and institutional structure, preparation of an action plan
for implementation, preparation of relevant legal framework, and provision of related technical and
operational support.

C.2. Improving Local Government Revenue Collection Systems and Mainstreaming Geographic
Information Systems. This subcomponent was to finance activities to launch and operationalize Local
Government Revenue Collection and Information Systems (LGRCIS) such as the migration of data to
LGRCIS, updating of the valuation roll improvement of billing and collections systems, provision of hardware
and software systems, and training.

C.3. Support for Integrated Transport and Land-use Planning. This subcomponent included activities to
maximize the benefits of the existing Bus Rapid Transit (BRT) systems such as integrated planning and
technical support, and development of priority nodes and a Corridor Development Strategy.

C.4. Strengthening Operations and Maintenance Systems. This subcomponent was to finance technical
assistance activities to strengthen the capacity of the government entities and DLAs in planning, delivering,
operating, and maintaining public infrastructure and services and the development of a Drainage Master
Plan and road maintenance system.

C.5. Urban Analytics. This subcomponent included activities to address long-term urban challenges and
improve the competitiveness of the cities through carrying out urban analytical work and technical
assistance such as feasibility studies and policy analysis on metropolitan sprawl and informality, land
management, climate change, development of economic opportunities, cultural heritage, and studies for the
preparation of future urban project investments.

C.6. Urban Planning Systems. This subcomponent was to finance technical activities to strengthen the
DLAs’ capacity in the development and implementation of core planning at the metropolitan and local levels.

D. Implementation Support and Monitoring and Evaluation. (Appraisal cost: US$14.40 million; actual
cost: US$14.24 million)



                                                                                                Page 3 of 22
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    TZ-Dar es Salaam Metropolitan Project (P123134)



  This component was to provide support in project implementation and supervision including procurement,
  accounting, financial management, safeguards, monitoring and evaluation, audit, meetings and workshops,
  and impact assessments.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost: The project cost was originally estimated at US$330.30 million. The project closed on
  January 2, 2023, with an actual cost of US$296.64 million. The difference in the estimated and actual
  project costs is mostly because of the US$25.30 million of resettlement costs estimated at appraisal but not
  reported in the ICR. The Government of Tanzania was to cover these resettlement costs (see Borrower’s
  Contribution below).

  Financing: At appraisal, the IDA credit amount was estimated at US$300.00 million. Additionally, the
  Nordic Development Fund Trust Fund (NDFTF) was to provide US$5.00 million for the financing of activities
  under Subcomponents C.3 and C.4. By the project closing in January 2023, the project had disbursed
  US$288.02 million of the IDA credit and US$4.28 million of the NDFTF funds. The undisbursed amounts
  were cancelled, and all project funds were accounted for at the time of project evaluation.

  Borrower’s contribution: At appraisal, the borrower’s contribution (to cover resettlement costs) was
  estimated at US$25.30 million, but the ICR does not report the actual borrower’s contribution at project
  closing. The project team commented that the borrower’s contribution was estimated at around US$35.0
  million at project closing, all of which was used for the payment of compensations to the project-affected
  people because of resettlement.

  Dates: The project was approved on March 2, 2015. The IDA Financing Agreement was signed on March
  12, 2015, and the project became effective on April 29, 2015. The Mid-Term Review was conducted three
  years later in March 2018. The original project closing date was December 31, 2020. The project closing
  date was extended by 24 months, and the project closed on January 2, 2023. The reasons for project
  closing date extensions are given in the project restructuring entries below.

  Restructurings: The project went through two level 2 restructurings, as described below.

  First Project Restructuring (April 2, 2020): Based on the findings and recommendations of the Mid-Term
  Review, the project was restructured to extend the project closing date by 18 months from December 31,
  2020, to June 30, 2022, to allow time for the completion of pending works. Progress in some project
  activities had been slow because of delays in processing compensations to the project-affected people and
  in relocating utilities identified in the project area, such as underground water pipelines. This was an
  expedited project restructuring to ensure the project closing date extension.

  Second Project Restructuring (April 25, 2022): The project was restructured to extend its closing date by
  about six months from June 30, 2022, to January 2, 2023. This time extension was required to allow time for
  the completion of the project activities that had been contracted but would not have been completed by the
  revised project closing date of June 30, 2022. Because of the time required for the preparation of the
  feasibility studies and detailed designs, the project implementing agency could not complete these activities
  for two urban pipeline projects for the Msimbazi Basin Development Project and the Tanzania Cities
  Transforming Infrastructure and Competitiveness Project. The contracts for these activities could not be



                                                                                                   Page 4 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TZ-Dar es Salaam Metropolitan Project (P123134)



   procured earlier because of delayed government request, and slow procurement process further contributed
   to the delays in implementing these activities.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The project objective was highly aligned with the World Bank’s strategy as defined in the Country
Partnership Framework for FY2018-22 (CPF) for Tanzania. The project sought to address the development
problems of unplanned rapid urbanization and insufficient urban service delivery (because of lack of
infrastructure and institutional capacity) in Dar es Salaam, which is the most important urban area in terms
of economic, industrial, and commercial activities in the country also serving the six landlocked neighboring
countries with its maritime port. These development problems fit under all three focus areas of the CPF.
The project objective supports the achievement of “Objective 1.5. To harness urbanization to promote
economic growth and job creation” under the Focus Area 1, Enhance Productivity and Accelerate Equitable
and Sustainable Growth. As the CPF (p.23) states, better planned, serviced, and functioning urban spaces
would contribute to a structural transition with more jobs in manufacturing and services. The project
contributes to this through the improvement of the urban services and increased institutional capacity in Dar
es Salaam. The project objective also supports the achievement of “Objective 2.5. To promote social
inclusion” under the Focus Area 2, Boost Human Capital and Social Inclusion. Improved urban services
under the project (such as roads that facilitate access to mass transit system, better drainage systems to
achieve sustained access to roads during flooding, sanitation, tertiary solid waste management, parks,
markets, and bus stands) would have been expected to facilitate the increased social inclusion of the low-
income population (constituting between 40 to 70 percent of the population in different areas of Dar es
Salaam) through easier and sustainable access to schools, health centers, markets, and other parts of the
city, and improved socioeconomic welfare. Lastly, the project objective supports the achievement of
“Objective 3.1. To strengthen public accountability and financial efficiency in delivering services” under the
Focus Area 3, Modernize and Improve the Efficiency of Public Institutions. The support for institutional
capacity strengthening to be given under the project to the DLAs in Dar es Salaam and continued reform in
decentralization and strengthening of own revenue resource (OSR) generation would have been expected
to improve the sustained delivery of urban services in Dar es Salaam metropolitan area.

The project objective was also highly relevant to the country priorities and strategies. Dar es Salaam is
the major urban center in the country, which drives economic, industrial, and commercial growth. However,
the interaction of factors contributing to agglomeration (i.e., clustering of firms and the overall size and
diversity of the urban economy) has been limited in the city (PAD, p.1). The population is expected to grow
to 10 million people by 2030 making Dar es Salaam a mega-metropolis. Yet, the city lacked a well-defined
urban master plan, and infrastructure has been lacking to provide modern urban services. Under its
Development Vision 2025 and Third Five-year National Development Plan (from 2021/22 to 2025/26), the
Government of Tanzania aims at promoting the country to middle-income industrialized country group. A
better planned urban development in Tanzania should contribute to the achievement of this objective.
Tanzania has been fast growing economically and investing in major infrastructure projects in energy and
transportation (high voltage transmission lines, connections with regional power pools, large hydropower
plants, and standard gauge electric train connecting Dar es Salaam to Dodoma and beyond to landlocked
neighboring countries) that should be expected to spur economic growth in major cities supported by


                                                                                                    Page 5 of 22
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                      Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      TZ-Dar es Salaam Metropolitan Project (P123134)



               sustained and improved urban delivery. Overall, the project objective was appropriately pitched for the
               development status and capacity in the country as described in the CPF.

               At the time of appraisal, the World Bank had already been a long-term development partner of
               Tanzania in urban development and development of policies for decentralization by devolution for a
               decade. To address the urbanization challenges in the country, the World Bank supported the Government
               of Tanzania and local governments through the Tanzania Strategic Cities Project, the Urban Local
               Government Strengthening Program, the Second Central Transport Corridor Project (construction of the
               first bus rapid transit in Dar es Salaam), and the Local Government Support Project. The project under this
               review was designed as the first phase of a Series of Projects (SOP) focusing on improving the city’s urban
               services and incrementally building institutional capacity with a long-term goal of establishing a metropolitan
               governance framework. This approach was adopted to address “the complex issues that require
               incremental and sustained interventions while also responding to immediate service provision and capacity
               building demands” (PAD, p.7). Therefore, while the project objective was broadly formulated and did not
               include specific urban services expected from the project’s intervention, the project objective was realistic
               and sufficiently challenging for the first phase of an SOP when assessed with respect to the World Bank’s
               country and sector experience in Tanzania.

               Overall, the relevance of objective is rated High.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To improve urban services in the Dar es Salaam Metropolitan Area.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change

                             The project was designed to improve urban services through three separate infrastructure development
                             channels (road infrastructure, drainage infrastructure, and upgrading of low-income neighborhoods) and
                             metropolitan governance through technical assistance for institutional capacity development. The outputs
                             expected from civil works were urban roads constructed or rehabilitated including footpaths, streetlights, and
                             roadside drains; major flooding and water drainage systems constructed or rehabilitated including storm water
                             drainage basins; and urban infrastructure constructed in low-income neighborhoods including markets, parks,
                             street lighting, bus stands, and sanitation. The expected outcomes were improved mobility because of
                             improved road conditions and connectivity (such as reduction in travel time and costs, better connection to
                             bus rapid transit system, and improved access to economic and social activities), reduction in waterborne
                             illnesses, protection of households and businesses, and increase in capital value of property due to the

                                                                                                                             Page 6 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   TZ-Dar es Salaam Metropolitan Project (P123134)



reduction of flooding risk because of the improved water drainage systems, and improvement of the
socioeconomic welfare of the low-income neighborhoods because of improved access to basic urban
services such as access to public transport, parks, markets, sanitation services, and health services, and
availability of streetlighting. The technical assistance activities were to lead to the development of various
plans, strategies, and studies such as Metropolitan Governance Action Plan, Corridor Development Strategy,
Drainage Master Plan, and urban analytics and planning studies. Technical assistance support was also to
lead to the improvement of local government revenue collection and information system (LGRICS). The
expected outcomes were strengthened municipal capacity in planning and delivering urban services, the
transformation to a metropolitan form of governance for Dar es Salaam and increased own source revenues
for DLAs. These infrastructure and technical assistance outcomes would have been expected to improve the
quality of life in the Dar es Salaam with a focus on the low-income neighborhoods setting the stage for
sustained urban development in the city because of increased institutional capacity, which would be
supported by the follow-on phases of the programmatic approach. Overall, the causal pathways from inputs to
outcomes were valid and direct, and the achievement of the outcomes could be attributed to the project’s
intervention. However, the project objective, although it was appropriate for the first phase of a long-term
programmatic approach, was broadly formulated and could have included the specific improved urban
services expected from the project’s intervention. Furthermore, the results framework had moderate
shortcomings in capturing the project’s outputs and outcomes, which were to be partially addressed by data
to be collected through beneficiary surveys.

Outputs

      Urban roads constructed and/or rehabilitated under the project. The target was to construct
       and/or rehabilitate 120 kilometers (km) of road. It was revised to 200 km at the time of the June 2021
       Implementation Status and Results Report (ISR) without a formal project restructuring. The
       achievement was 208 km. Cost savings allowed more roads to be constructed or rehabilitated under
       the project. The project financed the construction of 75 percent of these roads in informal settlement
       areas.
      Major drains constructed and/or rehabilitated under the project. This indicator measured the
       cumulative length of stand-alone drains constructed and/or rehabilitated under the project, excluding
       road-side drains that were captured under the first indicator above. The achievement was 75 km
       against the original target of 31 km and revised target of 40 at the time of the December 2022 ISR.
       (The target was revised without a formal project restructuring).
      Storm water detention basins constructed under the project. This indicator measured the number
       of innovative detention basins to be piloted under the project. The project constructed three detention
       basins against the target of four. The fourth detention basin planned in Ilala was cancelled because of
       unfeasible technical design and replaced by an alternative drainage solution resulting in the widening
       of the existing drain and increasing the length of its drainage outlet. The project financed the
       construction or widening of these water detention basins in low-income neighborhoods.
      The project’s intervention covered 152 low-income sub-wards compared to 40 targeted at appraisal.
       The project financed the construction of ten markets, six parks with children’s play equipment and
       sports facilities, four bus stands, ten water kiosks, six public toilets, fifty-three solid waste facilities, a
       health center, and nine pedestrian crossings in addition to the installation of 5,027 solar streetlights
       and plantation of 1,471 trees in these low-income sub-wards. The results framework did not include
       any indicator to capture the achievement of these outputs; hence there were no targets set at
       appraisal.


                                                                                                        Page 7 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   TZ-Dar es Salaam Metropolitan Project (P123134)



Outcomes

      Direct project beneficiaries, and percentage females. The target was 1.5 million direct project
       beneficiaries. The achievement was around 4.1 million benefiting from roads and drainage improved
       under the project and with access to the BRT Line 1 corridor. Fifty-one percent of the beneficiaries
       were female.
      People in urban areas are provided with access to all-season roads rehabilitated or
       constructed under the project. The target was 1.0 million people. The achievement was around 3.5
       million people (around 66 percent of the city population). This indicator shows the cumulative number
       of people in the urban area living within a ward through which a road rehabilitated or constructed
       under the project passes.
      Land area protected from a ten-year return period flood event as a result of project
       interventions. This indicator measures the cumulative land area protected from a ten-year return
       period flood event as a result of the drains constructed or rehabilitated under the project; hence, the
       land area protected has a lower flooding risk. The target was 290 hectares (ha) of land to be protected
       from flood events. The achievement was 406 ha.

The indicators in the results framework were insufficient to fully measure the project outputs and outcomes.
The results framework did not capture the outputs achieved in the low-income sub-wards nor the outcomes
expected from the project’s infrastructure investments in roads and water drainage. However, Prime
Minister’s Office – Regional Administration and Local Government (PMO-RALG) conducted a beneficiary
survey in 2022. According to the findings of the survey, the travel times and costs in the city decreased
because of improved road infrastructure; for example, the cost of a motorcycle taxi service from Mwenge to
Mwananyamala decreased by 40 percent. Similarly, beneficiaries reported that daily average commute times
in Dar es Salaam decreased by 50 percent (ICR, p.11) because of less traffic congestion. It was also reported
that absenteeism among teachers and students in low-income areas dropped significantly resulting in an
improvement in the quality of education. One of the findings of the beneficiary survey was related to the
occurrence of waterborne sicknesses, such as cholera. Before the project’s intervention, cholera was
common during rainy seasons when communities were flooded. However, after the project’s intervention, the
communities in the project area did not experience any flooding, hence, no cholera, because of improved rain
drainage.

According to the findings of the beneficiary survey in the low-income sub-wards, around 96.5 of the 70 key
informants randomly selected as part of the survey were satisfied with the improvement in urban services.
The project’s intervention in the low-income sub-wards resulted in the availability of fresh and affordable food
through the markets, provision of medical care in an underserved area through the health care center, less
solid waste on streets because of bins installed in these areas and community-led trash collection
initiatives. It is also reported that streetlights resulted in increased economic activity as street vendors and
small businesses could operate after sunset. According to the data from the Regional Commissioner’s Office,
the number of street vendors and small businesses in the three wards increased between 115 percent and
170 percent from 2015 to 2023, but the evidence is insufficient to fully attribute this achievement to the
project’s intervention (ICR, p.13).

Despite the weaknesses in the results framework in fully capturing the project outputs and outcomes, the
beneficiary survey conducted by PO-RALG in 2022 (a summary of which is given in Annex 7 of the ICR with
photographs in Annex 8) provides evidence to assess the project’s impact on communities because of
improved road and drainage infrastructure and urban services in low-income neighborhoods. Overall, the


                                                                                                   Page 8 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   TZ-Dar es Salaam Metropolitan Project (P123134)



project’s efficacy in achieving the project objective to improve urban services in the Dar es Salaam
Metropolitan Area is rated Substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To improve institutional capacity in the Dar es Salaam Metropolitan Area.

Rationale
Outputs

      Completion of the Local Government Revenue Collection and Information System (LGRCIS)
       operational plan for Dar es Salaam and for the system to be fully operational. A LGRCIS had
       already been developed and piloted under the World Bank-financed Tanzania Strategic Cities Project.
       The project redesigned and improved the LGRCIS by incorporating technological advances and
       changes in the business environment to the system. The new system is called TAUSI (peacock in
       Swahili), and 184 Local Government Authorities (LGAs) currently use the system
       (https://tausi.tamisemi.go.tz/) including the three-project beneficiary DLAs. LGAs use the system to
       send bills and collect taxes, except the billing and collection of solid waste fees, which is not activated,
       yet. The project provided training on TAUSI to 378 ministerial and municipal officials and implemented
       a public awareness campaign through social media about the link between paying local taxes and the
       provision of urban services. However, the ICR does not report whether the DLAs have sufficient
       staffing in place to operate the system with adequate facilities, supplies, and budget programmed for
       operation in each fiscal year, which was one of the two criteria to assess the full operation of the
       system as defined in the results framework. The other criterion, the three DLAs used the LGRCIS to
       send bills and collect taxes, was achieved.
      Completion and adoption of Corridor Development Strategy for the first line of the BRT. The
       project developed a Corridor Development Strategy (CDS), which supports an integrated approach to
       development along the Phase 1 of the BRT line incorporating the Transit Oriented Development
       (TOD) principles. As per the conditions given in the results framework for the achievement of this
       indicator, the Dar es Salaam City Council Management Team recognized the CDS in November 2018,
       and the Dar es Salaam Rapid Transit Agency (DART) included the CDS in its capital works plan.
      Completion and adoption of the Drainage Master Plan. The project developed the first city-wide
       drainage and sanitation master plan. As per the conditions given in the results framework for the
       achievement of this indicator, the Dar es Salaam City Council Management Team recognized the
       master plan in October 2018, and the master plan constitutes the basis for investments in flood control
       and drainage worth US$ 270.4 million and O&M plans throughout the metropolitan area.
      Completion, adoption, and implementation of an Action Plan for improving institutional
       structure for the Dar es Salaam Metropolitan Area. The project developed the Metropolitan
       Governance Action Plan (MGAP) in 2016, and the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Human Settlements
       adopted the MGAP in 2018 as a part of the Dar es Salaam City Master Plan (2016-2038). The MGAP
       proposed a higher-level metropolitan authority for Dar es Salaam to manage the metropolitan area

                                                                                                     Page 9 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   TZ-Dar es Salaam Metropolitan Project (P123134)



         through municipal, town, and district councils and included priority actions to be implemented and
         measurable targets to be achieved before project closing. However, the Action Plan could not be
         implemented because of shifting political context and new central government policies (ICR, p.13),
         and a metropolitan agency could not be established. To support metropolitan governance in the Dar
         es Salaam region, the project shifted its focus on regional solid waste management and the
         management of Msimbazi watershed and drainage (please see the entries below), in addition to land
         use and the BRT integration, which were covered in the entries above.

The results framework did not include indicators to capture the achievement of the following outputs that were
reported in the ICR:

      To diversify and increase own-resource revenue (see second outcome below), the project developed
         Five-Year Enhancement Strategies for the three DLAs. The DLAs currently implement these
         strategies.
        The project financed the preparation of the Inter-municipal Solid Waste Institutional Feasibility Study
         for Dar es Salaam in 2021. This study will inform the establishment of an inter-municipal solid waste
         management entity under the second phase of the SOP.
        After a flood in the Msimbazi floodplain during project implementation, which was identified as a risk to
         the sustainability of project outcomes and the overall quality of life in the city, the project developed
         the Msimbazi Opportunity Plan for the lower Msimbazi flood plain covering five municipal councils—
         Ilala, Kinondoni, Temeke, Kisarawe, and Ubungo. Additionally, the project developed the governance
         and legal arrangements for the Msimbazi Special Planning Area and a new executive agency under
         the PO-RALG responsible from the overall management of the special planning area and coordination
         among the municipal councils.
        The project developed the Urban Planning and Development Control Guiding Document and
         facilitated a policy dialogue, a public awareness campaign, and a training program on development
         control. The project also provided training to 323 government officials through the Urban Research
         Platform and a distance learning program.
        The project financed the development of a framework for O&M of stormwater drains and detention
         ponds, which defines the responsibilities of government entities, private sector, and communities in
         the O&M of the infrastructure and financing of these activities.
        The project financed the updating and institutionalization of the Road Asset Management and
         Planning Software (DROMAS), an existing computerized road database.

Outcomes

      Increase in own-source revenue over previous year. This indicator measured the average increase
         in own source revenues of the three DLAs—Ilemela, Temeke, and Kinondoni—collected over previous
         year. The target was a 100 percent increase from a baseline of 30 percent as a result of the
         implementation of LGRCIS established under the project. The achievement was 45.45 percent. The
         three DLAs reported that the TAUSI had significantly improved efficiency in revenue collection, and
         the cashless payment system reduced opportunities for corruption. Furthermore, the implementation
         of Five-Year Revenue Enhancement Strategies resulted in a significant increase in service levies,
         which are the dominant local tax in all three DLAs. However, numerous changes in the Local
         Government Finance Act adversely affected achievement of a 100 percent increase in the DLAs’ own-



                                                                                                   Page 10 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   TZ-Dar es Salaam Metropolitan Project (P123134)



       resource revenue, such as the recentralization of property taxes in July 2016, which was the largest
       source of local taxes.

One of the main outcomes expected from the project was the implementation of the Metropolitan Governance
Action Plan, which did not materialize because of changing government policies. The project was also
partially successful in increasing own-source revenues of the DLAs because of the government’s decision to
centralize some of the revenues that previously belonged to the DLAs, such as property tax, despite a
successful development of a new LGRCIS (see the entry above). Therefore, the project fell short of achieving
the above mentioned two major outcomes that would have improved the sustainability of urban services and
also created an enabling environment for a planned urban development in the Dar es Salaam region. Despite
these shortcomings, the project was successful in increasing institutional capacity and improving metropolitan
governance through the development of various action plans, master plans, and strategies, provision of
training to government and municipal officials, and implementation of public awareness campaigns. This
increased institutional capacity manifested itself in an improved collaboration among PO-RALG, the DLAs,
and the DART in the integration of land use with public transit planning (BRT lines), the construction of
drainage infrastructure based on a metropolitan plan, and the expected establishment of inter-municipal
entities for the management of the Msimbazi watershed and solid waste management. These entities now
reportedly have the core competencies for urban planning and development control and better integration of
transport and land use planning through Transit Oriented Development (TOD) principles. The development of
CDS assisted DART to incorporate TOD principles in its planning to increase ridership, maximize accessibility
to the BRT, and raise sufficient revenues to cover the O&M costs. The Drainage and Sanitation Development
Plan contributed to the development of the Dar es Salaam Water and Sewerage Authority’s investment
program by identifying key sanitation investments needed in the city. Despite a lower-than-expected increase
in the own-source revenues, the development of a well-functioning LGRICS (web and mobile phone based)
provides an efficient platform for the DLAs to collect their revenues and minimize opportunities for corruption.

While the project had moderate shortcomings in achieving some of its outcomes expected from its
institutional capacity development intervention, it, nevertheless, was substantially successful, being the Phase
1 of a programmatic approach, in achieving its two main goals: (a) building consensus and incremental policy
reform to support improved metropolitan management, and (b) developing the tools and skills to plan, finance,
deliver, and maintain urban services in a more sustainable manner. The outcomes achieved under the project
have already informed the interventions in the second phase of the SOP and are expected to further improve
the institutional capacity in urban development in Dar es Salaam with the establishment of a metropolitan
form of governance for the region to which the government shows renewed interest. Overall, the project’s
efficacy in achieving the project objective to improve institutional capacity (in metropolitan governance) in Dar
es Salaam Metropolitan Area is rated Substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
To facilitate potential emergency response.

Rationale

                                                                                                  Page 11 of 22
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                TZ-Dar es Salaam Metropolitan Project (P123134)



                            This review does not assess the achievement of this objective as the contingency emergency response was
                            not activated.



                            Rating
                            Not Rated/Not Applicable


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The project successfully completed the infrastructure investments to improve urban services in the Dar es
                            Salaam Metropolitan Area. However, the results framework did not fully capture the outcomes achieved as a
                            result of these investments. According to the findings of a beneficiary survey conducted by PO-RALG, the
                            project had a positive impact on decreasing travel time and cost and increasing mobility of beneficiaries
                            because of road improvements, prevention of flooding (and elimination of cholera caused by floods during
                            rainy seasons) because of drainage investments, increasing economic activity because of street lights and
                            availability of markets, and provision of health service because of the construction of a health center in the
                            city and low-income areas. Therefore, the project’s efficacy in achieving the first project objective to improve
                            urban services in Dar es Salaam Metropolitan Area is rated Substantial.

                            The project was not successful in establishing a metropolitan form of governance for Dar es Salaam because
                            of changing government policies and was partially successful in increasing DLAs’ own resource revenues as
                            a result of the government’s decision to centralize some taxes, such as the property tax. Despite these
                            shortcomings, as the first phase of a broad program, the project was substantially successful in building
                            consensus and achieving incremental policy reform to support improved metropolitan management and
                            developing the tools and skills to plan, finance, deliver, and maintain urban services in a more sustainable
                            manner in the Dar es Salam region through its technical assistance in capacity building. These achievements
                            successfully informed the capacity building interventions to be implemented in the second phase of the
                            programmatic approach. Therefore, the project’s efficacy in achieving the second project objective to improve
                            institutional capacity (in metropolitan governance) in Dar es Salaam Metropolitan Area is rated Substantial.

                            This review did not assess the project’s efficacy in achieving the third objective to facilitate potential
                            emergency response as the contingency emergency response was not activated during project
                            implementation.

                            Overall, the project’s efficacy in achieving the project objective to improve urban services and institutional
                            capacity in the Dar es Salaam Metropolitan Area and to facilitate potential emergency response is rated
                            Substantial.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial


                                                                                                                                  Page 12 of 22
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      TZ-Dar es Salaam Metropolitan Project (P123134)




5. Efficiency
Economic Analysis

A “with the project” and “without the project” economic analysis was conducted at appraisal. As the project’s
intervention was through three channels to improve urban services in Dar es Salaam, economic benefits were
expected to materialize separately from each intervention. Road improvements were to result in economic
benefits through savings in travel time, savings in vehicle operating costs (including lower gas consumption and
maintenance costs), and less traffic. The economic benefits expected from improved flood control and water
drainage system were as follows: decreased flood damage to properties and physical infrastructure, improved
health and quality of life, prevention of income loss, and generation of capital gains. Project’s intervention to
upgrade the infrastructure in low-income communities was expected to yield economic benefits through
improved flood resilience, health and sanitation, transportation access, and overall livability of these
neighborhoods. In the economic analysis, the costs were taken as investment costs and the cost of operation
and maintenance (one percent of the investment cost) excluding value added tax, price contingency, and
resettlement costs. The lifetime of investments was estimated as 20 years for roads, 25 years for flood control
and water drainage system, and 18 years for the infrastructure upgrading in low-income communities. The
economic analysis conducted at appraisal was detailed and adequately presented in the PAD (pp.65-75). The
assumptions were relevant for the economic analysis. The costs of these activities corresponded to 90 percent
of the total estimated project cost. The calculations resulted in a weighted economic internal rate of return
(EIRR) of 20.8 percent and a weighted net present value (NPV) of US$153.7 million at a discount rate of 12
percent—using the cost estimated for each intervention channel as weights.

At project closing, an economic analysis was conducted using the same methodology but because of data
unavailability, the benefits were restricted to those achieved as a result of the improvement of roads and flood
control and water drainage system. The benefits from infrastructure upgrading in low-income communities were
excluded. Therefore, the costs included in the analysis corresponded to 35 percent of the actual project cost.
The weighted EIRR at project completion was 32 percent and the weighted NPV was US$159.5 million. The
increase in the project EIRR was because of the increase in the EIRR calculated for the flood control and water
drainage activities, which was 29.0 percent at project completion against 15.1 percent at appraisal. The
sensitivity analysis showed that the project was still economically viable if the benefits decreased by 20 percent
and the costs increased by 20 percent. In this scenario, the EIRR and the NPV were calculated at 24 percent
and US$ 97.4, respectively.

Administrative and Operational Efficiency

The delays in procurement adversely affected project implementation as these led to a 24-month project closing
date extension. The low capacity at the DLAs, frequent staff turnover, and the impact of the COVID-19
pandemic were the reasons for procurement and project implementation delays. However, as the ICR (p.18)
notes, this 24-month project closing date extension resulted in more roads and drainage to be built under the
project. The lack of data about the location of utilities underground caused delays in utility diversion during road
works. The underestimation of the amount of land to be acquired and the delays in the availability of funds to
compensate project-affected people (PAPs) adversely affected operational efficiency of the project as these led
to implementation delays. However, the project had compensated around 99 percent of the PAPs by project
closing. There were no major issues related to the financial management of the project that could have had an
adverse impact on the project’s administrative and operational efficiency.



                                                                                                      Page 13 of 22
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      TZ-Dar es Salaam Metropolitan Project (P123134)



While there were some moderate shortcomings in the administrative and operational efficiency of the project
and the economic analysis conducted at project closing did not include benefits from the project’s intervention in
low-income communities, the project was substantially successful in converting resources and inputs to results
in an economic way, and the cost of achieving the project objective was reasonable as shown by the outcomes
and benefits achieved under the Phase 1 of a programmatic approach. Overall, the project’s efficiency in
achieving the project objective is rated Substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?              Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      90.00
 Appraisal                                                 20.80
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      35.00
 ICR Estimate                                              32.00
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The project objective was highly aligned with the World Bank strategy and the country context. It was directly
related to address the urban development problem in the Dar es Salaam region. The project objectives were
also appropriate for the first phase of a programmatic approach. Therefore, the relevance of project objectives is
rated High. The project successfully implemented the infrastructure investments that would improve urban
services in the city. While there were moderate shortcomings in capturing the outcomes expected from the
project’s intervention, the findings of the beneficiary survey show that the project had a positive impact on
improving the urban services in the city and the socioeconomic welfare of the project beneficiaries, especially
those in low-income communities. Therefore, the project’s efficacy in achieving the project objective to improve
urban services is rated Substantial. The project could not achieve the establishment of a metropolitan form of
governance for Dar es Salaam and was partially successful in increasing own source revenues of the DLAs.
However, the project was successful, through technical assistance, in building consensus and the
implementation of incremental policy reform to support improved metropolitan management and developing the
tools and skills to plan, finance, deliver, and maintain urban services in a more sustainable manner in the Dar es
Salam region. Therefore, the project’s efficacy in achieving the project objective to improve institutional capacity
(in metropolitan governance) in Dar es Salaam Metropolitan Area is rated Substantial. This review did not
assess the project’s efficacy in achieving the third objective to facilitate potential emergency response as the
contingency emergency response was not activated during project implementation. The economic analysis at
appraisal and project completion yielded significant economic rates of return, despite the limitation in the post-
project economic analysis because of unavailability of data related to the benefits achieved from the upgrading
of infrastructure in low-income communities. The project’s operational and administrative efficiency was


                                                                                                     Page 14 of 22
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      TZ-Dar es Salaam Metropolitan Project (P123134)



adversely affected by the delays in procurement, safeguards implementation, and civil works that led to a 24-
month project closing date extension. However, this extension provided sufficient time to complete and even
exceed the targets set for road and drainage improvement increasing the impact of the project to a larger
number of people in the city. Thus, the project’s efficiency in achieving the project objective is rated Substantial.
Overall, the project’s outcome is rated Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Political: The sustainability of the project’s development outcomes depends on the commitment of the
central government and the DLAs to the continuation of coordination on regional issues and the reform in
decentralization of municipal governance. This risk is moderate as the Government of Tanzania requested
the implementation of the second phase of the programmatic approach with a focus on the implementation of
the metropolitan action plan.

Financial: Insufficient funds to operate and maintain urban services developed under the project poses a
substantial risk to the sustainability of the development outcomes. The DLAs can generate their own source
revenues directly through the TAUSI system; however, the government’s decision to recentralize property tax
adversely affected the amount of own source revenue generated by the DLAs. As the metropolitan form of
governance reform progresses, it is expected that own source revenue generation by DLAs could be
sufficient to operate, maintain and further develop urban services.

Environmental: Climate change poses a high risk for the sustainability of development outcomes. Tanzania,
along with other Eastern African countries, is “highly exposed to pluvial and riverine flooding associated with
global warming” (ICR, p.26). Dar es Salaam is also exposed to inundation from sea level rise. Dar es Salaam
region needs continued investments in flood prevention.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  As the major city in terms of industrial and commercial activities and population in Tanzania, Dar es
  Salaam’s planned urban development has been of a strategic and high priority for the Government of
  Tanzania. The project was designed to support the government to achieve this objective benefiting from
  sustained policy dialogue on decentralization between the government and the international donors. The
  adoption of a programmatic approach was appropriate to achieve and sustain urban development
  outcomes and increase institutional capacity incrementally at every phase of the intervention. The project,
  as the first phase of this programmatic approach, was suitably designed to implement activities that
  would have immediate results and impact a larger part of the population in the city, specifically those in
  low-income neighborhoods. The project components included activities that were adequate to achieve
  the project outcomes of improved mobility in the city, decreased flooding risk, improved livelihoods in the

                                                                                                      Page 15 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TZ-Dar es Salaam Metropolitan Project (P123134)



  low-income neighborhoods, and increased institutional capacity in metropolitan governance; hence, the
  achievement of the project objectives. The programmatic approach and the design of the project were
  also appropriate given the institutional capacity in urban development and metropolitan governance in
  Dar es Salaam, so that without overwhelming the existing capacity it would help build institutional
  capacity gradually while improving the urban service infrastructure in the city. The technical aspects of
  the project were appropriate; the investments in road and drainage infrastructure were identified before
  project along with the investments in low-income neighborhoods. As designed, the project was expected
  to contribute to the reduction of poverty in the medium and long-terms while supporting social and
  economic development in the city.

  The project implementation readiness was high; project was ready to tender 30 percent of the works at
  project start because of advanced preparation of documents by consultants hired during appraisal.
  However, implementation arrangements were complex including various entities at different levels of
  governance because of the absence of a metropolitan form of governance. In addition, there was
  insufficient engagement with the utilities at the start that eventually resulted in implementation delays.
  The economic analysis was conducted in detail with realistic benefit and cost assumptions.

  Lessons learned from previous interventions were incorporated in the project design such as conducting
  consultations with local communities and their leaders about the project activities, long-term engagement
  to achieve institutional capacity development, integration of transport with land-use, and hiring of
  significant consultant resources to support project management.

  Most of the risks were adequately identified, and effective mitigation measures were in place, but the
  identification of the risk related to the availability of local funds for compensation payments to project-
  affected people was insufficient, which later led to significant delays in project implementation.

  The monitoring and evaluation (M&E) system had moderate shortcomings in adequately capturing the
  project outputs and outcomes making it difficult to test the links in the causal chain and assess the
  project’s achievements (see Section 9. M&E Design, Implementation and Utilization below). There were
  also moderate shortcomings in the safeguard aspects of the project at preparation that led to project
  implementation delays such as the underestimation of amount of land to be acquired for project
  implementation.

  While there were moderate shortcomings in the M&E system and safeguards aspects of the project, the
  World Bank’s overall performance in identifying, facilitating the preparation of, and appraising the project
  at entry is rated Satisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The World Bank’s project team held in-person missions twice a year until the onset of the COVID-19
 pandemic in March 2020, after which the project team held virtual supervision missions. The project had
 three task team leaders over the course of project implementation who, together with the majority of the
 other team members, were based in Dar es Salaam; the task team leaders’ transition arrangements were

                                                                                                      Page 16 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TZ-Dar es Salaam Metropolitan Project (P123134)



 reportedly adequate (ICR, p.21). The presence of the project team in Dar es Salaam allowed closer
 supervision of project activities through regular site visits and frequent contact with PO-RALG and DALs.
 The project team supported the project implementation units in procurement, financial management, and
 safeguards through training. The project team was proactive in changing the implementation direction of
 the project to maximize the impact of the capacity building activities when government interest in a
 metropolitan form of governance faded and to utilize credit savings to increase the amount of roads and
 drainage constructed or rehabilitated under the project. The project team’s focus on the development
 impact of the project and the continuity of development of urban services and institutional capacity under
 follow-on projects was noted as sufficient by the ICR. The ICR (p.21) reports that the aide-memoirs
 included adequate information about the project’s performance, monitoring, and actions to be taken, but
 the ISRs had shortcomings in reporting the project’s achievements in institutional capacity strengthening,
 and the targets of some indicators reported in the ISRs were revised without a formal project restructuring.
 The weaknesses in the M&E system in adequately capturing the project outcomes were not addressed
 although the project was restructured twice.

 While there were moderate shortcomings related to performance reporting in the ISRs and in addressing
 the weaknesses in the M&E system, the project team was sufficiently proactive in identifying and resolving
 threats to the achievement of the development outcomes and the World Bank’s fiduciary roles. Overall, the
 quality of supervision is rated Satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The project objectives were broadly defined but realistic and sufficiently challenging for the first phase of a
 programmatic approach. The project’s multichannel intervention to improve urban services and institutional
 capacity was adequately reflected in the theory of change. However, the project development objective
 level indicators were insufficient to capture the outcomes expected from the project’s intervention. On the
 other hand, the intermediate outcome indicators were measurable, achievable, relevant, and time-bound in
 capturing the main infrastructure investments built under the project, but they did not provide sufficient
 specificity. The indicators did not capture the project outputs in low-income neighborhoods. While some
 indicators monitored the achievement of technical assistance outputs as “Yes/No,” the detailed descriptions
 of these indicators with benchmarks defined for each step of achievement (for example, completion,
 adoption, and implementation of an action plan) in the results framework (PAD, pp.23-25) were very useful
 in sufficiently assessing their achievements. The project was also to finance surveys under the fourth
 component to assess the development impact of the project’s intervention. The M&E arrangements were in
 place but complex because of the involvement of multiple entities at the central and local government
 levels.


                                                                                                    Page 17 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TZ-Dar es Salaam Metropolitan Project (P123134)




b. M&E Implementation
  The staffing was sufficient for M&E implementation. The project coordination unit (PCU) hired a
  consultant to monitor and report on the project progress and achievement of the indicators. Each DLA
  had designated M&E focal persons and hired contract supervision consultants who were responsible for
  M&E data collection among others. The indicators in the results framework were adequately measured;
  the PCU prepared M&E reports on a quarterly basis, which were shared with the World Bank, but the
  ISRs did not always report the achievements related to institutional strengthening indicators (ICR, p.21).
  The weaknesses in the M&E design in adequately capturing the project outputs and outcomes were not
  corrected during implementation. This was partially addressed by a beneficiary survey conducted after
  project closing, the findings of which were useful in assessing the achievement of outcomes expected
  from the project’s intervention. Target values of some indicators were revised up through ISRs without a
  formal project restructuring. Despite some shortcomings in the M&E design, the DLAs and PCU’s overall
  attention to effective M&E implementation was sufficient.



c. M&E Utilization
  M&E findings led to resource allocation to increase the impact of the project’s intervention and were
  highly critical in informing the subsequent interventions, i.e., the Msimbazi Basin Development Project
  and the Tanzania Cities Transforming Infrastructure and Competitiveness Project (TACTIC), and the
  second phase of the programmatic approach with a focus on the metropolitan form of governance.

  While there were some moderate shortcomings in the results framework in adequately capturing the
  project outputs and outcomes, the M&E system as designed, implemented (including the beneficiary
  survey conducted after project completion) and utilized were sufficient to assess the achievement of the
  objectives and test the links in the results chain. Overall, the quality of M&E is rated Substantial.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   At appraisal, the project was classified as Category B under Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) and
   triggered Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) and Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) safeguard
   policies.

   Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01): The project was classified as Category B because of the
   potential site-specific and reversible negative environmental impacts. An Environmental and Social
   Management Framework (ESMF), an Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA), and an
   Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) were prepared and approved during project
   preparation. During project implementation, contractors prepared site-specific ESMPs. Although the

                                                                                                  Page 18 of 22
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    TZ-Dar es Salaam Metropolitan Project (P123134)



  contractors and the project implementation units in each DLA supervised the implementation of the ESMPs,
  there were shortcomings in the implementation of Operational Health and Safety measures in early stages
  of project implementation, as a result of which two fatalities occurred. These two incidents were reported,
  documented, and recorded according to the World Bank requirements. The ICR (p.24) notes that although
  there was a Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) in place for project beneficiaries (see below), there was
  no such mechanism for project workers at the level of contractors; the availability of a GRM for workers at
  the project sites could have assisted in resolving, documenting, and monitoring workers’ complaints.
  Nevertheless, overall, the project was in compliance with the implementation of this safeguard policy with
  moderate shortcomings.

  Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11): The project triggered this safeguard policy because of the
  potential presence of graves in the project area and the possibility of chance finds of physical cultural
  resources. The ESIAs did not find any direct impact of the project on sensitive physical cultural resources.
  There were no chance finds during civil works nor were household graves identified in the project sites. The
  project was in compliance with the requirements of the Physical Cultural Resources safeguard policy.

  Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12): The project triggered this safeguard policy because the project
  activities were expected to result in some involuntary resettlement, partially impacting businesses and
  residences. At appraisal, all subprojects for local roads, drainage, and infrastructure upgrading were
  screened for involuntary resettlement. The project prepared a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF), five
  Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) for the drainage packages that were advanced design stage (disclosed
  in Tanzania and on the World Bank’s InfoShop on December 16, 2014), and preliminary RAPs for the roads
  and upgrading works that were in the design phase. The preliminary RAPs were finalized after project start
  and disclosed in Tanzania and on the World Bank’s InfoShop. Extensive public consultations were held in
  the preparation of RPF and the RAPs. It was expected that 1,497 households would have partial impacts,
  and 535 households would require permanent relocation. Grievance Handling Committees were established
  for all subprojects at the sub-ward level to handle grievances. The delays in the availability of funds for
  compensation payments and the underestimation of land required for project activities adversely affected
  the implementation of this safeguard policy; hence, the project implementation was delayed as the
  contractors could not start work on time. Studies were conducted to minimize the number of project-affected
  people, and this led to design changes in some subprojects. The monitoring of the project-affected people
  had shortcomings because of lack of sufficient data on the socio-economic status of these people.
  However, compensations had been paid to project-affected people by project closing except 34 of them out
  of 5,234. Payments could not be made to the 34 people because of construction impacts and inheritance
  issues. By the time of project evaluation in May 2023, the number of people who were not compensated
  had decreased to four. The issues faced in the implementation of the Involuntary Resettlement Policy
  informed the design of the Msimbazi Basin Development Project and the second phase of the Dar es
  Salaam Metropolitan Development Project. Overall, the project was in compliance with the requirements of
  the Involuntary Resettlement safeguard policy with moderate shortcomings in timely payment of
  compensations to the project-affected people.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management



                                                                                                Page 19 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TZ-Dar es Salaam Metropolitan Project (P123134)



   The PO-RALG Project Coordination Unit (PCU) had overall responsibility for the project’s financial
   management. The PO-RALG and the DLAs had sufficient number of members of staff specializing in
   accounting. The project provided regular training in financial management to the accountants. The project’s
   interim financial reports were submitted according to schedule and were acceptable to the World Bank, but
   there were occasional late submissions. The opinions of the external auditors were unqualified. The Mid-
   term Review conducted in March 2018 identified some deficiencies in cash withdrawals and monitoring
   contract payments. The PCU addressed these deficiencies promptly. There were no known issues of
   corruption or misuse of funds associated with the project except one irregularity in procurement (see
   Procurement below). All project funds were accounted for at the time of project evaluation.

   Procurement

   Procurement was conducted in accordance with the World Bank procurement guidelines, except one
   procurement irregularity in the Temeke Municipality. The government took immediate action to remedy the
   irregularity through staffing changes and provision of additional training on procurement. The Anti-
   Corruption Bureau also investigated the irregularity. The project team stated that this irregularity had not
   adversely affected the project implementation. The PIUs in each DLA were responsible for procurement.
   The PIUs had insufficient capacity in procurement, and staff turnover was frequent. Although this led to
   delays in procurement, the project completed all procurement except five contracts related to the
   preparation of investment designs for the Msimbazi Basin Development and TACTIC projects (these
   contracts were transferred to TACTIC project for completion). The project provided support to the PIUs to
   improve their procurement capacity through procurement specialists hired under the project. The onset of
   the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020 impacted the implementation of some contracts as these contracts
   required international experts to travel to Tanzania and some goods to be shipped from abroad.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None.



d. Other
   None.



11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Satisfactory           Satisfactory

Bank Performance                Satisfactory           Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                  Substantial            Substantial

Quality of ICR                  ---                    Substantial

                                                                                                   Page 20 of 22
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       TZ-Dar es Salaam Metropolitan Project (P123134)




12. Lessons

This review has drawn three lessons based on the information in the ICR.

A Series of Project (SOP) approach can be effective in achieving urban development
outcomes by facilitating the sustained engagement of the central and local governments.
This project was the first of an SOP—a programmatic approach—to improve urban services and
increase metropolitan governance capacity incrementally in Dar es Salaam and Tanzania. While
achieving immediate results in infrastructure development in Dar es Salaam, the first phase
encountered obstacles in achieving the metropolitan governance reform because of the change in
central government’s preferences. However, the SOP approach was effective in creating an
environment for sustained engagement with the government and pursue reforms in politically
sensitive topics over a longer period. The success of the first phase led to a renewed government
interest in metropolitan governance reform, which will be implemented under the second phase of
the SOP.

High project implementation readiness because of advanced preparation of civil works at
appraisal can significantly increase the likelihood of successful delivery of project outputs
and expected outcomes. The project hired international consultants during appraisal for the design
and cost estimation of civil works and the assessment of environmental and social risks. These
consisted of “low-income area upgrading plans, detailed engineering designs, cost estimates and
draft bid documents for the drainage works, local road, and community-upgrading” (ICR, p.19). As a
result of these advance preparations, the project was ready to tender 30 percent of the civil works at
project start. This contributed to the successful completion of the civil works. However, insufficient
engagement with utilities adversely affected project implementation (see next paragraph).

The lack of data for underground utility infrastructure and insufficient engagement with the
utilities during project preparation can significantly jeopardize project implementation. As
discussed in the previous paragraph, the project was at an advanced implementation readiness
when project started; however, insufficient engagement with the utilities resulted in implementation
delays. Additionally, the data regarding the location of underground utility infrastructure was
insufficient. This resulted in project implementation delays until underground water pipelines were
located and diverted. These delays were one of the main reasons for project closing date extensions
in addition to the delays in the payment of compensations to project-affected people because of lack
of funds.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR




                                                                                                  Page 21 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TZ-Dar es Salaam Metropolitan Project (P123134)



The ICR is candid and provides a detailed overview of the project. It provides an accurate and substantiated set
of observations supported by evidence to the extent possible, given the weaknesses in the project’s results
framework. The report is focused on what occurred as a consequence of the project; “Annex 7. Borrower’s
Beneficiary Assessment – Summary” provides a robust evidence base to support the achievement of the
project’s outcomes reported. There is a logical linking and integration of the various parts of the report. The
report follows and adequately responds to the Bank's guidance both with regard to ratings and the performance
narrative, which is sufficiently evaluative. The theory of change of this complex project is well-articulated and
informs the reader how the ratings have been reached. Yet, although the entries in the “Lessons and
Recommendations” are based on specific experiences of the project, they are mostly in the form of findings
rather than lessons. The ICR would have been expected to provide additional lessons given that the project
was implemented through three different channels (i.e., road improvement, drainage improvement, and
upgrading of low-income neighborhoods) and that the experience gained in this project informed the design of
follow-on projects. Overall, the quality of the ICR is rated Substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                   Page 22 of 22
