     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Cambodia DPF (P176756)



                                                                                Report Number: ICRR0023570

1. Operation Information



 Operation ID                              Operation Name
 P176756                                   Cambodia DPF

 Country                                   Practice Area (Lead)
 Cambodia                                  Macroeconomics, Trade and Investment



 Non-Programmatic DPF

 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)                  Total Financing (USD)
 IDA-69500                                 31-May-2022                                        182,822,400.00

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 24-Jun-2021                               31-May-2022

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                              Co-financing (USD)

 Original Commitment                          200,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                           200,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Actual                                       182,822,400.00                                              0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                 ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Miria A. Pigato            Judyth L. Twigg             Jennifer L. Keller              IEGEC




2. Program Objectives and Pillars/Policy Areas
DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives

The Cambodia Relief, Recovery, and Resilience Development Policy Financing (DPF) operation was a single-
tranche standalone credit designed “to support the Royal Government of Cambodia to effectively deal with the
COVID-19 crisis and its aftermath” (Program Document, PD, page 2). The effective Program Development
Objectives (PDOs) were to:


                                                                                                 Page 1 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Cambodia DPF (P176756)



      (i) continue to provide timely and targeted relief to the affected population;
      (ii) facilitate robust recovery through structural reforms; and
      (iii) build resilience against future economic shocks.


b. Pillars/Policy Areas
The PD and Implementation Completion and Results (ICR) Report structured the program around three
pillars.

      Pillar 1: Continuing to provide timely and targeted relief to the affected population;
      Pillar 2: Facilitating robust recovery through structural reforms; and
      Pillar 3: Building resilience against future economic shocks.


c. Comments on Program Cost, Financing and Dates

The IDA credit of US$200,000,000 (165,600,000 Euros) was a single-tranche operation based on eight prior
actions. Approved on June 24, 2021, it became effective on October 1, 2021, and closed on May 31, 2022.
Withdrawal took place in the spring of 2022, in Euros. In dollars, the equivalent value was $182,000,000.
Differences in exchange rates are the sole cause of the difference with the initial value of $200,000,000.


3. Relevance of Design

a. Relevance of Objectives

 Relevance to country context

 Cambodia was significantly affected by the COVID-19 global pandemic. The first COVID-19 cases were
 reported at the end of January 2020. The Royal Government of Cambodia (RGC) acted swiftly to prevent the
 spread of the virus, by closing schools, factories, and public gatherings. Despite these measures to contain the
 virus, the economy suffered from a decline in international travel and tourism, supply bottlenecks for imports,
 and a collapse in external demand for its most important exports, garments, and footwear. Thousands of
 workers were laid off, while approximately 100,000 Cambodian migrant workers were forced to return home
 from neighboring countries. A reduction in the economic growth rate from 7.1 percent in 2019 to - 3.1 percent
 in 2020 was accompanied by Cambodia's first recession in 25 years.

 The crisis highlighted the vulnerability of Cambodia’s growth model. The low competitiveness of
 Cambodian firms made it difficult for them to diversify outside the textile and footwear industries. Risks
 associated with high private debt, particularly in the construction and real estate industries, were on the rise.
 The weak social security system left most households exposed to economic shocks, which threatened to
 reverse progress in reducing poverty. Additionally, large external imbalances, 9.7% of GDP in 2019, and the
 widespread dollarization of the economy (ICR, p. 7) further undermined the ability of monetary authorities to
 respond to shocks and heightened economic risks.



                                                                                                       Page 2 of 19
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Cambodia DPF (P176756)



A combination of higher spending and lower tax revenues resulted in a fiscal deficit of 2.7 of GDP in
2020. While the government managed to reduce capital and non-essential expenditures, fiscal space
remained tight as a result of lower tax revenues, tax relief measures, and reduced economic activity; in
addition, spending for the COVID-19 relief program increased. Further limiting fiscal space was the financial
assistance provided by the government to the population affected by the devastating floods of 2020.

The situation deteriorated in February 2021, when Cambodia experienced its largest outbreak of the
COVID-19 virus. Infections spread quickly; by mid-April, Cambodia had confirmed over 136,000 cases and
more than 3,000 deaths. Meanwhile, the economy was impacted by the European Union’s withdrawal of the
tariff preferences granted under its Everything But Arms (EBA) trade scheme due to alleged violations of the
human rights principles enshrined in the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. In response to the
new outbreak, the RGC reintroduced severe virus control measures and a vaccination program, intensified the
delivery of the relief actions initiated in 2020, and requested assistance from the World Bank – as well as from
other donors -- for a budget support operation.

Relevance of Objectives

Objective 1 - to provide timely and targeted relief to the affected population - was relevant to addressing the
effects of the pandemic, particularly given the uncertainty on the length of the crisis at the time of appraisal.

Objective 2 - facilitating a robust recovery through structural reforms -- and Objective 3 -- building resilience in
the face of future economic shocks – were aligned with the government’s economic recovery program and
supported by a substantial body of analytical work. Nevertheless, they were set at a level too high for
meaningful accountability and were too broad and ambitious to be achieved within the timeframe of a stand-
alone operation dealing with the effects of a crisis. As recommended by the Independent Evaluation Group
(IEG) in a report assessing the World Bank Group's response to the global financial crisis of 2008–2009, “to
design and implement a meaningful program of policy reforms requires time, and the DPFs prepared during
the crisis could at best support reforms already underway." [1]

Relevance of financial assistance

World Bank assistance in the form of a quick-disbursing operation was relevant to "support the Royal
Government of Cambodia to effectively deal with the COVID-19 crisis and its aftermath" because the funding
from the operation was needed (i) to close a sizeable fiscal gap and prevent further fiscal deterioration and (ii)
to maintain fiscal sustainability, an important outcome in a dollarized economy where fiscal policy is the key
instrument to respond to shocks.

Relevance to CPF and Country Development Strategy

The WBG Country Partnership Framework (CPF) 2019–23 did not envisage any development policy
financing. In line with the objectives of the COVID-19 crisis response, Bank management decided to proceed
with the DPF because of the need to address the economic and social impacts of the crisis in Cambodia [2].
The objectives of the operation were consistent with the CPF's themes of boosting private sector development,
fostering human development, and improving institutions.

The design of the reforms supported by the operation was informed by the RGC’s emergency
response program and Post‐COVID‐19 Economic Recovery Plan, as well as WBG’s extensive technical
assistance and analytical work in these reform areas. Specifically, it was aligned with the following focus areas


                                                                                                       Page 3 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Cambodia DPF (P176756)



included in the government’s Rectangular Strategy Phase IV and in the NSDP 2019–23 [3]: (i) promoting state
efficiency and boosting private sector development, and (ii) fostering human development.

Finally, the DPF was part of a joint response package by several development partners (World Bank,
Asian Development Bank, European Union, Japan International Cooperation Agency) aimed at supporting the
RGC in its relief efforts and rising fiscal needs. As a result of the financial support received from development
partners, the ratio of government debt to GDP increased to 37.2%. Despite this expansion, the Debt
Sustainability Analysis (DSA) indicated that the country was not at risk of debt distress (PD, p. 18), partly
because Cambodia had long avoided non‐concessional external borrowings and domestic bank financing.

[Note 1] See IEG (Independent Evaluation Group). 2012. The World Bank Group’s Response to the Global
Economic Crisis—Phase II. Washington, DC: Independent Evaluation Group, the World Bank Group.

[Note 2] The "Bank Group COVID-19 Crisis Response" aims at helping countries to address the health threat
and the social and economic impact of the COVID-19 crisis. It is organized around three stages (relief,
restructuring, and resilient recovery).

[Note 3] Cambodia’s policy development framework is defined in the "Rectangular Strategy for Growth,
Empowerment, Equality and Efficiency." This is represented as an "integrated structure of interlocking
rectangles" at the core of which is good governance, supported by (i) enhancement of agricultural
development, (ii) development of the private sector and job creation, (iii) rehabilitation and reconstruction of
physical infrastructure, and (iv) capacity building and human resources.


b. Relevance of Prior Actions

Rationale

The operation contained eight prior actions (PAs) divided into three clusters. A “Theory of Change”
summarizing the underlying diagnostic and rationale for each PA (drawing on the PD) was included in the ICR
(Diagram 1).

Table 1: Prior Actions (PAs)

 PA1: To strengthen social protection for the poor and economically vulnerable, the Recipient has: (i)
 extended the COVID-19 Cash Transfer Program for IDPoor Households including the new poor up to
 June 2021; and (ii) appointed the Ministry of Social Affairs, Veterans and Youth Rehabilitation as the
 implementing agency for the Cash Transfer Program for Pregnant Women and Children Under Two and
 finalized guidelines for monitoring and evaluating said Program.
 PA2: To strengthen employment‐based social insurance, the Recipient has enacted the Non-Bank
 Financial Authority Law that mandates supervisory authority over the National Social Security Fund.
 PA3: To enhance access to finance for small and medium enterprises (SMEs), the Recipient has
 launched the new Business Recovery Guarantee Scheme and the risk‐sharing facility for SME credit as
 part of the COVID‐19 response.
 PA4: To reduce non‐tariff barriers and lower trade costs, the Recipient has reduced the number of tariff
 lines requiring trade permits and updated the list of prohibited and restricted goods.



                                                                                                      Page 4 of 19
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Cambodia DPF (P176756)



PA5: To reduce the cost of doing business, the Recipient has launched an online portal for business
registration with streamlined procedures and reduced registration fees.
PA6: To strengthen public finance management practices and increase transparency, the Recipient has
published in the Royal Gazette: (i) the Law on Government Securities; and (ii) the Public Investment
Management Sub‐decree, which creates a common framework for a public investment management
system across all sources of financing and at all levels of government.
PA7: To modernize the legal framework for anti‐money laundering and combatting the financing of
terrorism, the Recipient has enacted the Law on Anti‐Money Laundering and Combating the Financing
of Terrorism and issued a Directive on Customer Due Diligence Measures (AML/LFT).
PA 8: To improve the efficiency of revenue collection, the Recipient has launched a centralized and
online system for value-added tax and corporate income tax filing



PDO 1: Continuing to provide timely and targeted relief to the affected population.

Prior to the COVID-19 crisis, Cambodia lacked a meaningful social security program, did not offer employment-
based social insurance, and had inadequate access to finance for small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs).
Many of the reforms supported by the DPO were long overdue, and the COVID-19 pandemic provided an
excellent opportunity to pursue them. When the COVID crisis was at its peak, high-frequency World Bank
surveys showed that poor and vulnerable households were highly impacted by the crisis and that SMEs was
under threat (PD, pp. 22-23). The three prior actions under Pillar 1 were relevant because they directly
addressed the constraints to the well-being of poor and vulnerable households and of SMEs affected by the
crisis. These prior actions made a substantive contribution to achieving the objective. They also established the
basis for a long-term social security system in a country where spending on social assistance was among the
lowest in the world, covering less than 2 percent of the poorest quintile of the population.

PA1. In response to the crisis, the Cambodian Government developed the COVID-19 Relief Program for poor
and vulnerable households. This program used the existing "IDPoor" identification system and built upon the
infrastructure of the nationwide Cash Transfer Program for Pregnant Women and Infants Under Two. PA1 was
relevant because it supported the expansion of this program to those who had become poor as a result of the
COVID crisis, thus contributing directly to the achievement of the PDO. Additionally, it ensured greater
accountability by establishing the Ministry of Social Affairs, Veterans and Youth Rehabilitation as the
implementing agency for the Cash Transfer Program for Pregnant Women and Children Under Two and by
finalizing guidelines for monitoring and evaluating the program. This PA was based on World Bank and country-
specific analytics and recommendations. For example, it followed up on the suggestions of (i) the 2017
Cambodia Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD), which recommended that cash transfer programs be scaled
up in order to provide a more effective safety net for poor families; and (ii) the 2018 World Bank Policy Note on
Social Assistance, which recognized the urgent need to reform Cambodia’s social assistance
programs. Overall, the PA made a major contribution to the achievement of the PDO. Rating: Highly
Satisfactory.

PA2. PA2 aimed to strengthen the employment‐based social insurance system for private-sector workers.
While the principle of expanding pension coverage to private sector employees was already embedded in the
2019 Social Security Law, the responsible entity, the National Social Security Fund (NSSF), had not
implemented it. The enactment of the Nonbank Financial Authority (NBFA) Law, backed by PA2, changed the
rules of the game by giving the NBFA the authority to oversee all nonbank financial services, including the
NSSF. This ensured that common standards in the areas of governance, reporting, and investment policy were

                                                                                                   Page 5 of 19
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Cambodia DPF (P176756)



also applied to the new pension fund that was established within the NSSF in 2022 (PD, p. 25). PA2 was
consistent with the approach set forth in the 2017 SCD, which noted the fragmentary nature of existing social
assistance programs and recommended the development of an integrated social protection framework. PA2
represented a necessary, though partial step forward in strengthening the employment-based social insurance
system for private-sector workers. Rating: Moderately Satisfactory.

PA3. According to World Bank surveys, 45 percent of companies listed access to loans as one of their top
three priorities for dealing with COVID-19 (PD, p. 26). The lack of credit at affordable rates was particularly
acute for SMEs. PA3 aimed to improve access to finance for SMEs impacted by the COVID‐19 pandemic by
supporting the launch of a Business Recovery Guarantee Scheme (BRGS) and of a risk‐sharing facility for SME
credit. Technical support for establishing these instruments was provided by the World Bank Financial Sector
Development Technical Assistance Program. The BRSG provided the collateral for 70 to 80 percent of the
individual loan amount borrowed by SMEs, thus helping them to survive and recover from the economic crisis.
The scheme also applied a favorable credit guarantee fee for working capital and investment or business
expansion loans. The risk‐sharing facility provided credits at subsidized interest rates to SMEs. It is unlikely that
many SMEs would have survived without these facilities. PA3 was relevant as it addressed some key
constraints that prevented SMEs from weathering the crisis effectively. There was an explicit and credible chain
of results that linked PA3 to the achievement of the PDO. Rating: Satisfactory.

PDO 2: Facilitating robust recovery through structural reforms.

Objective 2 included measures to reduce trade and business costs. They were based on an large amount of
analytical work, including the 2017 Cambodia SCD, the 2018 Doing Business Memorandum, the 2019
Investment Climate Assessment, the Cambodian compendium for the 2020 World Development Report, and
the Cambodia Country Economic Memorandum for 2021. Trade and business facilitation measures represented
positive steps to lower trade and business costs, but they were not structural reforms and therefore were
not designed to overcome the biggest obstacles to growth. The measures supported by PA4 and PA5
contributed moderately toward achievement of objective 2, as they left unaddressed the most fundamental
constraints to a robust recovery.

PA4. At the time of appraisal, many products still required import and export permits that were administered by
multiple ministries or agencies, creating a significant bottleneck for traders. PA4 aimed to lower both the
number of tariff lines requiring a permit and the number of prohibited and restricted goods, thus reducing the
costs associated with cross-border trade. Lower trade costs may boost the country's competitiveness, but they
would need to be accompanied by other reforms, including improving skills and the business climate and
investing in infrastructure. PA4 focused on a relatively minor step to achieve the development objective.
Rating: Moderately Satisfactory.

PA5. Cambodia has consistently ranked low on ease of doing business rankings, despite adopting regulatory
reforms intended to enhance competitiveness since 2004. For example, according to the Doing Business
survey, registering a business still took 99 days and nine procedures in 2020. PA5 supported the launch of an
online business registration system allowing investors to register both their businesses and taxes on the same
platform. This measure was expected to reduce the amount of red tape and the time and cost of starting up a
company, from three months to eight days. Launching an online registration system was one of the
recommendations included in the 2018 Doing Business Memorandum and in the 2019 Investment Climate
Assessment. PA5 addressed some constraints associated with the achievement of the objective, but the link
with the PDO - facilitating a robust recovery - was indirect. The evidence about firms leaving their informal state
and becoming more productive by registering online is controversial. Formalization brings taxes and higher


                                                                                                      Page 6 of 19
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Cambodia DPF (P176756)



regulatory burdens. Productivity cannot increase if enterprises – particularly those operating in poor areas –
continue to be subject to power outages, lack of local government services, and poor infrastructure, whether
they are registered online or not. Rating: Moderately Unsatisfactory

PDO 3: Building resilience against future economic shocks.

Objective 3 was to increase resilience to economic shocks* through three prior actions aimed at (i) improving
public finance management practices and increasing transparency; (ii) modernizing the legal framework for
combating money laundering and terrorism financing; and (iii) improving revenue collection. The formulation of
these prior actions benefitted from the analysis and recommendations included in the Cambodia Public
Expenditure Review (PER), and in the 2017 Mutual Evaluation Report of the Asia Pacific Group on Money
Laundering. Overall, the three prior actions did contribute directly to their specific objective, but the link with the
PDO was sometimes weak, partly because the concept of "resilience against future economy shocks" was not
clearly defined in the program document.

PA6 supported key elements of Cambodia's Public Investment Management System Reform Strategy 2019-
2025. Specifically, it supported the implementation of regulations to manage public investments and domestic
government bond issuance. Sub-decree 41 established the rules of a common framework for a public
investment management system across sources of financing and at all levels of government (PD, p. 30). This
measure enabled the government to fund public investment projects domestically rather than from external
sources. Moreover, the publication of the Government Securities Law, also supported by PA6, provided a legal
regulatory framework for issuing, trading, and managing government securities in a transparent, accountable,
and effective way. Together, these pieces of legislation were relevant to improve public financial management
and increase transparency. Rating: Moderately Satisfactory.

PA7: In 2019, Cambodia was placed on the grey list of the Financial Action Task Force (FATF), a global
watchdog that promotes common standards to mitigate money laundering and terrorism financing risks. Being
grey-listed indicates that the country's ability and efforts to combat money laundering, terrorist financing, and
proliferation financing are below international standards. During 2021-23, Cambodia made significant progress
toward improving its Anti-Money Laundering/Combating the Financing of Terrorism (AML/CFT) regime. Most
important was the passage of a revised Law on AML/CFT and the implementation of a directive on Customer
Due Diligence (CDD), both supported by PA7. As a result of these and other measures, Cambodia was
removed from the grey list of the FATF in February 2023. To comply with the revised law and Directive (PD, p.
32), financial and non-financial institutions were asked to revise their internal AML/CFT policies and procedures
and to introduce CDD measures. PA7 was based on credible analytics at the national and international levels.
The modernization of the legal framework for AML/CFT contributed to increasing the financial sector's resilience
to money laundering and terrorism financing risks. Rating: Satisfactory.

PA8: Improvements in the efficiency of revenue collection were an important objective of Cambodia's revenue
mobilization strategy for 2019-2023. The time spent to comply with filing and paying taxes, which took up to 173
hours, increased compliance costs and was a constraint to business development (PD, p. 32). PA8 aimed to
improve revenue collection efficiency by supporting the launch of a centralized and online system for value-
added tax and corporate income tax filing. Reducing compliance costs was one – though arguably not the most
relevant – among the recommendations suggested by the International Monetary Fund to improve the efficiency
of revenue collection: reducing exemptions; simplifying taxes, procedures, and structures; limiting tax holidays;
and curbing corruption related to tax evasion (IMF, Article IV, 2022 [1]). PA8 made only a modest contribution to
the achievement of the relevant PDO. Rating: Moderately Satisfactory.



                                                                                                        Page 7 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Cambodia DPF (P176756)



 Overall Prior Actions Relevance ratings

 The overall relevance is Satisfactory, with one action rated highly satisfactory, two actions rated satisfactory,
 four actions rated moderately satisfactory and one action rated moderately unsatisfactory.

 * While the program document does not clearly define the concept of "resilience," the RGC’s Strategic
 Framework and Programs for Economic Recovery in the Context of Living with COVID-19 in a New Normal
 2021-2023 (ERP 2021-23) defines economic resilience as diversification and enhanced competitiveness,
 capable to sustain different risks. It includes the idea of a fiscal system with efficient revenue collection and
 targeted expenditures, and a financial system with proper risk management, able to resist any negative
 consequences.

 [Note 1] IMF (2022) Cambodia, Article IV, Volume 2022: Issue 371, https://doi.org/10.5089/9798400228520.002



Rating

Satisfactory


4. Relevance of Results Indicators

Rationale

The DPF used nine results indicators (RIs) to track the impact of eight PAs in making progress toward the
objectives. Most RIs were relevant to the proposed actions and easily measurable, although some of them
were insufficient to capture the achievement of the results of those actions. RI5 and RI6 were no longer
available at the operation's closure due to the discontinuation of the Doing Business Report, and
alternative indicators had to be identified. The 2019 baseline was zero for many RIs, and data were
generally available. Table 1 shows the nine RIs, their relevance rating, baseline values, target values, and
achievement ratings (ICR, Table 2, pp. 10-12).

Table 1: Results indicators (RIs) by objective and PAs; baseline and target values; status and
achievement

                                                                                Actual
                                                                   Actual                         RI
 Results        Associated              Baseline:    Target date:               as % of
                           RI Relevance                            value at the                   Achievement
 indicator (RI) PAs                     2019         June 2022                  targeted
                                                                   target date                    rating
                                                                                change
 PDO 1: Continuing to provide timely and targeted relief to the affected population
 RI 1: Number
 of IDPoor
                                                                   690,000
 beneficiary
                                       0 beneficiary 688,841
 households PA1          Satisfactory                                           99.8%             High
                                       households households beneficiary
 having
                                                                   households
 received
 COVID‐19

                                                                                                         Page 8 of 19
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Cambodia DPF (P176756)



cash
transfers.
RI 2: Number
of eligible
beneficiaries                                                        273,590,
                                                     360,000
(poor                                                                with
                                                     beneficiaries
pregnant                                                             pregnant
                                                     (140,000
women and                                                            women
                                       58,324        poor
children under PA1       Satisfactory                                (170,135)    76%      Modest
                                       beneficiaries pregnant
two) having                                                          and children
                                                     women and
received                                                             (103,455,
                                                     220,000
maternal and                                                         well below
                                                     children)
child health                                                         the target).
cash
transfers.
RI 3: Number
of National
Social
Security Fund
reports
submitted to
the social                                                                         Over
security                 Moderately                                                100% of
               PA2                     Zero          1               2                      High
regulator, an            Satisfactory                                              targeted
arm of the                                                                         change
Non‐Bank
Financial
Authority, in
compliance
with reporting
requirements.
RI 4: Number
of beneficiary
                                                                     1,054
businesses                                                                         Over
                                       Zero          500             beneficiary
supported by                                                                       100% of
               PA 3      Satisfactory beneficiary beneficiary        businesses             High
the SMEBC                                                                          targeted
                                       businesses businesses         by March
risk‐sharing                                                                       change
                                                                     2022
facility for
SME Credit.
PDO 2: Facilitating robust recovery through structural reforms
RI 5: Cost to PA4        Moderately    US$84         US$76.1         US$75.6       99% of Substantial
import                   Satisfactory                                              targeted
(documentary                                                                       change
and border
compliance)




                                                                                                   Page 9 of 19
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Cambodia DPF (P176756)



Alternative
indicator:
Average
import fee per
declaration
RI 6:
Business
                                                                            Over
registration                                                                                 High
                        Moderately                             38.6 percent 100% of
fees as a      PA5                     53.4 percent 40 percent
                        Satisfactory                           in 2022      targeted
percentage of
                                                                            change
income per
capita.
PDO 3: Strengthen public finance management practices and increase transparency
                                                               Public Debt
                                                               Statistical
                                                               Bulletin
RI 7:                                                          Volume 14 – Over
Publication of                                                 Data as of 100% of
               PA6      Unsatisfactory Biannual     Quarterly
public debt                                                    End-Q1       targeted
                                                                                             [High]
statistics                                                     2022 was     change
                                                               published on
                                                               May 25,
                                                               2022
RI 8: Number                                                   45
of banks                                                       commercial
applying                                                       and          Over
simplified              Moderately                             specialized 100% of
               PA7                     Zero banks 43 banks
CDD                     Unsatisfactory                         banks, of    targeted
                                                                                             [High]
[4] measures                                                   which 43     change
for low‐risk                                                   commercial
clients                                                        banks
RI 9: Number                                                                Over
                                                               39,687
of businesses           Moderately     Zero         30,000                  100% of
               PA8                                                                           High
that file tax           Satisfactory businesses businesses                  targeted
                                                               businesses
online                                                                      change

Note: RI achievement ratings note achievement of the targeted change for the RI. Ri achievement ratings
in brackets reflect ratings that may have been adjusted based on weak relevance of the results indicator
(discussed in efficacy section).

PDO 1: Continuing to provide timely and targeted relief to the affected population

RI 1: This indicator was to measure the progress made in the number of eligible IDPoor households
receiving cash transfers from the COVID-19 program, a product of reforms supported by PA1. RI 1 was
clearly defined, measurable, and explicitly related to the objective of continuing to provide timely and
targeted relief to the affected population. Rating: Satisfactory.



                                                                                                 Page 10 of 19
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Cambodia DPF (P176756)



RI 2: This indicator was clearly defined, easy to measure, and entirely attributable to PA1 reforms. It
established an overall target for beneficiaries receiving maternal and child health care, as well as sub-
targets for women and children. By making this distinction, it is recognized that during times of public
health crises, both groups experience greater challenges, but these challenges may also differ among
them. Rating: Satisfactory.

RI 3: PA2 supported an improved employment‐based social insurance system extending pension
coverage to private-sector workers (PD, p. 26). Following the enactment of the Non-Bank Financial
Authority law, public pension funds had to adopt common standards of good practice including in the
areas of governance, reporting, and investment policy, in order to improve their performance and
accountability (ICR, p. 17). This information was expected to be reflected in the NSSF reports submitted
to the social regulator. RI 3 involved submitting one NSSF report to the National Business Federation's
social security regulator by June 2022 [1]. The results chain linking this indicator to the PDO was only
partially convincing. The publication of NSSF reports represents -- at best -- a preliminary step toward
improving employment-based social insurance. Rating: Moderately Satisfactory.

RI 4: RI4 measured the impact of PA 3. The SME Bank of Cambodia (SMEBC) risk-sharing facility was
developed to bring financial support to SMEs affected by the impacts of the COVID-19 crisis. As part of
the SME co-financing program, beneficiaries were provided loans with subsidized interest rates. RI 4 was
simple and directly related to the objective of providing targeted assistance to SMEs. Rating:
Satisfactory.

PDO 2: Facilitating robust recovery through structural reforms

RI 5: RI 5 was designed to measure the documentation and border compliance costs of importing, which
was tracked by the Doing Business report. The indicator could not, however, be assessed due to the
discontinuation of the report. The average import fee per declaration was then selected as an alternative
RI (ICR, pp. 17-18). This indicator was narrower than the original one, as it covered only the cost of
documentation and not border compliance costs. However, these are likely to be much more important
than the documentation costs, partly because of the presence of informal fees (PD, pp. 27-28). Hence, RI
5 may not accurately reflect the true cost to import. Rating: Moderately Satisfactory.

RI 6: The online business registration system, supported by PA 5, enabled investors to register their
businesses and pay their taxes from one platform, saving them both time and money. RI 6 captured one
important reason why business registration fees went down, i.e. the use of the online registration system.
However, as part of the same reform, on April 1, 2020, the RGC decided to sharply reduce registration
fees, a measure that strongly contributed to the success of the indicator. Business registration fees went
down from 300,000 to 180,000 riel for new enterprises; from 1,680,000 to 1,010,000 riel for non-enterprise
companies; and from 40,000 to 25,000 for company-name reservation services [2]. Rating: Moderately
Satisfactory.

PDO 3: Building resilience against future economic shocks.

RI 7: RI 7 was a simple and measurable indicator, but not very relevant. First, in addition to the biannual
reports, there was already a version of public debt statistics published every six months. Second, the PD
did not explain what different features were included in the quarterly publication (apart from the obvious
use of more recent data) that would "strengthen public finance management practices and increase



                                                                                                    Page 11 of 19
                    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                    Cambodia DPF (P176756)



               transparency." Finally, as also noted by the ICR (ICR, para. 38), the relationship between the publication
               of public debt statistics and Objective 3 is only partially convincing. Rating: Unsatisfactory.

               RI 8: Following the enactment of the Law on Anti-Money Laundering and Terrorist Financing (AML/CFT)
               and the approval of the National Bank's Directive on Customer Due Diligence (CDD), financial institutions
               in Cambodia were asked to develop customer acceptance policies and procedures, to address ML/CFT
               risks. The Directive stated that a bank could apply simplified CDD measures to a class of customers
               provided it had undertaken a written risk assessment demonstrating that these customers had a low risk
               of ML/TF. RI 8 measured the number of banks applying CDD. It was a simple and easy-to-monitor
               indicator, but as noted by the ICR (ICR, para. 39), its relevance to the DPO was limited as it did not
               address the significant deficiencies identified in the AML/CFT evaluation of Cambodia. A more
               meaningful indicator could have been "the number of banks applying enhanced customer due diligence
               measures" (as defined in Article 4.7 of the National Bank's directive for high-risk clients). Rather than
               concentrating on banks with well-behaved customers, the resilience of the banking sector is likely to
               increase by focusing on institutions with high-risk clients. Rating: Moderately Unsatisfactory.

               RI 9: PA 8 aimed to enhance the efficiency of revenue collection by establishing an online and centralized
               system for filing value-added tax and corporate income tax returns. Filing taxes online can save time and
               money (if the instructions on how to do it are sufficiently clear). Given that improvement in the efficiency of
               revenue collection is a long-term objective, RI 9 helped move in that direction. As discussed earlier, it
               addressed one of the constraints to increasing tax efficiency, and its relevance in terms of building
               resilience against future economic shocks could be defined as small but positive. Rating: Moderately
               Satisfactory.

               [Note 1] An example, available on the government website, is the 2022 Annual Report of the NSSF (the
               first since 2017). See Report - National Social Security Fund (nssf.gov.kh)

               [Note 2] See: https://www.phnompenhpost.com/business/public-service-fees-reduced-growth

               [Note 3] See https://gdicdm.mef.gov.kh/en/cat/documents-and-publications/bulletins

               [Note 4] The Customer Due Diligence process involves collecting and verifying information about a
               customer’s identity and financial and business activities, and monitoring of the customer’s activities to
               identify any changes that may indicate an increased risk of illicit activity. See the Directive of the National
               Bank of Cambodia: https://cafiu.nbc.gov.kh/Directives/2-%20Directive_on_CDD_Measures_ENG.pdf



   Rating

   Moderately Satisfactory

   5. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
EFFICACY_TBL




                OBJECTIVE 1
                Objective
                Continuing to provide timely and targeted relief to the affected population


                                                                                                                     Page 12 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Cambodia DPF (P176756)




Rationale
Of the four indicators used to measure the achievement of results for objective one, three were deemed to be
relevant, and one (RI 3) was moderately satisfactory. By the target date, RI 1, RI 3, and RI 4 had achieved or
exceeded their targets. As for RI 2, the achievement was modest because one of the sub-targets - the
number of children under two receiving cash transfers - had not been reached well beyond the target date.

RI 1: By June 2022, the target date, 688,841 households had received COVID-19 cash transfers, just short of
the target of 690,000 households (ICR, Table 2). Having reached 99.8 percent of the target, the ICR rightly
considers the target materially achieved. By February 2023, 706,648 households had received COVID-19
cash transfers. One of the reasons for this success was that the government did not invent a new system, but
instead strengthened the existing IDPoor verification and registration process. The digital infrastructure -
linking local and national databases - also contributed to improving the speed and transparency of cash
disbursements. Rating: High.

RI 2 set a target for the number of total eligible beneficiaries (poor pregnant women and children) having
received maternal and child health cash transfers, with separate targets for the two groups of beneficiaries.
Against the baseline of 58,324 beneficiaries in 2019, a target of 360,000 beneficiaries by June 2022 (140,000
poor pregnant women and 220,000 children) was set. Barely seventy-six percent (273,590 beneficiaries) of
the aggregate target was achieved by June 2022. The number of pregnant women receiving cash transfers
(170,135) exceeded the target by a large margin, whereas only half of the children expected to receive cash
transfers actually received them (103,455). Several factors may have contributed to these results, including
the difficulty of reaching remote and rural areas during the flood season and the fact that many poor
households relocated to join family members in urban areas (ICR, pp. 16-17). The ICR also noted that by
February 2023, the target for young children under two was yet to be achieved, having reached only 110,859
(half the target). Rating: Modest.

RI 3 measured the number of National Social Security Fund reports submitted to the social security regulator.
The target was to publish one report by June 2022 against a baseline of zero in 2019. Two reports were
issued by the target date. Moreover, the ICR found that by December 2022, the NSSF had issued four reports
to the social security regulator (ICR, p. 17). Rating: High.

RI 4 targeted the number of beneficiary businesses supported by the SMEBC risk-sharing facility. By March
2022, the SMEBC risk-sharing facility had provided support to 1,054 businesses, double the target of 500
businesses expected to be reached by June 2022 as compared to a baseline of zero businesses in 2019.
Rating: High.



Rating

Satisfactory

OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Facilitating robust recovery through structural reforms

Rationale


                                                                                                Page 13 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Cambodia DPF (P176756)



Only one (RI 5) of the two indicators chosen to assess the achievement of results for Objective 2 was
relevant. Both made some progress towards achieving their target by the closing date.

RI 5 measured the average import fees per declaration. Import fees decreased from US$84.5 in 2019 to
US$75.6 by June 2022 and were just below the target of US$76. Rating: Substantial.

RI 6 measured business registration fees as a percentage of per capita income. By June 2022, business
registration fees represented 38.6 percent of income per capita, even lower than the target of 40 percent,
compared to a baseline of 53.4 percent in 2019. The launch of the online portal in June 2020 was expected to
result in a reduction in registration fees, and it did. Rating: High.



Rating

Satisfactory

OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
Building resilience against future economic shocks

Rationale
Two RIs (RI 7 and RI 8) achieved their targets by the closing date but they were not relevant for measuring
achievement of the objective. The last indicator, RI 9, fully achieved and even surpassed its target by the
closing date.

RI 7 measured the frequency with which public debt statistics were published. The authorities were able to
publish not only one - the June 2022 target - but two quarterly debt statistics reports. Since then, several
others have followed. The ICR stated that these reports contained high-quality data and analysis (ICR, p. 18).
However, in line with the unsatisfactory relevance rating, achievement of RI 7 does not constitute strong
evidence of progress toward the objective. Rating: Negligible.

RI 8 measured the number of banks applying simplified CDD measures for low‐risk clients. RI 8 achieved its
target by June 2022, with 43 out of 59 commercial banks and two (out of 9) specialized banks applying
simplified Customer Due Diligence (CDD) measures. However, in line with the unsatisfactory relevance
rating, achievement of RI 8 does not constitute strong evidence of progress toward the objective. Rating:
Modest.

RI 9 reported the number of businesses that filed their taxes online. By June 2022, 39,687 businesses had
filed their taxes online, far exceeding the target of 30,000 businesses compared to a baseline of zero
businesses in 2019. The number of businesses that filed their taxes electronically reached 44,352 as of
December 2022. Rating: High.



Rating



                                                                                                Page 14 of 19
                         Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                         Cambodia DPF (P176756)




                      Moderately Satisfactory


OVERALL EFF TBL OLD




Overall Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
Rationale

The achievement ratings of the three objectives are: satisfactory, satisfactory and moderately satisfactory.



Overall Efficacy Rating
Satisfactory


      6. Outcome

      Rationale

      The overall outcome rating is Satisfactory, as the relevance of prior actions is rated satisfactory and efficacy
      satisfactory.


      a. Rating

      Satisfactory

      7. Risk to Development Outcome

      Cash transfers and other measures taken in this DPF to prevent people from falling into poverty could be
      jeopardized by slow economic growth and a resurgence of COVID-19 in Cambodia and partner countries.
      However, the Cambodian economy has continued to recover in 2022 and early 2023, despite a slowdown in
      consumer demand in advanced countries, tighter global financial conditions, and a surge in inflation (IMF,
      Press Release No. PR22/439). Following up on this DPF, the World Bank has supported Cambodia’s efforts
      to promote a resilient recovery from economic shocks with a US$274 million Growth and Resilience
      Development Policy Operation. This DPF will continue to support the reforms initiated with the operation
      approved in 2021 (Press release # 2022/037/EAP), thus minimizing the risks to sustaining the development
      outcomes.


        8. Assessment of Bank Performance

        a. Bank Performance – Design

        Rationale
                                                                                                            Page 15 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Cambodia DPF (P176756)




The COVID-19 approach paper "Saving Lives, Increasing Impact and Getting Back on Track" provided
guidance on measures related to cash transfers and other mechanisms to protect the poor and vulnerable
households and SMEs. The Bank deserves credit for responding quickly and effectively to the
government's request for budget support. The DPF objectives were relevant to the context of the country
and to the government's program.

The design of the operation was aligned with the CPF focus areas and complemented other WBG
operations (PD, p. 35). The reform program was based on solid analytics, such as the 2017 Cambodia
SCD, the 2018 Doing Business Memorandum and 2019 Investment Climate Assessment, and the
Cambodia Public Expenditure Review (PD, Table 4). The generality of objectives 2 and 3 made meaningful
evaluation of results more difficult, since some PAs represented only partial steps in a results chain that
would require a more comprehensive and sustained program of actions for effective implementation.

Results chain

The ICR (Diagram 1, p. 13) provided a simple and mechanical "Theory of Change" table summarizing the
underlying diagnostics and rationale, drawn from the PD, for each policy action in relation to the PDOs.
The results related to the objective of providing timely and targeted relief to the affected population were
clearly direct and did not require an elaborate chain of steps. However, an explicit, step-by-step chain
describing how to get the results for the measures designed to build resilience against future economic
shocks (the third objective) and facilitate a robust recovery through structural reforms (the second
objective) was lacking.

Risk identification and mitigation

The PD (p. 45) identifies the overall risk of the operation as “moderate," the balance between relatively
high levels of political, macroeconomic, institutional, and stakeholder risk with a lower set of program risks
resulting from Cambodia's successful handling of the COVID-19 crisis and the assistance provided by the
World Bank and other donors. The new dialogue on policy reforms with the Prime Minister and other
ministries, as well as the joint monitoring of the program, helped mitigate risk.

Stakeholder consultations

Stakeholder consultations were extensive (ICR, p. 21), despite the fact that the operation was prepared in
a very short time. In addition to government agencies, the team consulted closely with Korea, Australia,
China, the Asian Development Bank, the European Union, the Japan International Cooperation Agency,
the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank, and the European Investment Bank to determine how each
development partner would contribute to addressing Cambodia's large financing needs (ICR, p. 17).



Rating

Satisfactory




                                                                                                      Page 16 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Cambodia DPF (P176756)



b. Bank Performance – Implementation

Rationale

Monitoring

The government and the World Bank jointly monitored the reform program (PD, p. 44-45). . In general, the RIs
were relatively adequate for monitoring the implementation of the program, except for RI 5 and RI 6, which were
not available due to data discontinuation (ICR, pp. 17-18). However, there was no explicit monitoring of whether
the actions under objectives 2 and 3 led to the achievement of the intended objectives.

Adaptation

As a single operation, there was little opportunity for observing weaknesses and adapting accordingly.



Rating

Satisfactory

c. Overall Bank Performance

Rationale

Both design and implementation are rated Satisfactory, yielding an overall rating of Satisfactory.


Overall Bank Performance Rating

Satisfactory

9. Other Impacts

a. Social and Poverty

The 2022 Cambodia Poverty Assessment [1] indicated that absent government intervention, the pandemic could
have increased poverty by 4.7 percentage points in 2020, reversing Cambodia's progress in reducing poverty by
three years. According to the Poverty Assessment, almost 300,000 people were prevented from falling into
poverty by 2020 due to cash transfers under COVID-19. Additionally, cash transfers reduced inequality, with the
Gini index rising by 0.2 points as opposed to 0.4 points. The program was, however, unable to completely offset
all the negative effects of the pandemic on the poor. Per capita consumption declined by 25 percent among the
lowest quintile of the population despite cash transfers. Additionally, the COVID-19 relief cash transfer program
had little impact on households outside of the lower-income distribution, since they were largely excluded from
the program.



                                                                                                     Page 17 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Cambodia DPF (P176756)



[Note 1] World Bank (2022), The Cambodia Poverty Assessment, Toward a More Inclusive and Resilient
Cambodia, page 8.



b. Environmental

The operation was unlikely to have had significant effects on the environment, forests, and other natural resources
of the country. The DPF, however, missed the opportunity to expand eligibility criteria for the IDPoor to include
households at risk of climate-related economic shocks following the floods of 2020. The majority of these
households, located in rural areas, did not receive any relief assistance unless they were affected by the COVID-
19 crisis. Approximately a year later, this action was included as part of the Cambodian Growth and Resilience
DPF Series (P179019).



c. Gender

The Cash Transfer Program for Pregnant Women and Children (CTP‐PWC) Under Two, supported by PA1,
increased access to maternal and child health care. Cash transfers were given to poor women who visited a health
facility regularly during pregnancy and the first two years of their child's life. Moreover, considering that 70 percent
of micro and small businesses are headed by women, PA3 was also a gender-sensitive prior action. The credit
guarantee schemes announced by the government in the late 2020s to reduce the impact of COVID-19 on
businesses helped make SMEs more bankable by lowering collateral requirements and promoting SME
development in the long run.



d. Other

---

10. Quality of ICR

Rationale

The ICR presented a coherent narrative of the context at the time of appraisal, the reasoning behind the
operation, and the tough economic situation the country was in. It discussed the broad achievement of targets
within reform areas and provided useful suggestions. For example, regarding RI 5 and RI 6, the ICR suggested
that had a formal monitoring mechanism been in place, the team would have easily recognized the
discontinuation of the data on these indicators and would have been able to identify alternative indicators much
sooner. The ICR’s recommendation of a more formal approach to monitoring, including issuing monitoring
reports was a good suggestion. The ICR created a results chain by mechanically filling in a table listing prior
actions, outputs, and outcomes in the absence of an explicit results chain in the PD. The ICR could have better
questioned the relevance of the PAs aimed at building resilience against future economic shocks while noting
the incomplete results chain that undermined the implementation of these PAs.


                                                                                                      Page 18 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Cambodia DPF (P176756)




a. Rating

Substantial

11. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                Disagreement/Comments
Outcome                         Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Bank Performance                Satisfactory          Satisfactory
Relevance of Results
                                ---                   Moderately Satisfactory
Indicators
Quality of ICR                  ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

A standalone DPF is an adequate tool to use in the event of a pandemic or other crisis. The success of a policy
program is, however, determined by the availability of existing knowledge, the ability of the government to
implement and monitor reforms, and the willingness of development partners to contribute meaningfully to
reform formulation and share the financial burden. Cambodia's success with the DPF - despite it being the first
budget support operation in 15 years - is a testament to its government, the World Bank, and its development
partners. As a result of this success, a series of DPFs were followed up in 2022. (ICR, para. 59).

Cambodia's cash transfers have proven to be highly effective in cushioning the poor and vulnerable from the
worst effects of the crisis and preserving poverty reduction gains, although not entirely. It was possible to
achieve this because a basic infrastructure for social safety nets already existed.

Without pre-existing diagnostics and subsequent follow up, a standalone DPF is not suitable for implementing
structural reforms to accelerate the recovery process or adopting a green, resilient, and inclusive development
approach.


13. Project Performance Assessment Report (PPAR) Recommended?

No




                                                                                                  Page 19 of 19
