     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CN-Hubei Xiaogan Logistics (P132562)



                                                                                   Report Number: ICRR0023549

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P132562                                    CN-Hubei Xiaogan Logistics

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 China                                      Transport


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                 Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-86130                                 30-Jun-2021                                           58,662,299.66

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 29-Apr-2016                                31-Dec-2022

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                       Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           100,000,000.00                                                 0.00

 Revised Commitment                             65,000,000.00                                                 0.00

 Actual                                         58,662,299.66                                                 0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator           Group
 Cynthia Nunez-Ollero        Ihsan Kaler Hurcan           Avjeet Singh                     IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Loan Agreement dated May 26, 2016 (LA, p. 5) and the Project Appraisal Document (PAD,
   paragraph 20), the Project Development Objective (PDO) of the Hubei Xiaogan Logistics Infrastructure
   Project is "to enhance the connectivity and efficiency of the logistics operations of the Xiaogan Logistics Park
   in Hubei Province."

   This review will assess the project performance against the following PDOs:


                                                                                                     Page 1 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CN-Hubei Xiaogan Logistics (P132562)



         to enhance the connectivity of the logistics operations of the Xiaogan Logistics Park in Hubei Province.
         to enhance the efficiency of the logistics operations of the Xiaogan Logistics Park in Hubei Province.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project consisted of three components:

   1: Connected Logistics: (Cost estimated at appraisal was US$84.91 million; revised down to US$50.06
   million at the restructuring; actual cost was US$42.29 million)

   This component was to finance the construction of three new roads: (i) Vertical Road No. 1 (5.4 km); (ii)
   Horizontal Road No. 8 (2.6 km); and (iii) Secondary Road No. 50 (1.7 km). In addition, this component was
   to finance the underground facilities, such as drainage, water supply, power, gas, and telecom connections
   along these roads.

   2: Efficient Logistics: (Cost estimated at appraisal was US$58.15 million; revised down to US$47.08
   million at the restructuring; actual cost was US$33.89 million)

   This component was to finance: (i) the construction of a Logistics Information Management Center (LIMC)
   to host management and business service offices and community facilities; (ii) the development of a public
   logistics information platform to collect and analyze freight data, match logistics demand with capacity, and
   manage the internal logistics park operations; and (iii) the development of an Intelligent Transport Systems
   (ITS) to include a Traffic Command Center (housed in the Logistics Information Management Building), an
   Area Traffic Control (ATC) system covering 60 junctions, CCTV monitoring cameras, e-police enforcement
   cameras, a Traffic Guidance System using Variable Message Signs (VMS), a traffic flow monitoring system,
   an incident detection system, a GIS platform, data storage and management facilities, and other associated
   equipment for its operation.

   3: Institutional Strengthening: (Cost estimated at appraisal was US$2.82 million; revised down to
   US$1.84 million at the restructuring; actual cost was US$2.54 million)

   This component was to finance three technical assistance (TA) studies - green logistics development
   research, IT development research; and traffic safety research and education; consultancy for project
   management; external monitoring of social and environmental safeguards; training and study tour; and
   office equipment for the Project Management Office (PMO).



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project Cost: The total project cost estimated at appraisal was US$151.02 including a total of US$5.14
   million for a front-end fee, interest during implementation, and a commitment fee. At the project

                                                                                                   Page 2 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CN-Hubei Xiaogan Logistics (P132562)



   restructuring, the estimated project cost was revised down to US$104.11 million because of loan savings
   stemming from competitive bidding and weakening of the Renminbi (RMB) against the US dollar. The actual
   cost at project closing was US$81.65 million.

   Financing: The total International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) funding estimated at
   appraisal was US$100.00 million. At the project restructuring, the IBRD commitment was revised down to
   US$65.00 million. The project disbursed US$58.65 million. The World Bank project team confirmed that the
   Borrower refunded the US$1.44 million of the unused loan proceeds on June 9, 2023. The World Bank
   letter dated June 16, 2023 to the government cancelled the balance of US$6.35 million.

   Borrower Contribution: The government committed US$51.0 million to the project including funds for the
   payment of interest during implementation and the commitment fee. The borrower’s commitment reduced to
   US$39.1 million at the restructuring. The borrower’s actual contribution was US$19.5 million. The project
   team confirmed that this amount reflected unutilized reserve funds, lower than estimated land acquisition
   and resettlement compensation requirements, and interest expenses during the construction period that
   were not estimated for 2023.

   Dates: The loan was approved on April 29, 2016 and became effective on August 24, 2016. The Mid Term
   Review was conducted on April 25, 2019. The original project closing date was June 30, 2021. One level 2
   restructuring on June 14, 2021 cancelled US$35.0 million due to cost savings and extended the project
   closing date by 18 months to December 31, 2022 to complete the implementation of the remaining activities
   that were delayed because of late allocation of counterpart funds for land acquisition and resettlement
   activities, procurement and contract management capacity constraints, the floods in 2020, and the onset of
   the COVID-19 pandemic. No changes were made to the target values or indicators of the results
   framework. The loan savings were from competitive bidding, the weakening of the RMB vis-à-vis the US
   dollar and cost over-estimation at appraisal.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Context: Poor logistics infrastructure reduced the efficiency of freight operations in China. The country’s
14th Five-Year Plan (2021-2025) aimed to modernize the logistics sector. The ‘2014–2020 Mid- to Long-
Term Plan for Logistics Development’ aimed to improve logistics by using energy efficient technologies,
reduce empty trips, and develop green warehousing. The PDOs were aligned with the country’s national
and local government priorities since one of the key industries at the provincial and municipal levels in
Hubei Province in Central China was the logistics sector. By 2025, China was to establish a safe, efficient,
smart, green, and modern logistics system connecting domestic and international logistics. In addition,
innovation in logistics capacity, enterprise competitiveness, and the quality and efficiency of logistics
services were to be improved. The PDOs were relevant to the country’s plans to promote green logistics
using technical assistance to apply green design standards to the Logistics Information Management
Center (LIMC).

World Bank Country Partnership: The PDOs were substantially aligned with the World Bank Group's
Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for China for FY2020-2025. The project was to address the
development problem of inefficiency in freight operations in Hubei province where the logistics sector is a

                                                                                                    Page 3 of 16
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                       Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      CN-Hubei Xiaogan Logistics (P132562)



               key industry. This problem was to be addressed by modernizing the sector. The PDOs supported the
               promotion of green growth under engagement area 2.1 Facilitating transition to a low-carbon energy
               path. The project was to contribute in enhancing economic growth and reducing the environmental freight
               footprint by (i) developing logistics services and infrastructure that would enable trade and improve the
               competitiveness of businesses; (ii) improving the efficiency of logistics operations by reducing the
               proportion of trucks that run empty using intelligent transport systems (ITS); and (iii) reducing traffic
               congestion in the Xiaogan Airport Economic Zone (AEZ) that would lead to fuel efficiency and
               reduce carbon footprint of freight activities (ICR, paragraph 18). The PDOs also supported the Engagement
               Area 3: Sharing the benefits of growth by focusing investments on Central China and enabling the
               development of a modern logistics industry in Hubei Province to address spatial disparities through
               employment creation. The project contributed to the achievement of Objective 2.5: Promoting low carbon
               transport by improving the efficiency of logistics operations and reducing traffic congestion within the AEZ
               using innovative technologies such as the ITS.

               World Bank Experience in the Country and in the Sector: The World Bank has had vast experience in
               the sector globally including in China. In Shanghai, Guangzhou, Wuhan and Xi’an, the World Bank’s
               experience in ITS was complemented with engineering, education, and enforcement. The World Bank’s
               experience showed the importance of linking transport and logistics to environmental management, road
               safety and inter-modality but cautioned on the challenges of an all-encompassing approach. This project
               was the first project which combined an innovative wholistic solution to modernize the Logistics Park with
               the use of ITS to address traffic management, and road safety assurance to increase the sector’s efficiency.
               The development of a modern logistics industry in Central China (Hubei Xiaogan AEZ) with an ITS
               component led to the creation of low and medium-skilled jobs and improvements in road safety for the local
               communities.

               Overall, the relevance of objectives is rated High. The PDOs were relevant to both the World Bank's current
               partnership framework for the country and the country's plans at the national, local, and sector levels.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To enhance the connectivity of the logistics operations of the Xiaogan Logistics Park in Hubei Province.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change for Objective 1: A theory of change was not required at appraisal. The results framework
                             provided an overview of the causal links between inputs, outputs, and expected outcomes. The project was to
                             finance the construction of three roads totaling 9.7 km that would improve the Xiaogan logistics park’s (LP)
                             connectivity to the airport and the Xiaogan city center. The task team clarified that “enhanced connectivity”

                                                                                                                              Page 4 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   CN-Hubei Xiaogan Logistics (P132562)



only referred to improved travel times from appropriate road design and the construction of a rational road
network layout. Road planning and developing a Functional Road Hierarchy was to lead to a better, safer,
and more logical connectivity. In China, secondary roads were typically constructed following a skeleton
network of primary roads. Frequently, secondary roads were not built or were constructed as an afterthought.
Connectivity was to be promoted by constructing hierarchical elements of the road layout together as a
connected network rather than a skeleton. Overall, the causal chains from project’s inputs/outputs to
expected outcomes were direct and valid, and the achievement of improved connectivity in the LP could be
attributed to the project’s intervention.

The following critical assumptions were included in the theory of change, which, if realized, were
to improve the likelihood of achieving the objective: (i) availability of counterpart funds for land acquisition,
resettlement, design, and civil works; (ii) timely collection and analysis of freight data; and (iii) sufficient
implementation capacity of the public entities.

OUTPUTS:

      9.7 km of non-rural roads were completed as targeted.
      The project conducted a road safety audit of road designs and interactive design support as targeted.
      Over 10 road safety education activities were held for more than 200 attendees. The training activities
       were to update the participants—residents, local authorities, and other road users—on road safety
       knowledge and operational skills.
      Technical assistance on green logistics was completed, as targeted. According to the project team,
       the key output was the “General Report on the Development of Green Logistics.” This study
       recommended the establishment of a Logistics Park management system for the administrative office,
       daily operations, safety, and environmental monitoring. This output was used to design and develop
       the ITS and the Logistics Public Information Platform.

OUTCOMES:

      The average travel time by users of the roads was reduced by 18 minutes, from a baseline of 34
       minutes and an original target of 26 minutes. The Task Team clarified that the proximity of Xiaogan to
       the epicenter of the COVID-19 outbreak, Wuhan, contributed to 194 days of delay in road
       construction, and another 20 days in the construction of the LIMC building, the associated ITS, and
       the Public and Logistics Information Platform. When all three became fully operational late in 2022,
       travel time surveys were conducted in March 2023. The number of trucks entering the logistics park
       was 9 percent below the target but the ITS helped reduce the end target of average travel time by 47
       percent (ICR, paragraph 25).
      The standard deviation of travel times reached 1.44. The baseline was 4.7 and the original target was
       2.5. The reliability of travel time measured traffic congestion and unpredictable variation of travel time.
       The standard deviation of travel time showed the day-to-day variation of travel time and served as an
       indicator of the reliability of the network. The day-to-day variation of travel time may be caused by
       unexpected weather conditions (storms), erection of work zones, incidents, the nature of the traffic
       flow, or the variation of agency capacity to manage traffic or maintain roads.




                                                                                                       Page 5 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   CN-Hubei Xiaogan Logistics (P132562)




      Based on the feedback from the education staff and analysis of the completed road safety education
       program questionnaires, major road users in the LP confirmed that their awareness, knowledge, and
       technical skills for improving road safety were enhanced by the training.

Overall, the efficacy of the project to achieve this objective is rated Substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To enhance the efficiency of the logistics operations of the Xiaogan Logistics Park in Hubei Province.

Rationale
Theory of Change for Objective 2: As noted above, a theory of change was not required at appraisal. The
project was to finance a Smart Logistics platform integrated with a centrally controlled truck management and
on-street ITS to improve logistics and general transport efficiency. The task team clarified that the project
limited the efficiency element of the logistics operation to minimizing the idle running at traffic stops (when
there is no other traffic) and minimizing the empty running of return trucks (trucks running/returning with no
cargo) using smart data and ITS-supported traffic efficiency in the AEZ. The project was to finance the
construction of the LIMC. The completed LIMC building, the operation of the Logistics Public Information
Platform, and the traffic command center were to be the integrated service center for the Xiaogan LP and a
base to manage the AEZ, the traffic command center of the ITS, the management unit of the Logistics Public
Information Platform, a business training area, and a range of other services to support the coordinated
operation of the LP. These outputs were to lead to a one-stop operation that would then balance input and
output flows in the AEZ. The critical assumptions given for the theory of change of the first objective above
also apply to the theory of change of the second objective. Overall, the causal chains from the project’s
inputs/outputs to expected outcomes were valid. The outcome of an efficient logistics operation was to be met
by minimizing the empty running of trucks using smart data and ITS-supported traffic efficiency in the AEZ.
However, there may have been other outcomes that were not identified, nor tracked, such as the road safety
benefits associated with the use of integrated ITS logistics platform (ICR, paragraph 21). The Theory of
Change in the ICR also reflected the lower warehousing costs as well as reduction in GHG emissions (ICR,
paragraph 8) as outcome but these were not tracked.

OUTPUTS:

      The LMIC building was completed as targeted.
      All six sub-platforms of the public information platform were operational, achieving the target. The
       Logistics Public Information Platform was a centralized information system. The platform served as a
       one-stop government service platform with online services, such as logistics deployment, monitoring,
       and logistics information sharing for the entire supply chain. The government and AEZ
       encouraged more small and medium-sized logistics companies to join and share their data through
       the platform. The technical assistance outputs informed the design and development of the Logistics
       Public Information Platform.


                                                                                                    Page 6 of 16
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               CN-Hubei Xiaogan Logistics (P132562)




                                  The intelligent transport system (ITS) covered all 60 junctions, achieving the target. The TA outputs
                                   informed the design and development of the ITS, helped outline an intelligent traffic management and
                                   control system by integrating infrastructure, enterprises, goods, and trucks.
                                  13 companies were operating in the logistics park at closing. The task team confirmed that the
                                   baseline was zero because there were no companies operating in the LP before the project. The
                                   original target was 12.
                                  90,867 trucks entered the logistics park. The task team confirmed that the baseline was zero because
                                   the trucks counted referred only to those operating within the LP. The original target was 100,000. The
                                   target was only almost achieved because the park's business development was hampered by the
                                   COVID-19 pandemic related lockdowns on trucks entering the LP.
                                  The AEZ management committee established the Emergency and Social Affairs Management Bureau
                                   to enhance resilience to future meteorological and natural disasters to mitigate implementation risks.

                            OUTCOMES:

                            Efficiency gains in logistics operations were achieved because the proportion of trucks running empty
                            was reduced. The rate of empty running decreased to 24.3 percent from a baseline of 45 percent. The
                            original target was 25 percent. This was the only indicator used to measure the improvement in the efficiency
                            of the logistics operations in the AEZ.

                            The Logistics Public Information Platform was shared among all logistics providers. Data linked cargo
                            demand with idle capacity to improve the efficiency of the entire logistics system in the LP. The platform
                            allowed sharing of various links in the transportation process in real time to reduce empty running, logistics
                            costs such as fuel and inventory, and greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions. Suppliers and companies used
                            scheduling data to develop their own value-added services, optimizing transportation routes by matching
                            cargo demand across different companies for trucking supplies going in the same direction.

                            The use of the ITS provided better traffic management and road safety assurance, reduced losses from
                            unnecessary idle running at traffic lights and monitored accident and abnormal response mechanisms.

                            Overall, the efficacy of the project to achieve this objective is rated Substantial, with moderate shortcomings
                            because other useful outcomes were not included or measured such as the reduced logistics cost, value
                            added services identified to match trucking or reduced GHG emissions. In addition, local businesses and
                            residents benefited from the enhanced availability of logistics services, infrastructure, and job opportunities
                            but these indicators were not part of the results framework and were not measured (ICR, paragraphs 21 and
                            23).



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale

                                                                                                                               Page 7 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      CN-Hubei Xiaogan Logistics (P132562)



  The overall efficacy of the project in achieving both objectives is rated Substantial. Both outcome indicators to
  measure the PDO were exceeded although there were other useful outcomes for which data may have been
  available to reflect the efficiency aspects (reduced logistics cost or reduced GHG emissions) but not reported
  because the corresponding indicators were not part of the results framework.



  Overall Efficacy Rating
  Substantial



 5. Efficiency
Economic Analysis: A cost-benefit analysis was conducted at appraisal. Benefits were estimated from the
increased capacity due to the construction of roads, logistics infrastructure and institutional strengthening. Costs
of all the project components were used. Benefits only included those derived from the road construction and
ITS components. The potential benefits from the use of the Logistics Public Information Platform were
noted but not quantified. Benefits from reduced transport emissions, improved road safety, and reduced noise
were also not quantified. The economic internal rate of return (EIRR) was estimated at 13.0 percent and a net
present value (NPV) of US$15.95 million (or RMB 101 million) at a discount rate of 12 percent.

The ex-post cost-benefit analysis used the same methodology at appraisal. The estimated EIRR was 12.9
percent. Benefits were derived from estimated savings in vehicle operating costs and time saved from the use of
ITS. When estimates of the benefits from the Logistics Public Information Platform and accident and emissions
reductions were included, the NPV estimate increased to RMB 189 million and the EIRR to 13.4
percent. However, the post-economic analysis showed that the benefits did not materialize at project closing as
expected at appraisal (ICR, Table 2, p.10). At appraisal, total benefits were estimated at RMB 882 million,
whereas at project closing they were estimated at RMB 532 million. On the other hand, there was a significant
decrease in the estimated costs—from RMB 781 million at appraisal to RMB 372 million at project closing.
Therefore, although the post-project EIRR is very close to the EIRR estimated at appraisal, this is mostly
because of the overestimation of the project cost at appraisal.

Administrative and Operational Efficiency: The project was initially delayed due to capacity constraints.
Because of insufficient allocation of counterpart funds for land acquisition and compensation payments to
project-affected people, the construction of the three roads under the first component was delayed for about
three years. Severe rainfall and flooding in 2020 and land acquisition issues also delayed project
implementation. Procurement was delayed because of complaints regarding the participation of unqualified
bidders. The World Bank's integrity vice presidency investigated and issued sanctions to concerned construction
companies. Rebidding was delayed by COVID-19 but eventually, all works were completed, following an 18-
month extension of the project closing date to compensate for these initial delays. The over-estimation of the
project cost led to the commitment of excessive funds that were not needed and payment of a higher
commitment fee (Overestimation of project costs is a common problem across the World Bank portfolio in
China).




                                                                                                       Page 8 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      CN-Hubei Xiaogan Logistics (P132562)



Overall, the efficiency of the project in achieving the project objectives is rated Modest because of the lower
achievement of economic benefits, overestimation of the project cost, and substantial delays in project
implementation.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?              Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                       100.00
 Appraisal                                                   13.00
                                                                                        Not Applicable
                                                                                       100.00
 ICR Estimate                                                12.90
                                                                                        Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The relevance of objective is rated High. The efficacy of the project in achieving both objectives is rated
Substantial. However, the project’s efficiency in achieving the project objective is rated Modest. Overall, the
project’s outcome is rated Moderately Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The following pose as risks to the development outcome:

       Financial risk. This is a low risk. In this project, a comprehensive operations and maintenance plan
        was adopted to ensure the long-term effectiveness of the LP, the ITS, and other assets created by
        the project. The Xiaogan authority committed an annual operational fund of RMB 4 million from the
        government budget to subsidize operational costs from 2021 to 2040. Rent from the logistics
        companies in the LIMC, solar and electric charging poles, and parking fees were expected to ensure
        sustainable long-term operation.
       Institutional risk. This is a low risk. In this project, Fengxiang Holding Co. Ltd., an AEZ affiliate, was
        appointed to operate the LIMC building. At closing, the AEZ authority was recruiting employees to
        operate the project assets, the platform, and the building. The contract for the ITS and the Logistics


                                                                                                        Page 9 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CN-Hubei Xiaogan Logistics (P132562)



      Public Information Platform included a one-year after-sales period to conduct the institutional capacity
      training of staff (ICR, paragraph 86).
     Technical risk. This is a low risk. In this project, the new monitoring framework used data collected
      by the ITS and the Logistics Public Information Platform to identify issues and support decision-
      making. Periodic information on traffic condition for both networks and junctions were to monitor the
      level of service within the park. This was to identify potential congestion spots and conflict zones.
      Traffic control measures were to be undertaken to avoid safety issues. The operating companies
      were to match information from the logistics information platform in a timely manner, to tailor services
      such as product dissemination, financial support, and business coordination within the LP.
     Exposure to climate, natural hazards, and disaster risk. This is a low risk. In this project, the
      designs of the completed roads and the LIMC incorporated resilient measures against adverse
      conditions, including heavy rain and flooding. The roads were built with wide and sufficient side-
      drains, a thick water-stable layer (3–5 percent cement mix), and the mud foundation was
      replaced with chip stones. The LIMC exterior doors and windows met environmental standards.
     Governance and other stakeholder risk. This is a low risk. In this project, the Logistics Public
      Information Platform was to benefit small and medium-sized logistics companies, especially those
      operating with limited IT technology. The AEZ authority was to attract new companies and more
      enterprises to the park by offering favorable conditions. These included free office space in the LIMC,
      free access to the logistics platform, and tax benefits to companies. The park was to promote the use
      of the tology platforms to optimize the competitive advantages of the park.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The Bank team designed this project as one of the first intelligent transport system (ITS) linked to a
  logistics park (LP) in China, and the first to be funded by the World Bank. The project design responded
  to the strategic priorities of Xiaogan, Hubei province for logistics development. The project’s design was
  aligned with China's strategic priorities for logistics development. This meant reducing empty
  trips, improving last mile delivery, and encouraging private investment in the industry. The selection of
  Xiaogan, Hubei as the project location responded effectively to the growing demand for logistics in the
  area. The World Bank project team helped the local government identify the elements and functions of
  the project. These included inter-transport modality for efficiency improvement, LP function design, road
  design, road safety strengthening, ITS, and public information platform needs. The World Bank team
  tailored training to strengthen the PMO's institutional capacity and provided technical support and training
  on the feasibility study, social and environmental risk evaluation, financial management, and procurement
  guidelines. The project team designed a results framework with indicators supported by an appropriate
  M&E system. However, the results framework did not have the indicators that would have sufficiently
  captured project outcomes, such as the reduced logistics cost, or reduced GHG emissions or benefits to
  local businesses and residents from the available logistics services, infrastructure, and job opportunities
  (see ICR, Annex 4, Efficiency). The World Bank project team sponsored visits and adapted lessons from
  other similar World Bank-financed projects worldwide and in Xuancheng, Hubei Xiangyang, Shanghai,
  Guangzhou, Wuhan, and Xi’an to inform the project design. These included using a functional road
  hierarchy for network planning and design of the roads with a focus on key missing links, addressing non-
  motorized traffic (NMT), and road safety; using green ICT technologies and recycled material-based

                                                                                                   Page 10 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CN-Hubei Xiaogan Logistics (P132562)



  technologies to minimize noise, reduce maintenance needs, and increase sustainability; and innovative
  landscaping for noise reduction and improve visual impact. The Logistics Public Information Platform was
  designed to share information, reduce empty running, thereby reducing costs, and greenhouse gas
  (GHG) emissions. However, there were moderate shortcomings at entry. The project cost was
  significantly overestimated resulting in the cancellation of around US$41.35 million of funds out of a total
  commitment of USD100 million. Measures were not adequately identified to mitigate the implementation
  risks associated with the lack of procurement capacity of the implementing entities and the availability of
  local counterpart funds for land acquisition and resettlement, which led to significant delays in the initial
  phases of project implementation. These reflected shortcomings in assessing the fiduciary and
  safeguards risks of the project.

  The quality at entry is rated Moderately Satisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The World Bank project team conducted 12 supervision missions over the six-year implementation period,
 some virtually after the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic in March 2020. The project team leader changed
 hands once. The ICR reported a lack of communication with the project team that led to implementation
 inefficiencies (ICR, paragraph 37). The project team addressed implementation delays by recommending
 the recruitment of more experienced staff working on procurement policies, contract management, financial
 management, and safeguards. The project team also conducted training of staff and engineers to address
 bottlenecks in financial and safeguards compliance The project team restructured the project to extend the
 loan closing date and cancel more than a third of the loan. The World Bank focused on the development
 impact of the project by adopting alternatives such as virtual missions, online meetings, and videos and
 photos of project sites to monitor project progress during the COVID-19 pandemic. After restructuring,
 closer supervision resulted in rapid progress in the construction of the roads and an increase in
 disbursements. During the last stage of the project, the project team held monthly and biweekly meetings
 with the PMO.

 The quality of supervision is rated Satisfactory.

 The overall Bank Performance is rated Moderately Satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory




                                                                                                    Page 11 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CN-Hubei Xiaogan Logistics (P132562)



9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The M&E system provided the framework to monitor progress of activities and the achievement of the
 PDOs. The theory of change documented the causal link between the inputs/activities, the outputs, and
 the expected outcomes as reflected in the indicators of the results framework. The objectives were clear
 but low level - "enhance" - leading to a wide spectrum of outcomes. With less specificity, the outcome
 indicators could not encompass all outcomes. Other outcomes were noted to have been achieved but they
 were not monitored, and no data supported the claims of achievements reached. The selected
 indicators limited the scope of what was to be "enhanced." For example, the outcome indicators ‘average
 travel time’ and ‘empty-running’ measured the enhanced connectivity and efficiency of trucks traveling the
 improved roads and connectivity to the major transport lines. The intermediate results indicators captured
 the contribution of the operation’s activities and outputs toward achieving the two outcome
 indicators. These indicators were specific, relevant, measurable, time-bound, and achievable. Data sources
 and methodology were specified. Baselines were available for some relevant indicators. All indicators had
 targets. Additional indicators may have been useful to measure the efficiencies in the logistics operations
 achieved (see Section 4 Efficacy above). The M&E design and arrangements were institutionally
 embedded.



b. M&E Implementation
  The Project Management Office (PMO) in the Airport Economic Zone Management Committee
  implemented M&E supported by consultants. The PMO collected inputs, outputs, outcomes, and
  evidence of impact outlined in the M&E design. The ITS provided the data to be analyzed using the
  Logistics Public Information Platform (ICR, paragraph 68). All indicators in the results framework were
  measured and reported. No changes were made in the M&E design. The restructuring did not amend the
  target values or indicators, except the revised project closing date. Weaknesses in outcome indicators
  were not addressed at implementation. For example, the reduced logistics cost, value added services
  identified to match trucking services or reduced GHG emissions, benefits to local businesses and
  residents from the availability of logistics services, infrastructure, and job opportunities were not part of
  the indicators monitored (ICR, paragraph 32). The project financed the system that generated reliable
  M&E data. There is some indication that M&E functions and processes were to be improved and used
  after project closing (see Section 12 Lessons below).



c. M&E Utilization
  M&E data was used to inform project progress and achievement of the outcome indicators. The annual
  M&E report on implementation results was shared with the World Bank and relevant government
  agencies. The project team confirmed that the project management office shared the periodic reports to
  inform decision makers on needed policy changes. The project and the World Bank used M&E data to
  restructure the project. Experience with the M&E system is expected to support the PMO, with the help
  of the World Bank project team, to design a new monitoring framework for future operations using the
  data collected by the traffic command center and the Logistics Public Information System.




                                                                                                     Page 12 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CN-Hubei Xiaogan Logistics (P132562)



  Overall, while there were some moderate shortcomings in the M&E design and implementation in fully
  capturing the outcomes expected from the project’s intervention, the M&E system as implemented and
  utilized was sufficient to assess the achievement of the project objectives and test the links in the results
  chain. The quality of M&E is rated Substantial.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Environmental Safeguards: The project was classified as Category B, as only moderate environmental
   impacts were envisaged for construction activities in a rural farmland context that was intensively modified
   by human activity. An environmental impact assessment (EIA) and a stand-alone environment management
   plan (EMP) were prepared for the project following the relevant national laws/regulations and guidelines, the
   World Bank's safeguard policies, and the Environmental, Health and Safety (EHS) Guidelines. The
   EIA/EMP was locally disclosed in Chinese on March 12, 2015, and the English EIA/EMP was disclosed at
   InfoShop on July 8, 2015. The project complied with the one environmental safeguard policy that
   was triggered: Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01). Environmental management was incorporated in
   project management. The project had dedicated institutional arrangements, staff in the Project Management
   Office (PMO), the project management consultant, contractors, and construction supervision engineers,
   and an external environmental monitoring consultant. The ICR described how the environmental mitigation
   measures in the EMP were well-implemented (ICR, paragraph 72).

   Social Safeguards: The project triggered Involuntary Resettlement (BP/OP4.12). A Resettlement Action
   Plan (RAP) was prepared and identified the acquisition of 35 hectares (582.85 mu) of land. This was
   to affect 298 households or 1,210 people. 242 project affected people (PAP) from 45 households were to be
   resettled. Two private enterprises on 10,867.65 m2 were to be relocated and compensated. The project
   acquired a total of 40.4 ha (605.37 mu) of land, which affected 284 rural households or 1,119 people. All
   affected families received full compensation. By January 2021, 91 households or 242 people were relocated
   to permanent housing communities. The two enterprises were fully compensated. The project complied with
   social safeguard policies. The construction of the roads was delayed for nearly three years because of
   delays in allocating counterpart funds for land acquisition and resettlement activities (ICR, paragraph 37).
   All land acquisition and resettlement activities were completed in accordance with the RAP and national
   regulations.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management: The project complied with the World Bank’s financial management policies and
   procedures. There were no outstanding audits or audit qualifications (ICR, paragraph 80). The interim
   financial reports and audit reports were submitted to the World Bank on time. Audits were ‘unqualified.'



                                                                                                     Page 13 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CN-Hubei Xiaogan Logistics (P132562)



   Initial slow project implementation and disbursement led to an 18-month extension of the project closing
   date. The FM was rated as Moderately Satisfactory at closing.

   Procurement: Weak procurement management capacity led to early delays. Participation by unqualified
   contractors in bidding led to re-bidding. An investigation by the Bank's integrity vice presidency (INT)
   substantiated fraud by two firms that bid on the initial LIMC building construction contract and pursued
   sanctions against said firms (ICR, paragraph 79). Land acquisition issues significantly delayed the
   procurement process but were eventually resolved. Complaints lodged during the first round of bidding for
   the LIMC building construction led to a re-bid that was delayed by COVID-19. Contract management
   capacity constraints led to stalled contracts. Corrective measures were adopted but this led to extension or
   amendment of contracts. Staff procurement learning by doing capacity building was implemented.
   Administrative flows improved. Conducting market engagement prior to preparing procurement documents
   established effective communication with prospective bidders. The procurement was rated as Satisfactory
   at clsoing.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None.



d. Other
   None.



11. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                   IEG
                                                                                Disagreements/Comment
                                                                                Modest efficiency led to this
                                                                                outcome even with High
Outcome                         Satisfactory         Moderately Satisfactory
                                                                                relevance and Substantial
                                                                                efficacy.
                                                                                Shortcomings in risk
                                                                                assessment at entry also
Bank Performance                Satisfactory         Moderately Satisfactory
                                                                                affected supervision
                                                                                performance.
Quality of M&E                  Substantial          Substantial

Quality of ICR                  ---                  Substantial


12. Lessons

The project offered the following lessons (ICR, paragraphs 90-93):


                                                                                                   Page 14 of 16
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       CN-Hubei Xiaogan Logistics (P132562)



        An integrated logistics service center with modern technology may improve logistics
         efficiency. In this project, China's role in global trade was hampered by its lagging logistics
         sector. Xiaogan and other Chinese cities aimed to modernize their logistics sector. Before
         the LIMC was built, the functional departments of AEZ were in different places causing
         operational inefficiencies in the Xiaogan Logistics Park. In this project, the traffic command
         center used ITS to adjust traffic signals based on traffic. This use of the ITS increased route
         efficiency and minimized idle running/emissions at traffic lights. The Logistics Public
         Information Platform enabled matching cargo demand with trucking supply, minimizing empty
         return trucks, and sharing trucking capacity going in the same direction. As a result of these
         innovations, Xiaogan LP has attracted more businesses (although no data provided). The
         government is beginning to support further development of the sector - the inclusion of
         integrated logistics service centers and the use of ITS (no evidence provided). The Project
         Management Office has reached out to the small and medium-sized companies in the park to
         promote the use of the functionalities of the Logistics Public Information Platform, for
         example, shared use of delivery trucks, and cargo matching on return journeys (but no
         survey or report to indicate how many have used, started to use, or intend to use the
         functions). The PMO is collaborating with the supplier of the new technologies to recruit and
         train engineers for the continued operation of the systems after the project closing.
        Using big data from the traffic command center on the Logistics Public Information
         Platform may improve the efficiency of the park and business development in
         Xiaogan. In this project, the AEZ originally relied on manual data collection and data
         collected by other enterprises. The AEZ was to tap the digital delivery, the ITS and
         associated technology, and the Logistics Public Information Platform to develop a new M&E
         framework for the park based on data collected by the systems such as average travel time,
         rates of empty trucks that continue to run, and warehouse usage. Decision-makers would
         use the data to inform policy, leading to a path where logistics centers use big data for M&E.
        A strong government commitment and those of other stakeholders may contribute to
         a successful project, notwithstanding challenges posed by the pandemic. In this
         project, initial implementation was delayed due to low capacity, land acquisition,
         compensation, procurement, and contract management. In addition, flooding and the COVID-
         19 pandemic further delayed implementation being near the Wuhan area. A change in
         project leadership on the World Bank side helped bolster confidence in completing the
         project.
        An in-depth analysis of recent experience with the relationship between higher cost
         estimates at appraisal and canceled funds during implementation may be useful. In
         this project, US$35 million in cost savings led to cancelled funds. Cost estimates used at
         appraisal were high and competitive bids led to savings. The practice of using the higher cost
         estimate for infrastructure investments in the World Bank’s China portfolio may need to be
         revisited. An in-depth analysis of recent similar experiences other recent China projects may
         benefit future operations not only for the China program, but also for other countries.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No


                                                                                                    Page 15 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CN-Hubei Xiaogan Logistics (P132562)



14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The report followed the guidelines and provided a clear picture of the project. The report provided credible
evidence from the big data generated by the system financed by the project to support the
reported achievements. The report provided useful annexes to highlight or strengthen the justification for the
ratings. The report was candid in highlighting the shortcomings in the initial phase of implementation, including
capacity constraints and the need for corrective measures including cancelling US$35 million and extending the
project closing date. Clear links between evidence and findings were summarized throughout the report.
Lessons were based on the operational experience, linked to the narrative and the ratings, noting the need to
revisit the practice of using higher cost estimates at appraisal to avoid nonuse of uncommitted loan proceeds.
The report was results-oriented although some outcomes would have benefited from improved description. The
report was internally consistent, integrated various parts such as the review of Bank performance at supervision
and compliance needs of safeguards, financial management, and procurement. Overall, the quality of the report
is rated Substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                   Page 16 of 16
