     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Maldives Sustainable Fisheries Project (P157801)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0023644

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P157801                                     Maldives Sustainable Fisheries Project

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Maldives                                    Environment, Natural Resources & the Blue Economy


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-D1750                                   31-Dec-2022                                         17,553,706.57

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 11-Apr-2017                                 31-Dec-2022

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                             18,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                              17,140,507.96                                              0.00

 Actual                                          17,553,706.57                                              0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Chikako Miwa                Vibecke Dixon                 Avjeet Singh                   IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) of the project was "to improve management of fisheries at the
   regional and national levels including support to establish mariculture in Targeted Atolls in the
   Maldives" (Loan Agreement, schedule 1, page 4). The PDO formulation in the Loan Agreement was the
   same as that in the PAD (para 36).




                                                                                                   Page 1 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Maldives Sustainable Fisheries Project (P157801)



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  16-May-2022

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   Component A: Augmentation of Institutional Capacity for Marine Fisheries Management (Estimate:
   US$5.09 million, Actual: US$5.33 million, 105 percent of the estimate) aimed to enhance the government’s
   capacity and system to monitor the fisheries sector and strengthen internal control of marine fisheries value
   chains, focusing on delivery of the Indian Ocean Regional agenda of improving the overall fisheries
   management and marine zoning for long-term benefits. This component had four sub-components.

          (A1) Develop key fisheries management and planning instruments, including updating the fisheries
           policy and legislative framework, zoning the entire Maldivian exclusive economic zone, supporting
           grouper fish management, and preparing coral reef and reef fishery management plans.
          (A2) Develop and implement fisheries management activities to ensure compliance with
           requirements of the Indian Ocean Tuna Commission and the European Union, including expanding
           monitoring, control, and surveillance (MCS), vessel registration and monitoring systems, electronic
           observer systems, and reporting systems for commercial marine fisheries, as well as collaborating
           with regional and international actors on conservation and management measures.
          (A3) Support long-term program for fisheries management, including conducting sampling programs,
           stock assessments, and conservation zone surveys, preparing protocols for disease surveillance,
           and conducting quality control of brood stocks and fish feed.
          (A4) Build capacity of fisheries sector to strengthen local and national skills for fishery management
           and consequent diversification into mariculture, including providing training, collaborating with
           National Geographic Information System (GIS), and establishing a fisheries management
           information system.

   Component B: Support to Mariculture and Diversification of Fisheries (Estimate: US$10.76 million,
   Actual: US$10.94 million, 102 percent of the estimate) aimed to support developing mariculture by
   enhancing research, demonstration, and provision of extension services. This component had four sub-
   components.

          (B1) Develop and demonstrate mariculture production and technology package, including building
           mariculture infrastructure, preparing medium-term operations plans and service standards for the
           Maniyafushi Mariculture Research and Development Facility, developing and demonstrating
           technology packages for mariculture species, and conducting market studies.
          (B2) Promote mariculture out-grower schemes and seafood growth clusters, including assessing
           capacity and community custodianship of the coral reef resources, providing start-up investments
           and technical support, and conducting studies to develop gender actions in mariculture.

                                                                                                    Page 2 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Maldives Sustainable Fisheries Project (P157801)



         (B3) Support design, construction, and operation of a multispecies hatchery, including developing
          breeder stock development programs and professional training plans.
         (B4) Scope long-term marine fisheries diversification studies, including planning studies related to
          technology packages and conservation plans for new marine species to be explored in future.

   Component C: Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation (Estimate: US$2.15 million, Actual:
   US$1.39 million, 65 percent of the estimate) intended to provide equipment, technical assistance, training,
   and incremental operating cost to the Ministry of Fisheries and Agriculture and its Project Management Unit
   to manage, implement, and monitor and evaluate project activities.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project Cost. At appraisal, the total project cost was estimated at US$18 million (PAD, para 49). At project
   closing, the actual cost was US$17.52 million (ICR, page 44).

   Financing. At appraisal, the project was planned to be fully financed by IDA grants, consisting of regional
   IDA resources of US$16.5 million and national IDA resources of US$1.5 million (PAD, para 49). At project
   closing, the project was fully financed by IDA grants (ICR, page vi).

   Dates and Restructuring. The project was approved on April 11, 2017, and became effective on July 6,
   2017. The Mid-Term Review was recorded in the system on June 21, 2021. The project was closed on
   December 31, 2022, on the same date as originally planned.

   The project had two restructurings on June 3, 2018, and May 16, 2022. The key changes made are
   described below.

         The first restructuring reallocated US$ 1.32 million from component A to component B to
          accommodate the withdrawal of parallel budgetary support for the multi-species hatchery,
          responding to a request from the Ministry of Finance. The first restructuring deferred implementation
          of some activities in component A.
         The second restructuring adjusted indicators and targets, including the downscaling of the PDO
          indicator on mariculture. The deferring of the expenditure in component A was lifted as the
          government budget for the multispecies hatchery was reinstated in fiscal years 2021 and 2022.

   Split rating. IEG concurs with the ICR that a split rating is deemed necessary as the scope of the project
   decreased at the second restructuring.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country and Sector Context: The fisheries sector is a critical contributor to the national economy and the
welfare of the people in Maldives. In 2015, primary fisheries accounted directly for 1.4 percent of gross
domestic product (GDP), excluding manufacturing (3.5 percent of GDP), wholesale and retail trade (4.7

                                                                                                    Page 3 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Maldives Sustainable Fisheries Project (P157801)



percent), and transport (8.7 percent), where fisheries had a major role, as well as generating 11 percent of
employment (PAD, para 15). Fish products constituted 98 percent of all physical exports, providing
important export revenues to the import-dependent economy (ICR, para 1). The country’s per capita
consumption of fish was the highest in the world; the availability of fish was crucial both as food and
nutrients. However, the total fish catch declined from 185,923 tons to 127,350 tons over a decade from
2005, while direct employment reduced to almost two-thirds from around 14,000 in 2001 to less than 9,000
persons in 2015 (ICR, para 2). Three main challenges of the fisheries sector were: (i) the country’s need to
continue exporting a catch in compliance with the international resolutions and standards, making the
government continue allowing catching fish at about 120,000 tons and exporting about 60 percent of the
catch; (ii) excessive reef fishing and live-baits capturing threatening coral reefs; and (iii) a high level of
unemployment among inhabitants of remote atolls. To address these challenges in the fisheries sector, the
government set a vision to promote economic growth and increase job opportunities based on a diversified
economy.

Relevance to Government Strategies: Throughout project implementation, a diversification of the
economy and an enhancement of mariculture were prioritized in the government’s strategies, starting from
the National Adaptation Program of Actions in 2006. At appraisal, the project’s objectives were also in line
with the Fisheries Sector Roadmap by the Ministry of Fisheries, Marine Resources, and Agriculture, which
aimed to (i) update and implement fisheries management plans including diversification; (ii) strengthen the
country’s monitoring, control and surveillance systems; (iii) establish a better knowledge of the impacts of
climate change on the fisheries sector; (iv) reduce the excessive use of live bait in tuna fishery; and (v)
address the heavy exploitation of export-oriented reef fishery. At project closing, the project’s objectives
aligned with the government’s Strategic Action Plan 2019-23, which emphasized an improved management
of fisheries, including policy and regulatory transformations, an improved compliance to regional and
international standards, and a development and establishment of mariculture. To respond to the impacts of
the COVID-19 pandemic, the government also announced a plan for National Resilience and Recovery,
which set the fisheries sector as a cornerstone for recovery.

Relevance to Bank Assistance Strategies: At project closing, the project’s objectives aligned with the
Country Partnership Framework (CPF) fiscal years 2023-2027 specifically, with objective 3, which aimed to
strengthen natural asset-based industries sustainably. The CPF recommended deepening engagement
initiated by this project in the fisheries sector through (i) improving standards in sustainable fisheries
management, including marine health, handling, storage, and energy efficiency, and (ii) assisting regional
countries by drawing experience from the Maldives in sustainable fishing practices.

The World Bank’s Previous Experience in the Sector: From 2015, the World Bank financed the South-
West Indian Ocean Fisheries Governance and Shared Growth (SWIOFish) series of projects to address the
degradation of fish stocks and increase fisheries-related GDP along with local fisheries-related value-added
activities benefiting fisheries households. SWIOFish 1 project (covering Comoros, Mozambique, Tanzania,
and the Indian Ocean Commission) and SWIOFish 2 project (covering Madagascar and the Indian Ocean
Tuna Commission) were designed to provide the needed capacity enhancement to the regional platforms,
while SWIOFish 3 (implemented by Seychelles) and SWIOFish 4 (two-phased operations in Maldives
including this project) were designed to enhance institutional reforms and capacity building at national
levels. SWIOFish 1 supported the country in developing the National Observer Program, and SWIOFish 2
provided the country with training to better comply with international fisheries obligations under the Indian
Ocean Tuna Commission, such as the Port States’ Measures to combat Illegal, Unreported, and
Unregulated fishing.



                                                                                                     Page 4 of 19
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                       Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Maldives Sustainable Fisheries Project (P157801)



               In sum, the project’s objectives aligned with the government's strategies and the World Bank’s assistance at
               project closing. Building on the prior SWIOFish projects in the series, this project aimed to enhance
               institutional reforms and capacity building in the country to improve the management of fish stocks,
               providing positive externalities to the region.

               While there is a clear alignment between the project’s development objectives and the strategies of the
               government and the World Bank’s assistance, the relevance of the objectives had a shortcoming. There
               was a lack of clarity in the PDO formulation around what outcomes would be achieved through improving
               fisheries management. The expected results after the series of projects (i.e., the degradation of the status
               of fish stocks reduced or the local fisheries-related value-added activities benefitting the households
               increased) were described in the PAD (para 29); however, these outcomes were not reflected in the PDO
               formulation. Thus, overall, the relevance of the objectives is rated substantial.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To improve management of fisheries at the regional and national levels including support to establish
                             mariculture in Targeted Atolls in the Maldives

                             Rationale
                             The Theory of Change (ToC) for objective 1 envisioned that project activities including updating the fisheries
                             policy and legislative framework, zoning the entire Maldivian exclusive economic zone, supporting grouper
                             fish management, and developing coral reef and reef fishery management plans, expanding monitoring,
                             control, and surveillance (MCS) systems for vessel registration and electronic observation, and conducting
                             sampling programs for tuna and recreational fish species would result in outputs including stock and health
                             assessments for tuna and other fish species published, updated fisheries policies and legislations published,
                             and real-time monitoring and reporting implemented in compliance with requirements of the Indian Ocean
                             Tuna Commission (IOTC) and the European Union (EU). These outputs were postulated to contribute to the
                             outcome of compliance with the regional requirements on capture fisheries. The ToC also envisioned that
                             project activities, including establishing a mariculture research and demonstration facility, making Design,
                             Build, Operate, and Transfer (DBOT) concessions to establish multispecies hatchery, and providing
                             equipment and extension services to mariculture grow-out farms would result in outputs including mariculture
                             research and demonstration facility operationalized, multispecies hatchery established and operationalized
                             under management of private entities, and mariculture grow-out farms established for demonstration. These
                             outputs were postulated to contribute to the outcome of mariculture and the diversification of fisheries. The
                             above two outcomes were postulated to contribute to the PDO to improve the management of fisheries at the
                             regional and national levels. In the long-term, these outcomes were postulated to contribute to the sustainable


                                                                                                                              Page 5 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Maldives Sustainable Fisheries Project (P157801)



and diversified development of the fisheries sector at the national level and the sustainable management of
fish stock in the South-West Indian Ocean region.

The ToC was convincing primarily, except for the following two logical gaps. First, the project activities for
providing extension services were based on the expectation at the appraisal that the sea cucumber grow-out
farms would be adequately established through the project funded by the International Fund for Agricultural
Development (IFAD). The expectation was found to be implausible, as the grow-out sea cucumber farms
stopped production, maintenance, and upkeep during the pandemic, suffering from financial losses (ICR, para
23). Second, the assessment of the institutional capacity and expertise of the implementing agencies to
facilitate private sector leadership was optimistic (ICR, para 59). The expected results were mostly
attributable to the project.

Critical assumptions included that: (i) the project activities were sufficient to strengthen the country’s
institutional capacity to prepare and implement key management and zoning plans for sustainable capture
fisheries management; (ii) the private entities would invest in mariculture even though such investment was
limited to trading and processing; (iii) the extension services provided by the project would be sufficient to
expand the grow-out mariculture of sea cucumbers invested by the International Fund for Agricultural
Development, and (iv) the government would be committed to providing financial and human resources in a
succeeding project to deepen the reforms and contribution to the regional management of shared fishery
resources.

The PDO contained two elements: (i) to improve the management of fisheries at the regional and national
levels and (ii) to include support to establish mariculture in Targeted Atolls in the Maldives. The second
element was a sub-element of the first element.

(i) to improve management of fisheries at the regional and national levels

Outputs (paras 32-48 and annex 1):

      Support was provided to the Island Countries to improve their negotiation capacity within IOTC,
         meeting the target. Although this indicator was designed as an intermediate results indicator in the
         Results Framework, the indicator formulation was only adequate to measure an input.
        Five IOTC Compliance Support Missions were completed in Maldives, meeting the target of five
         missions (100 percent of the target). Since the outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic, the IOTC
         compliance support missions have been organized using virtual platforms.
        16 key policy or legal instruments were updated in Maldives, more than doubling the target of 6
         instruments (267 percent of the target). The updated instruments consisted of the Fisheries Act
         enacted in 2019, as well as eight regulations and seven fisheries sector management plans adopted
         and notified in 2020.
        680 vessels were inspected under monitoring, control, and surveillance (MCS), not meeting the target
         of 1,100 vessels (62 percent of the target). The original target of 1,100 vessels was the estimated total
         number of tuna fishing vessels at appraisal. During implementation, the number of vessels decreased.
        2,385 fishing trips were covered with electronic observation, not meeting the target of 6,000 trips (40
         percent of the target). The testing and commissioning of the electronic observer systems were
         delayed due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Software integration and optimization took additional time.




                                                                                                    Page 6 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Maldives Sustainable Fisheries Project (P157801)




      Financial management, accounting, and procurement systems were set up in the PMU, achieving the
       target. Although this indicator was designed as an intermediate results indicator in the Results
       Framework, the indicator measured the completion of project management activities.
      Financial reports and audit reports were submitted without delay, meeting the target. Although this
       indicator was designed as an intermediate results indicator in the Results Framework, the indicator
       measured the completion of project management activities.

In addition to the outputs defined in the Results Framework, the ICR reported on the following achieved
output, which did not have any formal target.

      Joint technical proposals for better management of fisheries resources (e.g., the proposals for
       yellowfin tuna) were developed through a series of meetings among the coastal countries of the Indian
       Ocean region (ICR, page 30). This output was linked to the input measured by the intermediate results
       indicator regarding the support provided to the Island Countries to improve their negotiation capacity
       within IOTC.

Outcomes (paras 32-48 and annex 1):

      SWIO countries complied with 77 percent of the IOTC resolutions on Conservation Management
       measures (CMMs) and Minimum Terms and Conditions (MTCs), increasing from the baseline of 72
       percent and meeting the target of 77 percent (100 percent of the target). The actual achievement was
       assessed by the IOTC based on compliance reports and provisional estimates as of April 2022.
            o Maldives complied with 87 percent of the IOTC regulations on CMMs and MTCs, increasing
               from the baseline of 78 percent and exceeding the target of 83 percent (105 percent of the
               target). By the time of the ICR Review, the actual rating for Maldives in 2022 had increased to
               89 percent (IEG’s meeting with the TTL on October 13, 2023; hereafter, TTL meeting).
      100 percent of vessels complied with the IOTC requirements on monitoring and reporting, increasing
       from the baseline of 0 percent and exceeding the target of 90 percent (111 percent of the target).
      100 percent of target beneficiaries rated "Satisfied" or above on project interventions in sample
       surveys, exceeding the target of 80 percent (125 percent of the target). Two sample surveys were
       conducted in March-April 2021 with 120 sample beneficiaries and in December 2020 with 200 sample
       beneficiaries. The primary beneficiaries came from the capture fisheries sector (TTL meeting).
      Direct project beneficiaries reached 3,865 beneficiaries, doubling the target of 1,800 beneficiaries (215
       percent of the target).
            o Female beneficiaries reached 20 percent, meeting the target of 20 percent.

(ii) to establish mariculture in Targeted Atolls in the Maldives

Outputs (paras 32-48 and annex 1):

      115 out-grower farms of sea cucumber demonstrated viability, increasing from the baseline of 100
       farms but not meeting the target of 250 farms (10 percent of the target). During the COVID-19 period,
       all these farms stopped, not enabling the planned expansion to take off.
      19 out-grower farms of groupers demonstrated viability, increasing from the baseline of 0 farms but
       not meeting the target of 200 farms (10 percent of the target) due to the COVID-19 pandemic.



                                                                                                  Page 7 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Maldives Sustainable Fisheries Project (P157801)




      140,000 fingerlings were produced by the hatchery, not meeting the target of 2,000,000 fingerlings (7
       percent of the target). The underachievement was due to the delay in establishing the multispecies
       hatchery during the COVID-19 pandemic.
      100 percent of out-grower mariculture farms received extension services, exceeding the target of 80
       percent.

Outcomes (paras 32-48 and annex 1):

      US$ 365,000 of production from mariculture was supported by the project, not meeting the target of
       US$ 9 million (4 percent of the target). This indicator was dropped at the second restructuring.

Referring to the ToC for objective 1, the compliance with the regional requirements on capture fisheries was
improved, including the compliance of the SWIO countries and Maldives with the IOTC resolutions and of the
vessels with the IOTC requirements on monitoring and reporting. On the other hand, the PDO’s second
element regarding the establishment of mariculture and the diversification of fisheries was not enhanced as
envisioned in terms of production. These were essential to address the key development challenge of the
degradation of fish stocks at the national and regional levels. While the beneficiaries who participated in the
sample surveys showed satisfaction with project interventions, the main beneficiaries came from the capture
fisheries sector. No specific data was available regarding the beneficiaries’ satisfaction level with the project
intervention on mariculture. Overall, the achievement of objective 1 is rated substantial but on the lower end.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
To improve management of fisheries at the regional and national levels including support to establish
mariculture in Targeted Atolls in the Maldives

*At the second restructuring in 2022, the PDO statement did not change. Two revisions to the PDO indicators
and six revisions to the Intermediate Resutls (IR) indicators were made, as described below.
•     The PDO indicator on “Value of production from mariculture supported by the project (US$ million)” was
replaced with the PDO indicator on “Mariculture established and operational (Y/N).”
•     The PDO indicator on the number of direct project beneficiaries increased the target from 1,800 to
3,600.
•     The IR indicator on “Key policy or legal instruments updated in Maldives (Number)” increased the target
from 6 to 16.
•     The IR indicator on “Vessels inspected under MCS (Number)” decreased the target from 1,100 to 670.
•     The IR indicator on “Viability demonstrated for out-grower farms of sea cucumber (or other species
equivalent in value) (Number)” was replaced with the IR indicator on “Mariculture Research and Development
Facility is completed and operational (Number).”
•     The IR indicator on “Viability demonstrated for out-grower farms of groupers (or other species equivalent
in value) (Number)” decreased the target from 200 to 20.



                                                                                                    Page 8 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Maldives Sustainable Fisheries Project (P157801)



•    The IR indicator on “Production of fingerlings by the hatchery (Number)” was replaced by the IR indicator
on “Operational capacity for production and supply of fingerlings in place (Y/N).”

Revised Rationale
The Theory of Change for the objective 1 revision 1 was the same as that for the objective 1.

The revised indicators are in bold Italic.

(i) to improve management of fisheries at the regional and national levels

Outputs (paras 32-48 and annex 1):

      Support was provided to the Island Countries to improve their negotiation capacity within IOTC,
         meeting the target. Although this indicator was designed as an intermediate results indicator in the
         Results Framework, the indicator formulation was only adequate to measure an input.
        Five IOTC Compliance Support Missions were completed in Maldives, meeting the target of five
         missions (100 percent of the target). Since the outbreak of COVID-19 pandemic, the IOTC compliance
         support missions were organized using virtual platform. The IOTC compliance support missions
         helped Maldives achieve compliance ratings.
        16 key policy or legal instruments were updated in Maldives, meeting the target of 16
         instruments (100 percent of the target). See objective 1 for details of the updated instruments.
        680 vessels were inspected under MCS, exceeding the target of 670 vessels (101 percent of the
         target). Although the target was revised downwards, the original intent of the indicator to inspect
         all tuna fishing vessels did not change. The revised target of 670 vessels was based on the total
         number of tuna fishing vessels estimated in 2021.
        On-Board Vessel Electronic Observation System was established and operational, meeting the
         target.

In addition to the outputs defined in the Results Framework, the ICR reported on the following achieved
output which did not have any formal target.

      Joint technical proposals for better management of fisheries resources (e.g., the proposals for
         yellowfin tuna) were developed through a series of meetings among the coastal countries of the Indian
         Ocean region (ICR, page 30). This was an output linked to the input measured by the intermediate
         results indicator regarding the support provided to the Island Countries to improve their negotiation
         capacity within IOTC.

Outcomes (paras 32-48 and annex 1):

      SWIO countries complied with 77 percent of the IOTC resolutions on Conservation Management
         measures (CMMs) and Minimum Terms and Conditions (MTCs), increasing from the baseline of 72
         percent and meeting the target of 77 percent (100 percent of the target). The actual achievement was
         assessed by the IOTC based on compliance reports and provisional estimates as of April 2022.
             o Maldives complied with 87 percent of the IOTC regulations on CMMs and MTCs, increasing
                from the baseline of 78 percent and exceeding the target of 83 percent (105 percent of the
                target). By the time of the ICR Review, the actual rating for Maldives in 2022 had increased to
                89 percent (TTL meeting).

                                                                                                  Page 9 of 19
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               Maldives Sustainable Fisheries Project (P157801)




                                  100 percent of vessels complied with the IOTC requirements on monitoring and reporting, increasing
                                   from the baseline of 0 percent and exceeding the target of 90 percent (111 percent of the target).
                                  100 percent of target beneficiaries rated "Satisfied" or above on project interventions in sample
                                   surveys, exceeding the target of 80 percent (125 percent of the target). Two sample surveys were
                                   conducted in March-April 2021 with 120 sample beneficiaries, and in December 2020 with 200 sample
                                   beneficiaries. The main beneficiaries came from the capture fisheries sector (TTL meeting).
                                  Direct project beneficiaries reached 3,865 beneficiaries, exceeding the target of 3,600
                                   beneficiaries (107 percent of the target).
                                        o Female beneficiaries reached 20 percent, meeting the target of 20 percent.

                            (ii) to establish mariculture in Targeted Atolls in the Maldives

                            Outputs (paras 32-48 and annex 1):

                                  Mariculture Research and Development Facility was completed and operational, meeting the
                                   target.
                                  19 out-grower farms of groupers demonstrated viability, increasing from the baseline of 0
                                   farms and almost meeting the target of 20 farms (95 percent of the target).

                            Outcomes (paras 32-48 and annex 1):

                                  Mariculture was established and operational, meeting the target. Established and operational
                                   mariculture meant all the following: (i) all processes for commercial supply of inputs required for
                                   mariculture (cages, fingerlings, and fish feed) were established; (ii) to supply fingerlings to the out-
                                   grower farms, hatcheries were established, operational, producing and supplying fingerlings, (iii) a
                                   quarantine facility was established and fully operational to facilitate supplementary import of
                                   fingerlings; (iv) at least 50 out-grower farms initiated production; and (v) at least 20 out-grower farms
                                   completed one batch of production and sold the harvested fish products at a profit.

                            Referring to the ToC for the objective 1, the compliance to the regional requirements on capture fisheries was
                            improved, while the establishment and the operationalization of the mariculture was piloted by a group of out-
                            grower farms. The number of targeted out-grower farms decreased to one-tenth of the original target;
                            nevertheless, the target of the revised PDO indicator on the mariculture was achieved. Thus, the achievement
                            of the objective 1 revision 1 is rated substantial.



                            Revised Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale



                                                                                                                               Page 10 of 19
             Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
             Maldives Sustainable Fisheries Project (P157801)



         The achievement of the objective 1 is rated substantial but at the lower end. The overall efficacy of
         the objective 1 is rated substantial with moderate shortcomings.



         Overall Efficacy Rating
         Substantial

 OBJR1_TBL




         OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
         Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
         The achievement of the objective 1 revision 1 is rated substantial; thus, the overall efficacy of the objective 1
         revision 1 is rated substantial.



         Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating
         Substantial



 5. Efficiency
Economic Analysis: At appraisal, the ex-ante internal rate of return (IRR) was estimated as 209 percent over
20 years (PAD, table 3, page 13). However, the ICR (page 45) noted that the ex-ante cost-benefit analysis at
appraisal did not adjust with tax and inflation. At project closing, the ICR (page 48) estimated the ex-ante
benefit-cost ratio (B/C ratio) and the ex-ante IRR with tax adjustment to be 36.63 and 93.45 percent,
respectively. The ex-post B/C ratio and the ex-post IRR with tax adjustment were slightly decreased to 29.38
and 82.44 percent, respectively (ICR, page 49).

The methodology and key assumptions used for the economic analysis at project closing were as follows (ICR,
annex 4, page 45). First, a tax rate of 6 percent and a discount rate of 5 percent were used. Second, the net
benefits (i.e., from maintenance of tuna production, direct jobs in tuna fishing, conservation of reef fishing, direct
jobs protected in reef fishing, mariculture production, and direct jobs created in mariculture) were compared to
the Business-as-Usual scenario. Third, only the benefits from 2021 to 2036 were considered based on the
implementation delay due to the COVID-19 pandemic.

The methodology and assumptions described in the ICR were reasonable, except for the following. The
expectations used by the economic analysis were ambitious, regarding the significant benefits from mariculture
from 2024 onwards and the annual increase of the mariculture activities by 2.5 percent (ICR, annex 4, pages 45
and 47). The mariculture activities were not enhanced during implementation as envisioned, as described in
section 4. The cages procured under the project were yet to be distributed by the government with their budgets
as of October 2023 (TTL meeting). Considering that the establishment of mariculture would require experiments
after the necessary supplies were distributed, it would be unrealistic to expect that increases in products and job
opportunities in the mariculture sector would occur from 2024.




                                                                                                             Page 11 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Maldives Sustainable Fisheries Project (P157801)



Aspects of design and implementation that affected efficiency. The project closed on the originally planned
closing date, although the COVID-19 pandemic restricted the contractors to halt the project activities for up to 24
months as described in detail in the ICR (para 19). On the other hand, scaling down the project scope on
mariculture was one of the key factors that contributed to the timely completion of the project. In the revised
PDO indicator on mariculture, the number of targeted out-grower farms decreased to one-tenth of the original
target, although the actual expenditure on component B (US$ 10.94 million) was almost the same as the original
estimate (US$ 10.76 million) (ICR, annex 3, page 44). One of the main causes of the cost increase was the
increased prices and delays in importing cages due to the COVID-19 pandemic (TTL meeting).

In conclusion, the project was cost-effective based on the ex-post values of the B/C ratios and the IRRs
calculated with adjustments on tax and inflation; nevertheless, some assumptions regarding the calculation of
benefits were not reasonable, as described above. The project was closed without any extension; however, the
scope of the expected outcome decreased while the project expenditure remained at the same level as the
original estimate, as described in section 2. e. Component B expensed almost the same amount as the estimate
to support significantly fewer out-grower farms than the original target. Thus, overall, the efficiency is rated
modest.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      100.00
 Appraisal                                                 93.45
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      100.00
 ICR Estimate                                              82.44
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Table 1. Overall Outcome Ratings.

                                              Objective with Original     Objective after the Second
               Rating Dimension
                                              Indicators and Targets            Restructuring

                                              (April 2017-May 2022)     (June-December 2022)
               Relevance of Objectives                           Substantial
               Efficacy
               Objective 1                          Substantial                   Substantial
               Overall Efficacy                     Substantial                   Substantial

                                                                                                       Page 12 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Maldives Sustainable Fisheries Project (P157801)



               Efficiency                                           Modest
               Outcome Rating                 Moderately Satisfactory   Moderately Satisfactory
               Outcome Rating Value                     4                         4
               Amount Disbursed (US$
                                                         13.97                         3.55
               million)
               Disbursement (%)                          80%                          20%
               Weight Value                              3.20                         0.80
                                                                         4.00
               Total weights
                                                                 (3.20 + 0.80 = 4.00)
            Overall Outcome Rating                              Moderately Satisfactory
a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Financing risk: There was a potential risk that the institutional reforms initiated by this project at the national
level might not be implemented due to a lack of financial resources. The second phase of SWIOFish 4 was
cancelled due to: (i) the new emerging priorities including expanding biosecurity and engaging private
entities in hydroponics, aquaponics, and agroforestry, and (ii) the changes in the regional IDA’s financing
eligibility which required all activities to have direct regional benefits. To mitigate the risk, the World Bank has
approved the Transforming Fisheries Sector Management (TransFORM) project (P179242) to strengthen
regional, evidence-based fisheries management in the SWIO Region and to improve competitiveness in the
fisheries sector in the Maldives.

Technical risk: There was a potential risk that the technical skills and knowledge built in the government
through the project might not be sustained due to the human resources challenges in staffing, staff retention,
and bureaucratic hurdles experienced during implementation. To mitigate the risk, developing and
implementing a sound human resources (skill and capacity) development strategy with key stakeholders
could have been useful (ICR, para 88). Adopting the right incentives to ensure staff motivation can reduce
detrimental and frequent turnover and underperformance. Capacity building can also include training to
change long-held perceptions of the government’s role from the provider to a regulator.

Government ownership risk: There was a potential risk that the government ownership for sustaining and
enhancing the results achieved by the project might decrease after the project closing. To mitigate the risk,
the MoFMRA allocated budgets for preparing and implementing fisheries sector management plans and
started a new operation (P179242) with the World Bank (ICR, para 83).

Environmental risk: There was a potential risk that the enhancement of mariculture could cause concerning
consequences for the environment, including chemical and biological pollution and disease outbreaks. Some
project activities might have contributed to mitigating the risk, such as preparing protocols for disease
surveillance, the quality control of brood stocks and fish feed, and the provision of extension services to the
mariculture out-grower farms.




                                                                                                        Page 13 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Maldives Sustainable Fisheries Project (P157801)




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The strategic relevance and approach of the project were adequate in general, as described in the
  section 3. In addition, this project enabled the World Bank to re-engage in the fisheries sector after many
  years by incorporating data and analysis from the ongoing operations and TA financed by IFAD and JICA
  into the project design (ICR, para 75). The technical aspect of the project was mostly adequate. The
  World Bank team facilitated the provision of expert advice to the Ministry of Fisheries, Marine Resources
  and Agriculture (MoFMRA) for designing the project which covered the infrastructure, institutions, and
  capacity building in equal measure (ICR, para 75). The poverty, gender, and fiduciary aspects of the
  project were adequately considered and reflected in the design. The M&E arrangements were adequate,
  though the M&E design had a shortcoming on the Theory of Change, as described in section 9.a. On the
  other hand, the project’s implementation arrangement on the mariculture development activities was not
  adequate. First, the design of the mariculture production activities was based on the overestimated
  capacities of: (i) the IFAD-financed project to create the required business environment for mariculture
  and (ii) the MoFMRA to implement ambitious mariculture development targets, including that of the
  component coordinators (ICR, para 75). Second, the implementation arrangement did not integrate a
  design to ensure an adequate transfer of technical skills and knowledge from the PMU to the MoFMRA,
  even though the challenge of technical transfer was continuously experienced by all externally financed
  projects in Maldives (ICR, para 75). Thus, overall, the quality at entry is rated moderately satisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The supervision inputs and processes were adequate. The World Bank proactively supported technical
 discussions through regular supervision missions and ad-hoc consultations on various topics, including (i)
 the procurement standards and specifications of Vessel Locating Devices (VLDs) and electronic observers;
 (ii) the private sector investment in the multispecies hatchery; (iii) the real-time data collection from the
 VLDs to the fisheries management information system; (iv) the preparation and implementation of the
 fisheries management plans based on the studies by the Maldives Marine Research Institute; and (v) the
 stakeholder consultations for preparation and adoption of the new legislation and regulations (ICR, para
 77).

 The project modified the original design to adapt to the changing implementation environment, including
 importing grouper fingerlings from Indonesia and downscaling the mariculture production activities due to
 the high post-pandemic price of imported fingerlings. As a transition arrangement, the World Bank
 approved the succeeding project, the Transforming Fisheries Sector Management (TransFORM) project
 (P179242), to strengthen regional, evidence-based fisheries management in the SWIO Region and to
 improve competitiveness in the fisheries sector in the Maldives. On the other hand, the focus on
 development impact decreased when the revised PDO indicator on mariculture set a lower scale target,



                                                                                                   Page 14 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Maldives Sustainable Fisheries Project (P157801)



 and the PDO indicator on the beneficiary perception did not disaggregate data for more granular analysis,
 as described in section 9. b. Thus, overall, the quality of supervision is rated satisfactory.

 The overall Bank performance is rated moderately satisfactory, based on the harmonized guideline
 between OPCS and IEG.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The indicators were encompassing all elements of the PDO statements, though some indicators were set
 at the output level. The intermediate results indicators were largely adequate to capture the contribution of
 the project activities. The baselines and targets were available for all indicators. The objectives were clear,
 though the expected outcomes at the regional- and national-level could have been more specific. The M&E
 arrangements were well-embedded institutionally, as the Compliance Division of the Ministry of Fisheries,
 Marine Resources and Agriculture (MoFMRA) recruited two staff members to coordinate with all relevant
 divisions in the ministry to collect and report the M&E data (ICR, para 67). On the other hand, the M&E
 design had shortcomings. First, the Theory of Change (ToC) presented in the ICR (para 8) did not align
 well with the causal links in the PDO statement which indicated that the diversification into mariculture and
 the consequent shift away from capture fishery were essential elements to improve the fisheries
 management. The ToC also did not clarify to what extent the project aimed to directly contribute to improve
 fisheries management at the regional level. Second, although both the PAD (para 92) and the ICR (para
 53) noted that the selection criterion to prioritize the out-grower firms owned and managed by women, the
 relevant indicators were not sex-disaggregated to assess the achievements of the results on enhancing
 women’s participation in mariculture (i.e., the numbers of out-grower farms of sea cucumbers and groupers
 that demonstrated viability and the number of out-grower mariculture farms receiving extension services).



b. M&E Implementation
  The indicators in the Results Framework were measured and reported adequately. The agency
  responsible for M&E ensured adequate M&E staffing arrangements. The data was found to be reliable
  and of good quality. The project conducted comprehensive surveys of all people involved in the fisheries
  sector with support from the National Bureau of Statistics and informed the national statistics. On the
  other hand, there were shortcomings in M&E implementation. First, at the second restructuring, the PDO
  indicator on mariculture reduced specification and the number of target farms. Second, the sea cucumber
  pilot farms suffered due to a lack of regular monitoring and evaluation, resulting in the difficulties to
  establish causal relationships and understand the reasons for the inadequate growth (ICR, para 87).
  Third, although the PAD (page 23) intended the data of the beneficiary satisfaction survey to be

                                                                                                    Page 15 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Maldives Sustainable Fisheries Project (P157801)



  disaggregated by gender and age group cohorts, the project did not report the disaggregated data at
  project closing. Although the ICR (page 30) noted that all beneficiaries that participated in consultations,
  stakeholder dialogue sessions, and sample surveys expressed satisfaction to the project interventions,
  data disaggregation and analysis might have helped an identification of what did not go well and why.



c. M&E Utilization
  The M&E findings were communicated to the various stakeholders in periodic meetings of the Project
  Steering Committee. The M&E data informed the revision of the Results Framework in the second
  restructuring. The M&E data was used to provide evidence of the achievement of the outcome on the
  fisheries management, although the utilization was limited for the outcome on the mariculture.

  Overall, the M&E design and implementation had some minor shortcomings, which affected the M&E
  utilization for the outcome on the mariculture. Nevertheless, the M&E data was sufficient to provide
  evidence of the achievement of the outcome on the fisheries management. Thus, the M&E quality is
  rated substantial.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Environmental safeguards. The project was assessed as an Environmental Category B and triggered the
   safeguard operational policies of Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01) and Natural Habitats (OP 4.04). An
   Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) was prepared, and appropriate environmental
   management measures were implemented. During implementation, the project ensured that environmental
   impact assessments and management plans were prepared for the sites selected for the pilot activities.
   Environmental provisions were included in construction contracts and strictly monitored. Mitigation
   measures were implemented and progress reports regularly submitted for the World Bank’s review. The OP
   4.04 on Natural Habitats was triggered as all of Maldives’ islands are surrounded by coral reefs and
   sensitive marine ecosystems, although the project was not expected to affect any natural habitats. The due
   diligence measures were selected specifically to avoid impacts on corals and water quality. The Project
   Management Unit (PMU) also prepared Good Environmental Practice Guidance Notes for Grouper Farming
   that will be used in planning and implementation of grouper mariculture by the Ministry of Fisheries, Marine
   Resources and Agriculture (MoFMRA) in future.

   No social safeguards policy was triggered.




b. Fiduciary Compliance


                                                                                                     Page 16 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Maldives Sustainable Fisheries Project (P157801)



   Procurement. The PMU conducted procurement in conformity with the procurement manual that was
   developed at approval in accordance with the World Bank Guidelines. The project staff including senior
   officials of the National Tender Board (under the Ministry of Finance) took the training on the World Bank
   procurement guidelines and standard bidding documents. The PMU updated and submitted Procurement
   Plan regularly. The project achieved lower contract prices than the original estimate by implementing
   competitive biddings and optimizing designs. For example, the case of the “design-build-finance-operate
   maintain and transfer” concession for the multispecies hatchery attracted a private sector investment of
   US$8 million where the concessionaire did not request any Viability Gap Financing. (ICR, para 74). On the
   other hand, the project experienced procurement delays due to the prolonged decision-making at the
   MoFMRA and the procedures adopted by the National Tender Board. Such delays were progressively
   reduced as the PMU gained more experience. At project completion, there was no outstanding issue on
   procurement.

   Financial Management. The PMU used the government’s systems for project budgeting, accounting,
   payment, and audit. The MoFMRA provided a parallel government budget of US$2.9 million for the
   project’s financial management. The staffing at the PMU was adequate to carry out financial management
   functions. The financial reports were submitted quarterly by the PMU to the World Bank. The internal
   auditors conducted by independent firm of auditors reviewed the project transactions on a quarterly basis
   and there were no major accounting and internal control issues reported in these audit reports. The Auditor
   General of Maldives conducted the annual statutory audits. The audit reports, submitted on a timely basis,
   were mostly unqualified, barring minor audit observations that were addressed subsequently by the PMU
   and the MoFMRA. At project completion, there was no outstanding issue, and no ineligible expense was
   declared.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   No unintended impact was reported in the ICR.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                     IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
                                Moderately
Outcome                                                 Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
                                Moderately
Bank Performance                                        Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                  Substantial             Substantial

Quality of ICR                  ---                     Substantial




                                                                                                   Page 17 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Maldives Sustainable Fisheries Project (P157801)



12. Lessons

The ICR (paras 86-88) provided three lessons. Additional lessons were provided during the IEG’s
meeting with the TTL. Four of those lessons are presented here with rephrasing as these may be
useful for the other projects on expanding fisheries and mariculture sector in the small island
counties.

The fisheries sector has the potential to emerge as a fallback sector to absorb laid-off labor
from the other sectors if the fisheries sector can be more diversified and modernized. Despite
the initial anticipation at the outset of the pandemic, the fisheries sector achieved a rapid export
turnaround. Even during 2020, which experienced a few months of lockdown, the export was 13
percent higher than in 2019, and exports further increased by 9 percent and 16 percent in 2021 and
2022 (ICR, para 87). However, the fisheries sector could not accommodate labor mobility from the
declined tourism sector even temporarily because the fisheries sector could not absorb additional
labor and lacked modern infrastructure like cold storage and canning facilities.

Combining knowledge/reform-oriented activities and infrastructure investments can be
beneficial when complementing each other. In this case, component A of the project focused on
infrastructure installation, such as Vessel Locating Devices and electronic observer systems.
However, it was necessary also to implement regulatory reforms to ensure compliance with fishing
protocols in the Maldives. The development and operation of the complementary Fisheries
Information System played a crucial role in utilizing the electronic observers effectively.

If the mariculture sector's growth is enhanced, it may attract more private investments. The
project used a design-build-finance-operate-maintain and transfer (DBFOMT) concession to mobilize
private sector financing of US$8 million for the construction of the multispecies hatchery and an
additional amount for operation and maintenance of the facility at no cost to the government (ICR,
para 55). However, despite the government’s keen interests in privatization, private entities generally
have limited interests in mariculture due to the low expected growth rate of the mariculture sector
compared to the fisheries sector (TTL meeting). To build on the project’s success in private capital
mobilization, more support for privatizing public investments and enhancing the mariculture sector
would be needed.

If a sound human resources development strategy for implementation agencies is in place,
then there is a higher potential that adequate technical expertise in the implementing
agencies will be retained. Although the project introduced an innovative private sector-led
approach to mariculture development, the Ministry of Fisheries, Marine Resources and Agriculture
(MoFMRA) had no expertise and motivation to operationalize the private sector-led approach and
facilitate private sector leadership (ICR, para 59). During preparation, the capacity assessment could
have included a thorough analysis of risks to appropriate staffing, staff retention, and bureaucratic
hurdles in the human resources development strategy. As a risk mitigation measure, adopting the
right types of incentives to ensure staff motivation can reduce detrimental and frequent turnover and
underperformance.



13. Assessment Recommended?


                                                                                                   Page 18 of 19
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Maldives Sustainable Fisheries Project (P157801)




  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is concise and tightly written. The ICR’s lessons are responding to the specific experiences and
findings for the project. There is a clear link between the narrative, the ratings and the evidence. It provides a
substantiated set of observations that are aligned to the project development objective. The report follows the
guidelines and seeks to triangulate data to reach conclusions. The quality of evidence and analysis is generally
aligned to the messages outlined in the ICR, except for some weakness in methodological clarifications and
data comprehensiveness, as described in sections 4 and 5. To supplement the ICR, the TTL provided
additional information in response to IEG’s inquiries. On the other hand, the Theory of Change presented in the
ICR (para 8) did not align well with the causal links in the PDO statement and did not clarify to what extent the
project aimed to directly contribute to improve fisheries management at the regional level, as described in
section 9.a. Therefore, the overall quality of ICR is rated substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                    Page 19 of 19
