     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Zhuzhou Brownfield Remediation Project (P147381)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0023650

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P147381                                     Zhuzhou Brownfield Remediation Project

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 China                                       Environment, Natural Resources & the Blue Economy


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-85870                                  31-Dec-2021                                         52,134,583.36

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 31-Mar-2016                                 30-Jun-2022

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           150,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                             52,134,583.36                                               0.00

 Actual                                         52,134,583.36                                               0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Janis D. Bernstein          Vibecke Dixon                 Avjeet Singh                   IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) was “to reduce public exposure to contaminated land in the project
   area using risk-based remediation approaches (Financing Agreement, Schedule 1, p. 6).” The PDO
   formulation was identical the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, p. 16).

   The objective will not be parsed because “to reduce public exposure to contaminated land in the project area”
   is the objective and “using risk-based remediation approaches” is a description of how the objective will be
   achieved and it is therefore at a lower level of the results chain. The latter part of the objective could have

                                                                                                   Page 1 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Zhuzhou Brownfield Remediation Project (P147381)



   come after a “by” or “through”, indicating that the risk-based approach is the means to get to the end; reduced
   exposure



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   Component 1: Remediation of contaminated plots (total cost at appraisal: US$137.43 million
   including IBRD loan US$103.96 million; actual cost: US$126.54 million, including IBRD loan
   US$36.66 million). This component supported activities related to the cleanup and remediation of
   contaminated plots and of dispersed open soil plots in residential areas within the Qingshuitang Industrial
   Zone (QIZ) core industrial area, including: (a) land clearance, and demolition and removal of household
   structures in the remediation area and closed plants; (b) materials transport, including road construction as
   needed; (c) soil and sediment treatment in closed plants, remediation of contaminated soil plots, ponds, and
   channels; (d) cleanup of industrial waste piles; and (e) soil exchange programs for open soil plots in
   residential areas.

   Component 2: Associated treatment and disposal works (total cost at appraisal: US$46.80 million
   including IBRD loan US$39.67 million; actual cost: US$7.28 million, all from IBRD loan). This
   component supported investments in remediation and disposal facilities that were required to treat
   contaminated materials, thus enabling the remediation of certain plots or making sure that the remediation
   was sustainable under Component 1. They included: (a) Xinqiao dewatering site, (b) Xinqiao Solidification
   and Stabilization facility, (c) wastewater treatment facilities, and (d) development of an industrial solid waste
   landfill in the project area.

   Component 3: Capacity building and knowledge management (total cost at appraisal: US$8.23
   million including IBRD loan US$4.54 million; actual cost: US$3.54 million, including IBRD loan
   US$3.43 million). The component supported capacity building for Zhuzhou Municipality and Shifeng District
   to operationalize the technical and management knowledge gained from project implementation, to engage
   the public, manage remediation and redevelopment strategic planning. Activities included: (a) establishing
   an environmental information and demonstration center to serve as an environmental education platform for
   the public, a data monitoring center, and a place for nation-wide knowledge dissemination events; (b) public
   disclosure activities, including disclosure of monitoring reports, pollution maps, and other environmental
   information; (c) a study on Qingshuitang brownfield remediation and strategic planning; and (d) a study on
   the compliance framework for Qingshuitang environmental quality and industrial pollution control.

   Component 4: Project management, monitoring, and evaluation (total cost at appraisal: US$20.98
   million including IBRD loan of US$1.45 million; actual cost: US$19.17 million, including IBRD loan of
   US$4.76 million). The component supported the Project Management Office (PMO) and the Project


                                                                                                       Page 2 of 21
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Zhuzhou Brownfield Remediation Project (P147381)



  Implementation Unit (PIU) with training, study tours, and consulting services, including contracts for project
  management capacity building, project management, and external environmental and social monitoring.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost. The total estimated project cost at appraisal was US$244.74 million. The final cost at closure
  was US$164.59 million.

  Financing. The IBRD loan was originally US$150 million. The actual loan amount at the end of the project
  was US$52.13 million. US$77 was cancelled during one of the restructurings, and the remaining
  undisbursed balance of US$20.87 million was cancelled at project closing. As discussed in the section on
  Efficiency, US$77.0 million was cancelled through project restructuring in 2021 to fund the World Bank’s
  emergency response initiatives addressing the impacts of the pandemic in China. Based on site
  investigations carried out during project implementation, it was concluded that these funds could be
  cancelled without affecting the achievement of the PDO because: (a) the costs of the required
  decontamination at various sites were lower than originally estimated due to the changes made in the future
  use of those sites that were not known during project preparation, and (b) a third party was to take over
  remediation of parts of the project area through a public private partnership (PPP) arrangement, which also
  was not known at the time of project preparation.

  Borrower Contribution. At appraisal, the Borrower contribution was estimated to be US$94.74 million. At
  the end of the project, the actual Borrower contribution totaled US$112.46 million.

  Dates. The project was approved on March 31, 2016 and became effective on September 13,
  2016. Although the planned date of the mid-term review (MTR) was May 1, 2020, the actual date of the
  MTR date was August 31, 2020. The delay was due to the discussions between the Bank and the client
  over the use of the project cost savings. The client wanted to use the savings for remediation of additional
  areas in the industrial zone that had become available for cleanup, while the Bank wanted to use the funds
  for the global COVID response. These discussions continued after the MTR as well. As noted below, the
  project was restructured twice; the first one was in June 2021 and the second one in December 2021. The
  original closing date was December 31, 2021. Following the December 21, 2021 restructuring, the closing
  date was extended by six months. The actual closing date was June 30, 2022.

  Additional Financing and Restructuring. The project was restructured twice.

  Restructuring of June 2021
  The first restructuring in 2021, which was done almost a year after the MTR, authorized revisions to the
  Results Framework, changes in components and component costs, cancellation of financing, and
  reallocation of funds between disbursement categories. The delay in the restructuring was due to the Bank
  team’s extended discussions with the Borrower prior to and following the MTR concerning the use of loan
  savings (see below for the reasons for the reduction).

  The restructuring authorized changes in PDO-level or Outcome Indicators 1 and 5 and their respective
  target values to reflect (a) the findings of soil investigations carried out during project implementation
  indicating that a smaller area (1.70 km2 compared to the 2.84 km2 at appraisal) of land within the project
  area needed remediation, and (b) part of the project area would be remediated and redeveloped by third-
  party developers (in line with World Bank policies and standards). As noted above, the latter development

                                                                                                    Page 3 of 21
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  Zhuzhou Brownfield Remediation Project (P147381)



was not anticipated during project preparation and was beyond the World Bank’s control. The specific
changes to the PDO-level indicators are summarized below.

Changes to the PDO Indicators: The original PDO Indicator 1 (area of contaminated land managed or
dumpsite closed under the project (original target: 284 hectares) was split into two parts: (PDO Indicator 1a)
the area of contaminated land to be managed or dumpsite closed under the project (loan-financed activities)
(revised target: 122 hectares) and (PDO Indicator 1b) the area of contaminated land to be managed or
dumpsite closed by third parties (revised target: 48 hectares). The revised overall total area to be managed
or dumpsite closed was reduced to 170 hectares.

The original PDO Indicator 5 (verified remediation works implemented per risk-based design (original target:
273 hectares) was split into two parts for the same reasons as those described under PDO Indicator 1: PDO
Indicator 5a (verified remediation works implemented per risk-based design (loan-financed activities –
revised target: 122 hectares) and PDO Indicator 5b (verified remediation works implemented per risk-based
design (third-party financed activities – revised target: 48 hectares). The revised total became 170
hectares.

Revised Components: Revisions in the components included the addition of works and revised
component costs. As part of the June 2021 restructuring, six new remediation works were added, which
included the clean-up of five contaminated land plots (total area 0.16 km2) and the construction of one
centralized contaminated soil stabilization and solidification facility in the QIZ core area for the treatment of
soil from the project and post-project cleanup in other parts of the QIZ area. The component cost allocations
were revised in line with the cancelled loan amount.

Cancellation of Loan Savings: The June 2021 restructuring approved a cancellation of US$77.0 million to
reflect the reduced costs for completing project activities. The disbursement schedule for the remaining loan
amount was revised accordingly. The loan savings were initially intended to be used for additional
remediation works that were identified, discussed, and appraised during the project mid-term review (MTR).
However, these savings were largely cancelled in 2021 in order to respond to the early shocks of the
COVID-19 pandemic. The Government and the World Bank had agreed to cancel uncommitted loan
amounts from ongoing China projects in seven provinces, including the loan for this project, to fund higher
priority pandemic response initiatives. However, this partial cancellation of loan savings did not compromise
the PDO. By the end of the project, the remaining project savings of US$22 million were cancelled.

Restructuring of December 2021
This restructuring authorized the extension of the loan closing date by six months from December 31, 2021
to June 30, 2022 to provide additional time to complete implementation and achieve the PDO. The six extra
months were considered a limited extension to make up for the delays in works, reduced availability of the
work force, and supply change interruptions caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, The disbursement
projection for the remaining activities were updated accordingly.

 Split rating
Two outcome indicators, along with their target values, were reduced during the June-2021 restructuring to
reflect the reduced area that needed remediation, and to make a distinction between remediated areas
financed from the loan and those by third party developers. Project outcomes will thus be evaluated using a
split evaluation against the original and the revised targets.




                                                                                                   Page 4 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Zhuzhou Brownfield Remediation Project (P147381)




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country and sector context. China's industrialization process during the last seven decades resulted in
many sites with soil and groundwater pollution (often referred to as “brownfields”), which pose two sets of
problems: (a) pollutants in soil, water, groundwater, and disposed waste that cause environmental and
public health risks; and (b) obstacles to urban and local economic development. Prior to project appraisal,
industrial restructuring, urban upgrading, and rising environmental awareness made brownfield remediation
and redevelopment an increasingly urgent need for China, and the Chinese government began to take
action to remediate the brownfields to improve environmental and public health conditions and support
sustainable urban development. At the time of project appraisal, the Government had already launched
several policies and national programs to promote industrial restructuring and contaminated site
remediation. Qingshuitang Industrial Zone (QIZ), centrally located in Zhuzhou Municipality of Hunan
Province, was one of the nationally recognized priority areas for remediation.

At the time of project appraisal, the country lacked the capacity and experience to manage brownfield
remediation using risk-based approaches, the method widely accepted and used in many countries. Unlike
the traditional method of site remediation (excavate, remove, and treat/dispose offsite), risk-based
approaches tailor remediation interventions to control current and future risks of potential human and
environmental exposure to contaminants in soil and groundwater based on intended land uses. The
significant cost-saving effects of such approaches are widely acknowledged; the costs of remediation with
traditional maximum cleanup can be eight times higher. However, compared to the traditional approach,
risk-based remediation requires substantially more management inputs such as: (a) comprehensive
information on site contamination to inform cleanup and future land-uses; (b) analysis of exposure paths
between contamination and the public and environmental resources; (c) identification of applicable
remediation techniques; (d) determination of proper monitoring and oversight; and (e) preparation of
strategic land-use and urban development plans that are adaptable to changing circumstances. China
recommended these approaches in their 2017 soil pollution prevention and control plan, and requested
World Bank support and financing for remediating a QIZ core area using risk-based interventions.

Alignment with World Bank strategy. At completion, the project objective of reducing public exposure to
contaminated land was relevant to the World Bank’s Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for FY2020-
2025, particularly Engagement Area Two: Promoting Greener Growth, and Objective 2.2: Reducing Air,
Soil, Water, and Marine Plastic Pollution, which among other objectives, focuses on strengthening
institutions for coordinated pollution management and land use planning. The part of the project objective
that called for risk-based approaches was relevant to two other objectives highlighted in the CPF: (a)
building local capacity to monitor and enforce environmental regulations; and (b) improving the
transparency of environmental information. By operationalizing the risk-based remediation approaches, the
PDO was directly relevant to building the capacity of local institutions for cost-effective land
decontamination and demand-driven redevelopment.

Alignment with China’s country strategy. The project objective was also highly relevant to China’s
development priorities, specifically China’s 14th Five-Year Plan (FYP 2021-2025), which stipulates that
remediating contaminated land and addressing heavy metal pollution are priorities for environmental
management (Chapter 38), and that greening urban spatial planning is closely linked to comprehensive
urban transformation (Chapter 29). China had strengthened its policy and regulatory framework for

                                                                                                  Page 5 of 21
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Zhuzhou Brownfield Remediation Project (P147381)



               brownfield remediation in parallel with the implementation of this project. The Ministry of Ecology and
               Environment and its subsidiary, the Chinese Academy of Environmental Planning, have been attentive to
               the challenges of contaminated sites in Zhuzhou and the conceptual and practical approaches under the
               project as well as the introduction of international good practices. The PDO was also directly relevant to
               Zhuzhou’s transition to a greener and innovative industrial base by 2025, and was regarded as an important
               first phase for full redevelopment of the QIZ core area expected to be completed by 2030.

               Previous sector experience. The Zhuzhou Greenfield Remediation Project was the World Bank’s first
               industrial brownfield remediation operation in China. The World Bank’s value-added was to introduce
               international good practices and build the capacity of local institutions for cost-effective land
               decontamination and demand-driven redevelopment. The objective was pitched at an appropriate level of
               ambition given the context.

               The overall relevance of the objective is rated as High.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             The PDO was to reduce public exposure to contaminated land in the project area using risk-based
                             remediation approaches.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change (TOC)

                             A Theory of Change (ToC) was created for the ICR that outlines the project’s inputs, outputs, and outcomes.
                             The project’s inputs were: Remediation of contaminated plots (e.g., site preparation and removal of industrial
                             waste, etc.), Treatment and Disposal Works (e.g., increase landfill capacity for disposal of contaminated soil
                             from project sites, create soil stabilization and solidification capacity, and soil treatment), and Capacity
                             building and knowledge management activities, such as underground water research, Brownfield remediation
                             and redevelopment research, construction of an environmental information and demonstration center, and
                             disclosure of remediation status). These inputs were expected to lead to outputs such as the cleaning up
                             seven sites of contaminated land, relocation of manufacturing sites, landfills built and upgraded, soil
                             stabilization and solidification center built to treat contaminated soil, and reduction and recycling of industrial
                             solid waste. These outputs were, in turn, expected to lead to the following outcomes: brownfield remediation
                             at scale, a reduction in risk of public exposure to soil contamination, and the clean-up to be informed by risk-
                             based remediation approaches. This was expected to lead to the longer-term targets of improved



                                                                                                                                  Page 6 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Zhuzhou Brownfield Remediation Project (P147381)



environmental and public health conditions and improved urban and local economic development through
sustainable urbanization. The revision of two of the indicators did not affect the ToC.

The Theory of Change was clear and convincing and did not contain any logical gaps. The project outcomes
were attributable to the project activities.

Outputs

      7 project sites in Zhuzhou’s QIZ core industrial area were remediated and met contamination levels
         based on their future land use, exceeding the original target of 6;
        All project activities related to relocation of manufacturing sites and compensation of workers fully
         complied with national standards, as targeted;
        2,767,500 tons per year of industrial or municipal solid waste were reduced or recycled under the
         project, exceeding the original target of 1,100,000 tons/year;
        200 people were trained in contaminated site remediation, achieving the original target of 200; and
        Environmental monitoring reports were publicly disclosed, as targeted.
        A spatial zoning plan for Qinghuitang Core Area was updated with the appropriate risk assessment
         and cost-effectiveness taken into consideration, as targeted. The local government made major
         adjustments to their spatial plan, specifically increasing the share of residential land in project restored
         areas given the acceptable level of contamination. In the Xiangshiling Sub-Area, for example, over
         82,000 m2 of contaminated land was cleaned up under the project by 2021, and has been
         redeveloped for housing. In the Yingfeng sub-area, the land was remediated after four polluting plants
         were shut down and is now being redeveloped for government buildings and commercial use.

In addition to the above, the ICR reported on the following achieved outputs, which were not included in the
RF and hence had no target values:

      Closed industrial plants and households in the project area were demolished and removed;
      Industrial waste piles were removed from the project sites so the land could be remediated;
      The Hehua landfill was constructed for the disposal of Class 1 contaminated soil from project sites;
      Xinqiao landfill was upgraded for disposal of Class 1 and Class 2 contaminated soil from project sites;
      A soil treatment center was constructed for the treatment of contaminated soil from the project and
       non-project remediation activities in QIZ;
      A geospatial information system (GIS) based tool was developed to visualize land contamination
       levels before and after project remediation and intended land uses, as well as to support
       redevelopment decisions;
      Two studies were completed on Groundwater and Brownfield Remediation and Redevelopment
      An environmental information and demonstration center was established.


Outcomes

      122 hectares of contaminated land managed or dumpsites were closed, not achieving the original
       target of 284 hectares;
      118 hectares of verified loan-financed remediation works were implemented per risk-based design by
       the end of the project, not achieving the original target of 273 hectares;

                                                                                                       Page 7 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Zhuzhou Brownfield Remediation Project (P147381)




      6,237 people in the project area had reduced potential risk of exposure to contaminated land,
       achieving the original target of 6,237 people.
      262,000 people were direct project beneficiaries, achieving the original target of 262,000;
      50.8 percent of the direct beneficiaries were female, achieving the original target of 50 percent.
      80.2 percent of people living in the Zhuzhou QIZ indicated that sufficient information was available
       regarding the area’s remediation process and grievance redress mechanism, achieving the original
       target of 80 percent.

While the project achieved the original targets for several people in the project area with reduced potential for
exposure to contaminated land and the number of direct project beneficiaries, and while it exceeded the
original target for treated solid waste, it did not achieve the original targets related to the area of land cleared,
and dumpsites closed. The original objective is therefore rated Modest.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
The PDO was to reduce public exposure to contaminated land in the project area using risk-based
remediation approaches.

Revised Rationale
The PDO was not revised, but two of the main outcome targets were reduced at the restructuring in June 30,
2021. The revisions were due to third parties taking over remediation of contaminated land in parts of the
project area, and the overall reduction in the area of land considered necessary for site remediation based on
new site investigations. These changes had no implications for the ToC, which remained unchanged and
relevant also after restructuring.

Outputs

The types and targets of project outputs, including those that were and were not intermediate indicators, were
the same as those listed above under the original objective. They did not change as a result of project
restructuring in June 2021.

Outcomes

      170 hectares of contaminated land managed or dumpsites were closed under the loan and third
       parties, achieving the revised target of 170 hectares. Among these, 122 hectares were managed or
       dumpsites closed under the loan (achieving the revised target), and 48 hectares were managed or
       dumpsites closed by third parties (achieving the revised target), using PPP schemes.
      118 hectares of verified remediated works were completed under the World Bank loan by the end of
       June 2022, almost achieving the revised target of 122. This was not fully achieved due to verification
       delays in 2022 caused by lock-downs enforced locally during the Covid-19 pandemic. However, the
       end target was fully achieved by the end of May 2023. This indicator was renamed with its target value

                                                                                                       Page 8 of 21
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Zhuzhou Brownfield Remediation Project (P147381)



                                   revised following the June 2021 restructuring to separate the area of contaminated land remediated
                                   with the World Bank loan versus the area remediated by third parties.
                                  48 hectares of verified remediation works were implemented by third-parties by the end of the project,
                                   thus achieving the revised target of 48 hectares. This was a new indicator added after the June 2021
                                   restructuring to reflect verifiable remediation conducted by third parties following World Bank technical
                                   and safeguard requirements.

                            All contaminated land requiring remediation in the project area was remediated to the required level (using
                            risk-based approaches), and all of the decontamination at the sites was verified. The Bank team informed
                            IEG (11.04.23) that a group of experts selected by the environmental authority reviewed the site investigation
                            reports after the remediation work was completed, and provided feedback at a meeting organized by city or
                            provincial environmental authority. The experts’ feedback showed that the cleanup of the sites met the
                            previously defined remediation targets for residential and non-residential land use, respectively. The City
                            environmental authority, the City Natural Resources Bureau (basically the city planning department), and the
                            provincial environmental authority would then agree that the remediation outcome of the site or district is
                            accepted and the relevant filing for the records would be approved.

                            The project met or exceeded all of the other outcome and intermediate results targets which were not revised
                            in the restructuring.

                            In addition to the achievements captured in the Results Framework, the ICR reported on the following (hence
                            without target values): The project increased the capacity of local institutions in managing areas with legacy
                            environmental liabilities. By introducing risk-based approaches to remediating contamination, the project
                            showcased integrated land decontamination with cost-effectiveness, and confirmed the strategic position of
                            Zhuzhou in the regional development agenda.

                            The project achieved all output and all revised outcome targets related to the area of land cleaned and
                            dumpsites closed, and the revised objective is therefore rated Substantial.



                            Revised Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The overall efficacy is rated Modest under the original objective because while all output targets were either
                            met or exceeded by the end of the project, the original outcome targets for PDO indicators related to the
                            reduced land area under contamination were not achieved.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating                                   Primary Reason
                            Modest                                                    Low achievement


                                                                                                                               Page 9 of 21
             Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
             Zhuzhou Brownfield Remediation Project (P147381)



 OBJR1_TBL




         OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
         Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
         Overall efficacy is rated Substantial under the revised objective because all of the revised outcome targets
         were achieved.



         Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating
         Substantial



5. Efficiency
Economic Analysis

The economic analysis at completion followed the same methodology used at appraisal when the Economic
Internal Rate of Return (EIRR) was estimated to be 38 percent. At that time, it was expected that the project’s
significant benefits would derive from increased land values after remediation and the potential expansion of the
local government’s tax base from the rent and revenues from the re-developed industrial parks, real estate, and
jobs created. At project completion, the EIRR was 14.2 percent, lower than that at appraisal but higher than the
social discount rate of 10 percent. The gap in the EIRR is mainly due to some high-value land clean-up and
redevelopment being carried out by third parties instead of the loan and the project taking on additional cleanup
work on small plots with relatively lower redevelopment potential.

Financial Analysis

The financial and fiscal analysis at project completion show that (a) Zhuzhou co-financed around 67 percent of
the project cost, and (b) the provision of counterpart funds did not affect its fiscal performance, even during the
years 2020-2021 when local government revenues were substantially lower due to the impact of the COVID-19
pandemic. Debt servicing of the project loan is not expected to affect the municipal government’s fiscal
performance during the loan repayment period.

The project saved US$97.9 million of the loan (65 percent of the loan). All intended outcomes were achieved or
exceeded using just 35 percent of the loan (US$52.1 million. An amount of US$77.0 million was cancelled
through project restructuring in 2021 to fund the World Bank’s emergency response initiatives to address the
impacts of the pandemic in China. The cancelled amount would otherwise have been used to clean up further
some large additional contaminated land plots near the project area that were released during implementation
due to the shutdown of additional major industrial plants. The undisbursed balance of US$20.87 million at
project closing was cancelled.

More than 40 percent of the loan savings was attributed to the price factor in that the unit cost of soil cleanup
was lower than originally estimated due to increasing market competition in China. In addition, part of the
project area being taken over by third-party private entities for remediation and redevelopment under PPP
schemes led to around 30 percent of the loan savings. The remaining 30 percent was due to technical factors,
including (a) optimization of remediation technologies which had been identified in the detailed environmental
investigation in the project area in 2020; (b) lowering the cost of containment based on the use of risk control


                                                                                                          Page 10 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Zhuzhou Brownfield Remediation Project (P147381)



measures, instead of traditional clean-up for 0.14 km2 of plots; and (c) moving certain land plots of the project
area from Category ‘Area to be Remediated’ to ‘Risk Acceptable Area,’ which required no remediation under
China’s 2018 revised soil contamination standards.

Administrative and Operational efficiency. The flexible design of the project allowed the investment to
accommodate changes in the highly dynamic operating environment and continue to add value without
compromising the PDO or the main components. The remediation plan using the risk-based approach was
realigned with the evolving local zoning plan and the rounds of scientific work and enabled the streamlining of
remediation works. Notably, the project’s cleanup and restoration focus allowed the inclusion of the project-
remediated land in the more comprehensive redevelopment programs of the local government using PPPs,
significantly reducing the need for government co-financing under the project. Technical assistance activities
were also designed to create ownership, build stakeholders' capacity, and ensure readiness to accommodate
more land plots to be released for cleanup during project implementation. The use of risk-based approaches in
the project also demonstrated significant cost-effectiveness compared to traditional approaches, which are
based on “excavate and remove” for ‘full cleanup.’ The selected risk-based remediation and cleanup methods
reduced costs substantially. With the traditional approach, the estimated costs of remediation works and
contaminated site management measures would have been up to eight times higher. Also, the revised outcomes
with reduced scope were achieved with 35 percent of the approved loan due to the abovementioned factors.
The loan savings were cancelled to fund World Bank emergency response programs to mitigate the shocks of
the COVID-19 pandemic. The extension of the loan closing date by six months was needed for the project to
achieve its outcomes.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      100.00
 Appraisal                                                  38.00
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      100.00
 ICR Estimate                                               14.20
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance was rated High. The original Efficacy was rated Modest and the revised Efficacy was rated
Substantial. Efficiency was rated Substantial. The table below presents the results of the split evaluation used to
determine the final outcome rating.

Split Rating with and without Restructuring


                                                                                                     Page 11 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Zhuzhou Brownfield Remediation Project (P147381)



                                                     Original Project          Restructured Project
Relevance                                                                 High
Efficacy                                                Modest                      Substantial
Efficiency                                                              Substantial
Overall outcome                                 Moderately Unsatisfactory           Satisfactory
Numerical value of outcome ratings                          3                             5
Disbursement                                         US$35 million                 US$17.1 million
Share of disbursement                             0.67 (or 67 percent)          0.33 (or 33 percent)
Weighted value of outcome rating (row 5 x
                                                      3 x 0.67 = 2.01                  5 x 0.33 = 1.65
row 7)
Outcome rating                                                           2.01+1.65 = 3.66

Note: Highly Satisfactory=6; Satisfactory=5; Moderately Satisfactory=4; Moderately Unsatisfactory=3;
Unsatisfactory=2; Highly Unsatisfactory=1.

3.66 is rounded up to 4 and gives an overall Outcome rating of Moderately Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Technical Risk: Clean-up operations are sustainable when the potential sources of contamination are
eliminated. In this regard, the risks to the project’s development outcomes are low due to several
factors. First, the risk of re-contamination through migration of polluted ground-water into the cleaned-up
areas is low based on the Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) and feasibility study carried
out during the design stage, prior to selecting the remediation technologies to be applied for each land plot.
Second, virtually all soil contamination in the project area was caused by historic pollution from emissions of
airborne particles containing heavy metals, or from the open disposal of waste materials on unprotected
land. These polluting industries were shut down or relocated away from the project area, and current
national, provincial, and city regulations make it extremely unlikely that contamination from such sources
would occur now or in the future.

Economic and Financial Risk: There were low economic and financial risks associated with this
investment. As noted in the efficiency section, the provision of counterpart funds (Zhuzhou co-financed
around 67 percent of the project cost) did not affect its fiscal performance, even in years 2020-2021 when
local government revenues were substantially lower due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. The
financial analysis also concluded that debt servicing of the project loan is not expected to affect the municipal
government’s fiscal performance during the loan repayment period.

Government Ownership Risk: The government ownership risk is very low based on the region’s updated
development strategy which designates QIZ as a green growth engine in the Changsha-Zhuzhou-Xiangtan
city cluster. As such, Zhuzhou is unlikely to allow polluting industries to re-enter the restored areas.



                                                                                                     Page 12 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Zhuzhou Brownfield Remediation Project (P147381)




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The World Bank responded appropriately to the Government’s request for a project to remediate
  brownfields in an important industrial area using risk-based approaches. The World Bank worked with the
  client to ensure that the project was well conceived and designed despite the absence of an established
  regulatory system and relevant capacity. The project location reflected the national development strategy.
  The World Bank also ensured that the project would benefit from the Bank’s analytical work on brownfield
  remediation in China and incorporated lessons from relevant World Bank projects in other countries.
  Based on recommendations from these studies and lessons, the project was designed to (a) define
  remediation liabilities and financial benefits; (b) tailor the risk-based approach to remediation efforts
  based on the risk level and the future use of target land plots; (c) focus on decontamination and
  restoration to enable future redevelopment by the local government or developers; and (d) optimize the
  counterpart financing plan.

  The World Bank ensured that the project had comprehensive technical support to ensure that the client
  would have the necessary capacity for quality delivery of the project and realistic financial arrangements
  regarding local counterpart financing. The World Bank fully addressed environmental and social aspects
  in the project’s technical studies and the environmental and social assessments carried out before project
  approval. The World Bank also supported measures to ensure that the PMO and PIU had adequate
  capacity and arrangements for meeting the World Bank’s safeguard and fiduciary requirements during
  project implementation.

  The World Bank paid particular attention to ensuring client readiness. Throughout project preparation, the
  Bank recognized that there were major gaps in the knowledge and capacity of the Zhuzhou agencies.
  Thus, the World Bank maintained regular communications with the senior leadership in Zhuzhou to help
  secure their ongoing commitment to the project as well as support and needed resources. During its
  identification and preparation missions, the World Bank supported the client by providing sample terms of
  reference for all main aspects of project preparation, including environmental site investigation and risk
  assessment, feasibility study, land-use field survey, spatial planning and zoning maps, ESIA, and
  Resettlement Action Plan (RAP).

  In preparing the project, the World Bank carried out a realistic assessment of project risks, specifically:
  (a) inadequate experience and capacity of the PMO and PIU in managing and implementing World Bank-
  financed projects; (b) unintended environmental and social (resettlement) impacts; and (c) limited fiscal
  revenues at the city and district level to co-finance the project, especially in light of the large expenses
  needed to close, relocate, and compensate the polluting enterprises. A range of mitigation measures
  were adopted by the World Bank to improve political commitment, foster inter-departmental
  communication, mobilize domestic and international expertise for technical support, and build client
  capacity to ensure that the project could be successfully implemented. Overall, the Quality at entry is
  rated Satisfactory.




                                                                                                   Page 13 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Zhuzhou Brownfield Remediation Project (P147381)



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The World Bank provided adequate supervision and technical support through 11 supervision missions
 (including the MTR) and carried out regular reviews to enhance project outcomes in a country where the
 client was new to a large World Bank-financed brownfield remediation project and required considerable
 implementation support. The Implementation Supervision and Results Reports (ISR) were well prepared
 and demonstrated candor in the ratings.

 World Bank supervision provided close support to the client in navigating project implementation issues as
 they emerged. In the early stage of project implementation, for example, one main challenge related to the
 changing spatial plan for the QIZ core area because the risk-based remediation approach for the project
 was closely tailored to the planned land uses. In response to the legislative and planning changes, the
 World Bank justifiably carried out a new in-depth environmental investigation, which led to the downsizing
 of areas that required remediation. To ensure that project implementation was on track, the World Bank
 recommended that a comprehensive action plan was prepared and followed by the PMO/PIU as a planning
 and monitoring tool. The World Bank also encouraged the PMO/PIU to monitor the implementation
 progress closely and share monthly monitoring reports with the World Bank. When more land plots were
 released for cleanup during implementation, the project supported further environmental and social impact
 assessments to identify and mitigate potential risks. Moreover, when the Zhuzhou Municipality engaged
 third-party agencies for remediation and redevelopment in the project area in 2018, the World Bank worked
 closely with the PMO/PIU in adopting monitoring and risk mitigation measures to ensure that the third-party
 remediation adhered to the project’s technical requirements and the World Bank’s safeguards criteria.

 To address persistent institutional issues causing implementation delays, particularly in the early stage of
 implementation, the World Bank communicated frequently with the leadership in Zhuzhou to have
 adequate staffing, resources, and capacities in place. The World Bank’s dedicated support reversed the
 slow implementation from 2019 and paved the way for two restructurings in 2021. Overall, the Quality of
 Bank Supervision is rated Satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The M&E system for the project included progress and results monitoring based on the RF. The RF
 contained a clear PDO and appropriately defined outcome and intermediate indicators. Progress towards
 achieving the outcome of lowered potential risk for the local people was monitored using proxy indicators

                                                                                                    Page 14 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Zhuzhou Brownfield Remediation Project (P147381)



 for reduced exposure to contaminated land (that is, the total area of land to be decontaminated and then
 verified and the amounts of associated waste for treatment and disposal removed). Progress towards the
 PDO was also tracked using the link between risk-based remediation approaches and local spatial plans,
 as well as the increase in local institutional capacities to scale up and sustain the remediation impacts. In
 addition, the M&E system included a GIS-based monitoring system that used maps to track pre- and post-
 cleanup levels, verification status, and current and future land uses. The ICR annexes 7 provided details on
 the technical summary of the remediation work and redevelopment status of each remediation site in the
 seven project sub-areas, the measures taken to meet the requirements, and the verification status. Annex
 9 presents pre- and post-project concentrations of three toxic metals in the seven project areas.



b. M&E Implementation
  M&E implementation was well organized. The PIU was responsible for reporting on the status of
  implementation and progress monitoring as well submitting periodic monitoring reports to the World Bank,
  including semi-annual project progress reports and annual reports. External M&E consultants provided
  professional support in tracking the progress of the works, assessing the achievement of key results, and
  reporting to the World Bank. In 2018, when the Zhuzhou municipal government contracted third-party
  entities to take over 105 ha in the project area for redevelopment, this involvement of third-party
  developers accelerated the redevelopment of QIZ and led to a smaller area for remediation using loan
  finance. However, it also increased the monitoring work of the PIU to ensure that the risk-based approach
  to site remediation and World Bank technical and safeguards standards were applied to third-party
  remediation. With World Bank guidance, the PIU contracted a senior M&E expert (and safeguards expert)
  for monitoring and periodic reporting on the progress and results of the third-party site remediation. Due
  diligence reports confirmed that the risk assessments were considered and the World Bank requirements
  were followed in the cleanup works completed by the third-party agencies in the project area.



c. M&E Utilization
  The M&E system was used throughout project implementation to track work progress and site cleanup
  results in different stages, and identify potential issues. The monitoring results, including those captured
  by the GIS system, informed project restructurings, and strongly facilitated the World Bank’s
  responsiveness to the changing environment and emergencies, including the COVID-19 pandemic.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was in full compliance with the World Bank’s safeguard policies. The project was classified as
   Category A (full assessment) and triggered three environmental and social safeguard policies: OP/BP 4.01




                                                                                                     Page 15 of 21
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  Zhuzhou Brownfield Remediation Project (P147381)



– Environmental Assessment, OP/BP 4.11 – Physical Cultural Resources, and OP/BP 4.12 – Involuntary
Resettlement.

OP/BP 4.01 Environmental Assessment. A comprehensive Environmental and Social Impact Assessment
(ESIA) and a standalone Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) were prepared and
disclosed in the World Bank’s Infoshop on August 19, 2015. The draft Environmental Assessment was also
disclosed locally through the Zhuzhou Municipal Government website. Hard copies were provided to the
communities on April 27, 2015. During the project restructuring in June 2021, the PIU prepared a
supplementary ESIA and ESMP for the additional remediation activities approved by the World Bank.

Environmental safeguards were an integral part of project management by Zhuzhou. The PIU included
external environmental monitoring consultants. The ESMP measures were incorporated in bid documents
and contracts and were generally well-implemented. Overall, the performance on safeguards observed
during World Bank supervision missions and confirmed by the semi-annual external environmental
monitoring reports, was satisfactory.

The third-party developers that assumed responsibility for site remediation in parts of the project area were
required to meet the World Bank’s technical and safeguard requirements and were in full compliance with
the World Bank’s safeguard policies. The company engaged a third-party consultant to monitor
environmental emissions on a quarterly basis, as required by its Environmental Permit, and submitted two
monitoring reports to the World Bank through the PIU confirming that the environmental emissions
standards were met.

OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats. An ecological survey carried out during preparation indicated there were no
critical natural habitats or endangered/valuable species and plants identified in the project area because the
area was industrialized and already heavily polluted. However, the ESMP implementation report prepared
by Zhuzhou PIU and provided to the World Bank on a bi-annual basis shows that the planned rehabilitation
measures were implemented to restore the vegetation. During project implementation, the remediation
approaches were further fine-tuned, and ecological containment technologies were adopted for the planted
hills.

OP/BP 4.11 Physical Cultural Resources. A site survey and consultation with responsible agencies and
local communities found no physical cultural resources within the project area, although there were some
temples and other structures in the vicinity. The project activities were not expected to have direct impact on
any of these physical cultural resources. The policy was triggered for precautionary purposes because any
additional remediation activities during implementation could require policy screening. During project
implementation, the scope of the remediation work was further refined, and the physical cultural resources
were avoided.

OP/BP - Involuntary Resettlement. The project involved the permanent land acquisition of 1,591.17
mu (or 106.1 ha), which affected 5,156 people (1,074 households), and the physical demolishing of
65,548.5 m2 of residential houses of 229 households. It also affected six enterprises, involving 280.04 mu
of land acquisition and 68,004 m2 of structure demolition. All six enterprises were closed before the project
started, and the workshops of these enterprises remained in the project area as abandoned structures. The
Center for Involuntary Resettlement Research of Wuhan University was hired in 2016 as the external
monitoring agency. Six trainings were provided for the PMO and government staff, and 13 external
monitoring reports were submitted by the external monitoring agency.



                                                                                                 Page 16 of 21
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  Zhuzhou Brownfield Remediation Project (P147381)



The project originally planned to use temporarily rented land for soil remediation. With the adjustments to
the overall development plans of Zhuzhou municipality in 2019, land in the project area would be
permanently acquired and the households on the land would be resettled. Besides the soil remediation
carried out under the project, there were five additional plots where remediation was undertaken through
contracts between the PIU and other third parties, which were considered as associated projects (see
below). As required by the World Bank, the original Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) was updated in 2019,
and a due diligence for the land use of those five blocks was undertaken through other contracts between
the PIU and third parties, approved by the World Bank in 2021. Implementation of resettlement and related
measures such as public consultation, livelihood restoration, and grievance mechanism were covered by
the external monitoring.

Five projects were identified as associated projects, including: (a) the third-party environmental control
project; (b) the environmental protection road project; (c) the gravel dock project; (d) the bonded logistics
center project; and (e) Xiangjiang Metal Logistics City (Jiangwan Famous House). A due diligence report
was prepared by the PMO in January 2018 and was approved by the World Bank. In all, 1,131.7 mu (75.5
ha) of land acquisition and 109,982.6 m2 of house demolition were implemented, affecting 1,174 people
from 330 households.

Approval of Land Acquisition and Resettlement. As indicated in the ICR and its supporting documents
provided in appendixes, the land use approvals for all components of the project as well as for the
associated projects, were obtained as required.

Compensation and Restoration. All resettlement-related payments, including those for the associated
projects, were made by the PIU to the Project Affected People (PAP) through bank remittances, after
necessary verification. According to a July 2022 survey by the resettlement monitoring agency, the PAPs
sampled were satisfied with the compensation. According to the monitoring report, compensation for house
demolition was adequate for the affected households to buy or replace with a new apartment in Zhuzhou
with the same or larger area, better conditions, and comparable public services. Livelihood restoration
measures included social security insurance, technical training, and employment support. In total, 6,237
people received social security; 1,383 people (54 percent were female) were trained; and 1,327 people
were hired by local companies. Consultations were carried out with the affected people during the
preparation of RAP, and the compensation and resettlement plans were disclosed for feedback from the
affected people. Project information was publicly disclosed online, including the official website of the
Zhuzhou municipal government, in October 2014. During RAP implementation, the approvals of the
resettlement documents and asset evaluation results were disclosed in the project-affected communities
from 2016 to 2021.

The PMO, PIU, and the resettlement institutions at district and neighborhood levels were responsible for
project-related resettlement, with six designated staff in the PMO and 10 in the Shifeng and Tongtangwan
district governments. A third-party external monitoring agency was hired, which provided training since 2016
on China’s domestic resettlement policy and the World Bank’s safeguard requirements.

Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM). A GRM was established under the project. According to the
external resettlement monitoring report, 33 grievances were recorded, including 23 related to house
demolition, one on land acquisition, two on transportation issues, and seven on crop compensation. All
complaints received during resettlement were addressed through the GRM, and there are no legacy issues.




                                                                                                 Page 17 of 21
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Zhuzhou Brownfield Remediation Project (P147381)




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial management. The project had adequate financial management (FM) arrangements. There was
  sufficient financial staff recruited by the Zhuzhou Qingshuitang Investment Group (the PIU). The PIU used
  the accounting software (“Kindie”), with a separate set of accounts to record project activities, but project
  financial reports had to be prepared manually. Although the annual project work plan was prepared, there
  were gaps between the target dates for planned activities and their actual implementation; thus,
  disbursement was delayed. Changes in the PIU and the lack of clear separation of duties among the
  entities involved caused some FM problems, especially related to the accuracy of financial data presented
  and the efficiency of the disbursement review process. Overall, the required Interim Financial Reports were
  mostly submitted on time. Most of the annual audit reports were received by the World Bank on time and
  actions were taken by the relevant entities to address any issues highlighted by the external auditors.
  There were no qualified opinions. The FM rating was Moderately Satisfactory at closing.

  Procurement. Procurement was carried out in accordance with the World Bank’s procurement policies,
  procedures, and requirements. During the first few years of project implementation, however, procurement
  lagged behind schedule because the PMO and PIU had no previous experience managing such a complex
  project financed by an international financial institution. In the later stages of implementation, the
  procurement pace increased due to improvements in the PIU’s staffing and capacity in procurement and
  contract management resulting from the guidance received from the World Bank and the assistance from a
  project management consulting firm. There were several procurement-related complaints, which were
  properly handled by the PIU with World Bank guidance, but no cases of mis-procurement were
  reported. The procurement rating was Satisfactory at closing.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
  Gender
  The project improved the living environment of 262,000 people in Shifeng District, of which 51 percent were
  women. As part of the implementation of the RAP, the project included livelihood restoration measures for
  affected men and women, including social security insurance, technical training and re-employment support.
  By project completion, a total of 1,383 project-affected people (PAPs), including 747 women, received
  technical training for re-employment provided by the district/municipal government.

  Institutional Strengthening
  The project introduced risk-based remediation approaches and international good redevelopment practices
  to the high-profile industrial city of Zhuzhou, and closely linked these with the city’s updating of the spatial
  zoning plan. Knowledge and capacity of relevant government agencies and developers were built;
  engineering works were designed and carried out based on international good practices for brownfield
  remediation. A GIS was established for monitoring remediation progress as well as to link cleanup results
  with spatial planning and inform decision making for redevelopment. An information disclosure mechanism
  was also established for public access to information on the remediation progress and environmental
  monitoring.


                                                                                                    Page 18 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Zhuzhou Brownfield Remediation Project (P147381)



   Mobilizing Private Sector Financing
   World Bank funding and technical support helped prepare Zhuzhou for large-scale cleanup and
   redevelopment of the QIZ core industrial area using diverse financing schemes. Land plots of 1.05 km2 in
   the project area that were appraised for cleanup with loan finance were taken over by third-party entities
   using PPP finance. More broadly, the ICR noted that the project leveraged US$1.2 billion of investments in
   QIZ through the PPP scheme in 2018; 55 percent of the investment was for land plot cleanup, remediation
   and ecological restoration, while the rest was invested in public infrastructure and facilities
   construction/upgrading. The mobilized PPP finance helped to accelerate the redevelopment of the QIZ core
   area, making the remediated areas ready for immediate use by developers or tenants.

   Poverty Reduction and Shared Prosperity
   Through the decontamination of land in QIZ, the project supported the government’s strategy to revitalize
   the local economy by transitioning Zhuzhou City into a modern and livable city by clustering new and light
   industries, logistics, and commerce. The remediated land and improved environment were key factors in
   attracting businesses and investments to Zhuzhou, which would expand government revenues and
   investments in people, create jobs, and raise local incomes. As such, the project had the potential to
   benefit Zhuzhou’s low-income families and reduce poverty.



11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                      IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
                               Moderately
Outcome                                                 Moderately Satisfactory
                               Satisfactory
Bank Performance               Satisfactory             Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                 Substantial              Substantial

Quality of ICR                 ---                      High


12. Lessons

Linking brownfield remediation projects to local land use plans can increase the chances for
project success. In the case of the Zhuzhou Brownfield Remediation Project, future land-use had a
strong bearing on the required levels of decontamination. The redevelopment interests of the
leadership of Zhuzhou also exerted time pressure on the project during the early stages of land
remediation. Thus, from the early stages of project preparation, the World Bank stayed in close
communication with the leadership of Zhuzhou to inform them of progress made on the project and
to seek coordination. Because senior officials from the municipal government and the Development
and Reform Commission as the development planner were strategically engaged to head the PMO,
the project was on the local government’s radar, which allowed the linking of remediation work with
urban spatial planning, redevelopment, and financing. This high-level involvement was also
instrumental in facilitating inter-departmental coordination on remediation and redevelopment
matters. As such, the project contributed to the overall remediation and redevelopment of QIZ.



                                                                                                    Page 19 of 21
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Zhuzhou Brownfield Remediation Project (P147381)



Flexibility in project design may allow land decontamination and restoration projects to
proceed in the context of a highly dynamic planning environment. To adjust to the changing
demands in the project area, the design included a menu of remediation measures that could be
used according to site specific circumstances, contamination levels, time available for restoration,
and future land-use. The project design had the flexibility to accommodate third parties to take over
site remediation in parts of the project area, as long as their remediation activities would be
implemented according to the same standards for land cleanup and managing potential social and
environmental impacts.

High quality contaminated site investigations and risk assessment can lead to design
optimization. The project feasibility study investigated the restoration and redevelopment needs
within the original project area of 8.48 km2. The study also identified the different types of plots in
the project area that were in various phases of development and had varying needs for
interventions. The plots included those where industries had already been relocated and
redevelopment was in process, land plots where remediation and redevelopment were planned in
line with the anticipated time span for project implementation, and plots where redevelopment was
expected only after 2020. The most suitable site remediation approaches were determined on the
basis of three main parameters: (a) soil and groundwater contamination levels, (b) current land use
and the presence of people and structures, and (c) future land use based on the strategic plans. The
project area was then divided into 100+ plots, where each of the three main parameters was
homogeneous, and the most suitable remediation approach among five to ten different technologies
was selected for each plot. This approach ensured the tailoring of remediation to site-specific
characteristics, while maintaining the flexibility to change from one approach to another in case the
use of a land plot was to change in the future.

World Bank risk management applied to third party remediation works may ensure that both
Bank-financed and third-party remediation investments within an appraised project area meet
the same technical, environmental, and social standards. In the Zhuzhou Brownfield
Remediation Project, the World Bank ensured that the following mitigation measures were in place
for the site remediation in the parts of the project area that came under the Zhuzhou Municipal
Government’s PPP agreements: (a) priority should be given to World Bank-financed activities
through careful planning, phasing, interfacing and coordination with third-party activities; (b) third-
party work plans and redevelopment progress should be communicated to the World Bank in a
timely manner; (c) as stipulated in the project legal agreement, all remediation and redevelopment
activities in the project area shall adhere to the same technical, environmental, and social standards
applied to the project; (d) the PMO/PIU was to carry out due diligence on third-party remediation
activities and provide a report to the World Bank; (e) the PIU would have designated staff for
monitoring and monthly reporting on the status of third-party remediation to the World Bank; and (f)
the PIU would solicit verification by the municipal environmental authority for all completed third-
party remediation works in the project area.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No



                                                                                                   Page 20 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Zhuzhou Brownfield Remediation Project (P147381)



14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is generally well-written and well-presented. The quality of analysis was generally sufficient and
concise in summarizing salient points with links to evidence. The quality of evidence is good; the ICR presented
relevant and rich additional evidence in Annexes 7, 8, and 9 regarding the details of the remediation work and
redevelopment status. The ICR is internally consistent and in line with the guidelines. The report is concise with
sufficient clarity in the messaging, and the performance story is direct, well informed, and tightly presented. The
quality of the ICR is rated High.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      High




                                                                                                     Page 21 of 21
