     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     RRMSP (P132982)



                                                                                Report Number: ICRR0023652

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P132982                                   RRMSP

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Albania                                   Transport


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-84890                                31-Dec-2021                                         57,573,090.85

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 27-Mar-2015                               31-Dec-2022

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                          80,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                           80,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Actual                                       57,573,090.85                                               0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Hassan Wally               Avjeet Singh                 Avjeet Singh                   IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) of the Results-Based Road Maintenance and Safety Project
   (RRMSP) as articulated in the Loan Agreement (LA, page 5) was identical to the one stated in the Project
   Appraisal Document (PAD, paragraph 20) and aimed to:




                                                                                                 Page 1 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     RRMSP (P132982)



   "(a) maintain the condition and improve the safety of the Borrower’s Primary Road and Primary-
   Secondary Road networks; and (b) strengthen sustainable and efficient road asset management and
   safety practices, for the benefit of road-users."

   Parsing the PDO. The PDO will be parsed based on the following three objectives:

   1. To maintain the condition of the Borrower’s primary road and primary-secondary road networks.

   2. To improve the safety of the Borrower’s primary road and primary-secondary road networks, and safety
   practices for the benefit of road-users

   3. To strengthen sustainable and efficient road asset management for the benefit of road-users.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The PDO was supported by the following four components:

   1. Maintenance Works and Monitoring (appraisal estimate: US$68.46 million, actual cost: US$50.59
   million). This component aimed to provide periodic and routine maintenance of project roads. It
   was a Disbursement-Linked Indicators (DLI)-based component, and financing was linked to the
   achievement of agreed disbursement linked indicators. It included two sub-components:

   1.1. Maintain the condition of 1,053 km of Primary (P) roads and 282 km of Primary-Secondary (PS) roads
   under hybrid17 type Performance-based Maintenance Contracts.

   1.2. This component financed a Monitoring Services Consultant. The primary role of the Monitoring
   Consultant was to ensure that the service levels defined in the maintenance contracts were complied with.

   2. Institutional Reforms (appraisal estimate: US$3.54 million, actual cost: US$3.20 million). This
   component aimed to support institutional reforms at both the Albanian Road Authority (ARA) and the
   Ministry of Transport and Infrastructure (MOTI), aimed at enhancing capacity in road safety and road asset
   management on a country level. It was a DLI-based component, and financing was linked to the
   accomplishment of agreed disbursement linked indicators. It included two sub-components:
   2.1. Operationalize road safety in the ARA, MOTI and the Inter-Ministerial Road Safety Council (IMRSC), by
   strengthening organizational and policy-oriented actions, introducing Road Safety audit training
   accreditation courses, supporting Road Safety media campaigns, and developing an integrated database to
   enhance the Accident Information System (AIS).




                                                                                                 Page 2 of 20
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    RRMSP (P132982)



  2.2. Institutionalize Road Asset Management Systems (RAMS), by enhancing ARA’s capacity to collect and
  analyze road data, conduct road condition surveys to collect input data for RAMS, and provide training to
  ARA staff to use the system to plan and budget for multi-year maintenance and investments expenditures.

  3. Sector Support (appraisal estimate: US$4.80 million, actual cost: US$1.04 million). This component
  aimed to support transport sector reforms. Financing under this component was based on standard Bank
  Investment Project Financing (IPF) disbursement procedures, and it was fully financed out of the IBRD loan,
  with the Government financing only the Value Added Tax (VAT). The component provided financing to
  address sector reforms, which included, but not limited to, technical and advisory assistance to the
  Government of Albania (GoA) to finalize the Transport Sector Strategy and associated implementation plan;
  and technical and analytical support for medium term budget planning.

  4. Project Management and Audit (appraisal estimate: US$3.00 million, actual cost: US$2.55 million).
  This component supported project management functions of ARA’s Project Management Team (PMT) and
  provided financing of the operating costs. It also supported carrying out monitoring activities including the
  Beneficiary Impact Assessments, the Technical Audits and DLI Audits.

  Revised Components. There was a change to Component 3 as the Bank agreed to GoA’s request for the
  project to finance: (a) a feasibility study and detailed designs for the Building Resilient Bridges program to
  be financed by the Bank; (b) a study for Road Traffic Monitoring and Control Center; (c) radar mounted
  vehicle equipment; and (d) TA support to ARA’s project management team. In addition, the GoA was able to
  secure EU grant financing to cover the cost of the National Transport Sector Strategy, so this activity was
  dropped from the project.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost. The total project cost was estimated at US$156.00 million. The actual cost was US$106.97
  million (ICR, Data Sheet, page 2). The difference was due to a lower disbursement of both the Bank loan
  and the borrower's counterpart funding (see below).

  Financing. The project was financed through an IBRD loan worth US$80.00 million. The Bank and the
  Government of Albania selected a Results-based IPF with six DLIs for some activities as noted above.
  DLI1.1, DLI 1.2, DLI 2.1 were all fully disbursed, DLI 1.3. was partially disbursed, DLI 2.2 and DLI2.3 were
  not disbursed. The actual amount disbursed was US$57.57 million or about 72% of the loan amount (ICR,
  Data Sheet, page 2). According to the ICR (paragraph 15) "project costs were lower than estimated (cost of
  materials, e.g., bitumen) and resulted in savings of about US$14.1 million (equivalent). ARA was reluctant
  to use savings to do additional rehabilitation and road safety works, partly because of the need to request
  counterpart funding in a constrained budget environment." The disbursed amount and the cost savings
  amounted to US$71.67 million. The remaining amount was due to the non-disbursement of DLI2.2, DLI2.3
  and partial disbursement of DLI 1.3, which all totaled to about US$8.33 million.

  Borrower Contribution. The Borrower was expected to contribute US$76.00 million of counterpart
  financing. The actual disbursement by Borrower was approximately US$49.40 million.

  Dates. The project was approved on March 27, 2015 and became effective six months later on September
  25, 2015. The Mid-Term Review (MTR) was conducted on April 9, 2019 which was about six months later
  than the expected date in the PAD on October 28, 2018. The project closed on December 31, 2022, which

                                                                                                   Page 3 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     RRMSP (P132982)



   one year beyond the original closing date on December 31, 2021. The project was restructured once, Level
   2, on April 7, 2021, when the amount disbursed was US$49.44 million in order to revise the Results
   Framework, change components and Cost, extend the Loan closing date by 12 months, reallocate funds
   between disbursement categories, and change the implementation schedule. The extension of the closing
   date was necessary to accommodate initial implementation delays and the delays associated with the
   COVID-19 restrictions.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Context at Appraisal. At the time of appraisal, Albania had just become an official candidate for European
Union (EU) accession. Accession candidacy provided the Government of Albania (GoA) renewed impetus
to address the three key challenges in managing the country’s road network: (i) prioritization of new
investments aligned with macro and fiscal realities; (ii) clearance of arrears on a large number of contracts;
and (iii) improving asset management and maintenance. The overall length of the road network is just over
15,000 km. Of which 3,400 km are national roads administered by the Ministry of Infrastructure and Energy
(MOIE) and directly managed by the Albanian Road Authority (ARA). The RRMSP aimed to support the
maintenance backlogs on the highest trafficked sections of the national network.

Previous Bank Experience. The Bank has been one of Albania’s most important development partners.
Bank lending to the country has totaled US$2.9 billion since 1991, of which US$356.7 million (12.3%) has
been approved for 12 projects in the transport sector. The RRMSP was to build on the Bank’s prior
engagement in the transport sector in Albania which contributed to road network management
improvements and maintenance modernization. Two consecutive Bank-supported projects, the Road
Maintenance Project, and the Transport Project (which closed in 2007 and 2011, respectively), contributed
to improvements in road network management, and supported modernization of maintenance by a
transition from force account to direct contracting. In addition, the Bank-supported Secondary and Local
Roads Project (P107833, closed on June 30, 2013) which resulted in highly satisfactory implementation as
evaluated by the Independent Evaluation Group (IEG), set an example by preparing a US$ 368 million
nation-wide program. Based on the afore-mentioned experiences, the Bank was on a solid foundation to
implement the RRMSP.

Consistency with the Bank Strategies. At appraisal, the PDO was in line with the Bank's Country
Partnership Strategy for Albania (CPS, FY2011-FY2014), which acknowledged that Albania had steadily
improved its transport infrastructure, but also recognized the need for greater focus on maintenance. At
completion, the PDO continued to be in line with the Bank's Country Partnership Framework for Albania
(CPF, FY2015-FY2019). The CPF noted the project’s contribution to strengthening road sector investment
planning, addressing the key area of public sector management and service delivery. Also, it
emphasized the importance of developing strategies, policies and practices to inform road maintenance
management and investment planning. The same CPF was extended and was still in effect when the
project closed on December 31, 2022. The current CPF (FY2023-FY 2027) took effect in March 2023, and
identified poor transport infrastructure as a key obstacle to market access for agricultural goods and the
growth of potential sectors, such as tourism.



                                                                                                    Page 4 of 20
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                     Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      RRMSP (P132982)



               Consistency with the Government Strategies/Priorities. At appraisal, the PDO was in line with
               the National Strategy for Development and Integration (NSDI) 2014-2020, which reflected a strong focus on
               construction, rehabilitation, and management of the national road network. The NSDI also identified
               sustained growth through efficient use of resources and improving infrastructure links in the regions as
               strategic priorities and aimed to improve maintenance and safety of the road assets in line with EU
               standards and directives. The PDO was also in line with the Albanian National Transport Plan 2030
               (ANTP2), which recommended that ARA initiate road maintenance activities through Performance-Based
               Contracts (PBCs) using RAMS, along with formalizing a SLA between ARA and MOIE.

               At completion, the PDO continued to be in line with National Strategy for Development and Integration
               (NSDI, 2014-2020) and the Albanian National Transport Plan 2030 (ANTP2) as discussed above.
               According to the ICR (paragraph 20) the project's financing of private-sector contractors to undertake
               periodic and routine maintenance functions under five-year OPRCs was consistent with the Government of
               Albania's ongoing strategy to concession the operation and maintenance of key highways.

               Summary of Relevance of Objective Assessment. While the statement of objectives was ambitious, it
               was in line with the Bank’s experience in Albania’s road sector and prior engagement in road maintenance
               and sustainability. The PDO statement was formulated as two development objectives, with four distinct
               outcomes. At completion, the PDO continued to be in line with the Bank's country strategy for Albania and
               with GoA’s priorities as elaborated in its development and sector strategies, plans, and policies. Overall, the
               Relevance of Objectives is rated High.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To maintain the condition of the Borrower’s primary road and primary-secondary road networks.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change (ToC). To achieve the stated objective, the project supported road maintenance on 1,053
                             km of primary roads and 282 km of primary-secondary roads under Output and Performance-based Road
                             Maintenance Contracts (OPRCs). The expected output was 1,335 km of roads under maintenance via
                             OPRCs. The expected outcome was maintaining the condition of primary and primary-secondary road
                             networks. The anticipated medium to long-term impacts included improved capacity in road asset
                             management including regular maintenance through OPRCs and the Road Asset Management System
                             (RAMs) which would improve the credibility on medium-term budget planning and efficient use of resources.

                             The achievement of the stated objective was underpinned by the following critical assumptions: 1.
                             Performance-Based Contracts (PBCs) are based on accurate and updated road survey data; 2. Both ARA

                                                                                                                             Page 5 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   RRMSP (P132982)



and the private contractors have good understanding of PBCs; 3. RAMs are functional and staff is trained;
and 4. PBCs are fully costed.

The ToC reflected the relationship between the supported activities, outputs and outcomes in a plausible
causal chain. The stated critical assumptions were logical and realistic.

Outputs/Intermediate Results

      1,335 km of project roads were under routine maintenance through Performance Based Contracts
       (target fully achieved). While the combined 1,335 km of project roads represented 39% of the national
       road network, the project roads carried about 70% of total traffic volume.
      554 km (no target provided) of project roads were subject to major rehabilitation under periodic
       maintenance and the project succeeded in bringing all project roads to maintainable condition.
       Also, all roads under the four OPRCs were routinely maintained and were fully useable.
      60 emergency work orders (no target provided) were completed with a total value of EUR 7 million.
       The technical audit report of October 2022 noted that emergency works produced many good works
       and effective measures for relatively small amounts of money.
      The Social Transparency System (STS) was to be developed as a feedback and grievance redress
       system (GRS). The STS was expected to allow road users to submit feedback on the project and
       national road network via text, telephone, and web interface. however, this was partially achieved. The
       ICR (paragraph 31) reported that the "STS was marred by inconsistency, lack of updating, and
       transparency issues (target partially achieved).

Outcome

      The project aimed to keep the roads’ International Roughness Index (IRI) from deteriorating. The IRI
       measures pavement smoothness which directly affects ride quality, vehicle cost, fuel consumption,
       and road maintenance costs.
      Baseline and end target for the associated PDO indicator “road condition, as a function of the average
       IRI of the project road network, does not deteriorate” were set at an IRI of 4.5, which corresponds to a
       “fair” quality of road roughness. Data collected and analyzed in 2022 showed the actual IRI achieved
       was 3.6, indicating “good” quality of road roughness and representing the average IRI (ranging from
       3.3 to 4.1) across all project roads. The IRI at completion was an overachievement of the target and is
       directly attributable to the maintenance of the network financed under the project.
      The project achieved this outcome through supporting four OPRCs to carry out maintenance which
       according to the ICR included three types of maintenance: 1. Periodic maintenance: aimed to improve
       and rehabilitate the structural integrity of severely deteriorated roads through intensive pavement
       repair and ancillary works, and to address unsafe road conditions; 2. Routine maintenance: aimed to
       preserve road assets to predefined service levels, including winter maintenance, resealing (with
       surface dressing, ultra-thin asphalt, etc.) of paved roads, and re-graveling of shoulders, grass cutting,
       drainage maintenance and road sign maintenance, along with activities required throughout the year
       such as pothole patching, crack sealing, and grading; and 3. Emergency works with the objective of
       restoring the roads after damage caused by weather or accidents.
      The project fully met two of three DLIs and the third was partially achieved. The first DLI was linked
       to periodic maintenance works, the second to routine maintenance, and the third was linked to
       developing the Social Transparency System (STS) as a feedback and grievance redress system
       (GRS). The ICR (paragraph 30) concluded that not all conditions for the third DLI were met and stated

                                                                                                  Page 6 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   RRMSP (P132982)



       that "the DLI compliance conditions were inadequate or missing." As a result, the third DLI was
       partially met, resulting in EUR 650,000 disbursed out of the total EUR 2.97 million allocated.

Summary of Efficacy Assessment. As discussed above, the project successfully addressed three types of
maintenance needs. The PDO outcome target pertaining to this objective was over-achieved and was directly
attributable to the maintenance of the network financed under the project. The project also fully achieved two
out of three DLIs and partially achieved the third. Therefore, the efficacy with which this objective was
achieved is rated Substantial with minor shortcomings.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To improve the safety of the Borrower’s primary road and primary-secondary road networks

Rationale
Theory of Change (ToC). To achieve the stated objective, the project supported strengthening organizational
and policy-oriented actions, introduce road safety audit training accreditation, support road safety media
campaigns, and develop an integrated database to enhance accident information system (AIS). The expected
output was the completion of the International Road Assessment Program (iRAP) safety survey showing an
improvement in safety star rating across the project roads, road safety media campaigns developed and in
use, accident information database enhanced and in use, and beneficiary impact assessments and
completion reports finalized. The expected outcomes were: strengthening road safety practices, and improve
the safety of primary and secondary roads networks. Anticipated medium to long-term impacts were improved
road safety, connectivity and better access to markets.

The achievement of the stated objective was underpinned by the following critical assumption: No external
factors influence the severity of road accidents.

The ToC reflected the relationship between the supported activities, outputs and outcomes in a plausible
causal chain. The stated critical assumption was logical and realistic.

Outputs/Intermediate Results

      The International Road Assessment Program (iRAP) surveys were completed showing an
       improvement in Safety Star ratings across the project roads (target achieved). A total of 1,251 km of
       roads were surveyed, representing 95% of the project roads. The survey results in 2021 showed an
       improvement in the star rating for all surveyed roads where improvements ranged from 7.5% to 13.5%
       over the numbers recorded in the initial survey in 2017, no specific targets were set at appraisal.
      Road Safety Media Campaign was not developed and not in use (target not achieved).
      Accident information database was neither enhanced nor in use by end of Year 2 (target not
       achieved).



                                                                                                 Page 7 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   RRMSP (P132982)




      The following were notable achievements not covered by the RF: 1. The project addressed more than
       50 blackspots primarily through redesigning of small junctions, installation of lighting, landslide and
       rockfall stabilization, retaining wall, improvement of road geometry, sidewalks and protective
       structures for pedestrians, speed bumps, guardrails, median barriers, and other safety measures. 2.
       The project improved 60 intersections prone to road accidents through effective speed reduction and
       overtaking management and included gateway treatments, rumble strips, improved delineation of
       traffic lanes by road markings and raised road studs, road signage and markings, street lighting and
       addressing inadequacies of side road sight distances. 3. The project supported institutional reforms
       through a comprehensive program of TA aimed at enhancing road safety practices at the country
       level. 4. The project also provided TA to ARA on high-risk road infrastructure which included traffic
       speed management plans and a national post‐project program of infrastructure safety improvements
       network‐wide, based on successful experience. 5. The project provided an assessment of the GoA’s
       Road Crash Data and Analysis System which evaluated current and planned procedures for reporting,
       recording, and analyzing road crashes and the extent to which they meet specified agency
       requirements, and recommended improvements to current and planned procedures. 6. The project
       prepared and conducted an awareness raising campaign targeting unsafe behavior which introduced
       and evaluated publicity and awareness campaigns supporting the Inter-Ministerial Road Safety
       Council (IMRSC) activities and traffic police enforcement programs for unsafe behavior.

Outcome

      By project completion, the project overachieved its PDO outcome target pertaining to this objective as
       the fatalities on an annual basis across the national road network dropped to 227 compared to an end
       target of 250 and a baseline value of 295 fatalities per year. Despite that this indicator provide a
       national coverage, it worth noting the project roads were the most trafficked segments of the network
       with 70% of the traffic volume. According to the EU’s Transport Community, in Albania, road fatalities
       dropped by 17% from 2019 to 2022 (ICR, paragraph 37).
      The project succeeded in achieving its target through the complimentary effects of the project's civil
       works and institutional strengthening activities as both contributed to the road fatality trends. The
       OPRCs brought large sections of the national road network up to good, maintainable standard and
       kept them as such throughout the duration of the project. The ICR (paragraph 38) noted that "roads
       with good quality pavement directly improve ride quality and indirectly contribute to lower accident
       rates by providing good quality vehicle operating conditions and reducing driver distraction."
      Road safety also benefitted from explicitly incorporating road safety aspects into the OPRCs which
       resulted in safer roads as discussed above. The project also fully achieved the DLI related to road
       safety and EUR 2.97 million was fully disbursed.

Summary of Efficacy Assessment. The project successfully improved road safety through the
complementary effects of the project's civil works and institutional strengthening activities. The project
exceeded its PDO outcome target for the indicator measuring this objective and fully achieved the linked
DLI. There were minor shortcomings in the achievement of some intermediate results. Therefore, the efficacy
with which this objective was achieved is rated Substantial.



Rating
Substantial

                                                                                                Page 8 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   RRMSP (P132982)




OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
To strengthen sustainable and efficient road asset management for the benefit of road-users

Rationale
Theory of Change (ToC). To achieve the stated objective, the project supported the following activities: 1.
Enhance capacity and collect and analyze road data; conduct road condition surveys to collect input data for
RAMs; and train ARA staff to use system to plan and budget multi-year maintenance and investment
expenditures, 2. Finance TA to finalize transport sector strategy and implementation plan; and finance TA to
support medium-term budget planning. The expected outputs were: entering condition survey data for 3,400
km of national road network into RMS database; and transport sector strategy prepared with a
defined development strategy for management of existing assets and new road investments. The expected
outcome was strengthened sustainable and efficient road asset management practices. Anticipated medium
to long-term impacts included improved capacity in road asset management.

The achievement of the stated objective was underpinned by the following critical assumption: RAMs are
functional with adequate staff training provided, strengthened capacity is used and sustained; and improved
confidence in road asset management allows commercial financing of the road sector.

The ToC reflected the relationship between the supported activities, outputs and outcomes in a plausible
causal chain. The stated critical assumption were logical and realistic. However, it was not clear how the last
assumption (improved confidence in road asset management allows commercial financing of the road sector)
related to the achievement of the stated objective.

Outputs/Intermediate Results

      A transport sector strategy was prepared (target achieved).
      1,240 km of national road network had their condition survey data obtained and entered into RAMS
       database which was below the target of 3,400 km (target partially achieved). The RAMS was to
       enhance ARA’s capacity to plan, collect, store, and analyze road data in order to support evidence-
       based decision making on road asset management through multi-year and fully costed maintenance
       programs within a medium-term budget framework (target not achieved).
      A Service Level Agreement (SLA) to formally define the relationship between the ARA and the
       Ministry of Infrastructure and Energy (MoIE) and the level of service the former is expected to provide
       to the latter, laying out the metrics by which service is measured was not formalized (target not
       achieved).

Outcomes

      By project completion, the preparation and implementation of fully-costed multi-year maintenance
       plans, on an annual basis was achieved (PDO outcome indicator).
      The project did not achieve the targets for the two outputs related to RAMs and SLA (as noted
       above) and their respective DLIs were not disbursed. It is worth mentioning that progress on both
       RAMS and SLA continued to underway and according to the ICR (paragraph 35) both could be
       institutionalized in the short- to medium-term.


                                                                                                  Page 9 of 20
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                RRMSP (P132982)




                                   That said, the decision of the Government to mainstream the use of OPRCs for all 3,400 km of
                                    Albania’s national road network could be considered an important step towards achieving a more
                                    sustainable and efficient road asset management. OPRCs were expected to help strengthen medium-
                                    term budget planning, increase the confidence in the efficiency of expenditures, and improve the
                                    credibility of budget requests, leading to greater and more predictable outlays to the road sector (ICR,
                                    paragraph 32). The ICR (paragraph 33) emphasized that "under OPRCs, contractors have a strong
                                    incentive to be both efficient and effective; to maximize profits, they must reduce activities to the
                                    smallest possible volume required to achieve pre-defined levels of service."

                            Summary of Efficacy Assessment. The project contributed to strengthening sustainable and efficient road
                            asset management through demonstrating the benefit of using OPRCs in road rehabilitation and
                            maintenance. The success of the project approach resulted in the Government adoption OPRCs for the whole
                            of the national road network. Despite this success, the project did not achieve two important output targets
                            linked to DLIs as discussed above. Therefore, efficacy is rated Modest.




                            Rating
                            Modest


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Overall Efficacy is rated Substantial. The project fully achieved two of its three objectives of: (i) maintaining
                            the condition of primary and primary-secondary road networks; (ii) improving the safety of primary and
                            primary-secondary road networks; and strengthening road safety practice. The project contributed
                            to achieving the objective of strengthening sustainable and efficient road asset management, as evidenced by
                            the continued use of OPRCs for the entire national road network, however, the project did not achieve two
                            important output targets linked to the two DLIs associated with this this objective .



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



   5. Efficiency
   Economic and Financial Analysis (EFA)

   ex-ante



                                                                                                                              Page 10 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      RRMSP (P132982)



      The Economic Internal rate of Return (EIRR) for the project was estimated at 135%. For the four
       contracts to be financed under the project, over a five year period, the evaluation showed that 28% of
       respective financing about US$10.1 million equivalent, should be allocated to pavement works on roads
       in poor condition and 61%, or about US$ 21.6 million equivalent to periodic maintenance works on roads
       in fair condition. Under this scenario the average network roughness of the primary and primary -
       secondary networks, over five year period, would remain at the same level as in 2014; and the benefit
       cost ratio would be 23.6.
      A sensitivity analysis showed that an increase of project costs by 20% along with a decrease in benefits
       by 20% decreased EIRR to 109%.
      Overall, the PAD (annex 6) included a detailed economic analysis that provided a robust justification of
       the project investments.

ex-post

      The ex-post analysis followed the same approach at appraisal to ensure consistency and comparability.
       At completion the EIRR was estimated at 147% compared to 135% at appraisal.
      The slightly higher EIRR at appraisal was due to EIRR improvement of IRI in project roads from the
       average 4.5 meter/km to 3.6 meter/km, and about 3.5% decrease of actual costs compared to appraisal
       (ICR, paragraph 52).
      The ex-post analysis in the ICR (Annex 4) reflected enough detail to justify the project investments.

Implementation Efficiency. The project closed on December 31, 2022 which one year beyond the original
closing date on December 31, 2021. Implementation efficiency was negatively impacted by frequent changes to
ARA management and project team directors during the first two years. Also, the prequalifying and selection
of OPRC contractors was lengthy from mid-2015 to early-2017. This increased the gap between information and
data relevance during appraisal (used in the bidding documents) with the actual conditions on the ground. There
were also a number of procurement issues that led to significant delays in implementation. Also, implementation
delays were further exacerbated by the untimely and inadequate counterpart funding and budget allocation,
especially in 2019-2020, due to the Government's response to the 2019 earthquake and COVID-19 (ICR,
paragraph 18)." Finally, US$8.33 million of the loan were not disbursed due to the non-achievement for the
targets of two DLIs and partial achievement of the target for one DLI.

Summary of Efficiency Assessment. The ex-post EIRR was estimated at 147% which exceeded the ex-ante
estimate at 135%. The project experienced implementation delays that could potentially delay the accrual of
benefits. Overall, Efficiency is rated Substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?            Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)


                                                                                                  Page 11 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      RRMSP (P132982)



                                                                                     0
Appraisal                                                  135.00
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     0
ICR Estimate                                               147.00
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of Objectives was rated High. Overall Efficacy was rated Substantial. The project fully achieved two
of its three objectives of: (i) maintaining the condition of primary and primary-secondary road networks; and (ii)
improving the safety of primary and primary-secondary road networks; and strengthening road safety practice.
The project also contributed to achieving the third objective of strengthening sustainable and efficient road asset
management, as evidenced by the continued use of OPRCs for the entire national road network. Efficiency was
rated Substantial as the ex-post EIRR was estimated at 147% which exceeded the ex-ante estimate at 135%.

Based on the assigned ratings for the three Outcome criteria, Outcome is rated Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The following risks could potentially impact the Development Outcome:

1. Financial risk. The decision by the Ministry of Infrastructure and Energy and Albanian Road Authority to
finance the expansion of Output and Performance-based Road Maintenance Contracts (OPRCs) to the
entire national road network over the medium-term is a significant step to sustainable road asset
management. This decision reflects the project’s success in institutionalizing performance-based road
maintenance and building capacity to sustain the project’s development outcomes. The new OPRCs were
designed for a period of four years and are based on similar operational performance standards, merit and
demerit system, and technical specifications. The multi-annual budget for the OPRCs is estimated at about
US$17 million annually.

2. Technical risk. The challenge for the Albanian Road Authority is to tailor the contracts to the current local
environment. There are already some differences from RRMSP’s arrangements. For example, there is no
independent monitoring consultant, a role that the Albanian Road Authority is filling. Strong commitment and
support is required from key decision makers, especially from the Ministry of Finance, and capacity of the
Ministry of Infrastructure and Energy, the Albanian Road Authority, and contractors need to continue to be
strengthened and fully resourced with skilled technical, M&E, fiduciary, and environmental and social
safeguards teams. Under the RRMSP, one of the concerns voiced by contractors was the inefficient
communication by the Albanian Road Authority, which caused some problems. Therefore, it is vital to
address this communication gap to avoid errors, delays, and increased costs.



                                                                                                     Page 12 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      RRMSP (P132982)



3. Institutional risk. The road sector’s sustainability will be further enhanced when the Road Asset
Management System (RAMS) is finally operational. The new Bank-financed Building Resilient Bridges
Program will continue to support the adoption of RAMS with help from a trust fund. It is important that both
the Bank and the Albanian Road Authority take stock of lessons learned from the capacity, technical, and
contract management challenges experienced in setting up the RAMS. The capacity for data collection and
analysis from a dedicated RAMS unit, along with other institutional, regulatory, and financing (multi-year
planning and budgeting) perspectives, are being addressed under the new project. The Bank team is also
looking into the possibility of including the Service Level Agreement as a prior action in a development policy
lending (DPL) program currently under preparation.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
        Strategic relevance and approach. The project was built on the experience of the Bank-
          financed Road Maintenance Project and the Transport Project (which closed in 2007 and
          2011, respectively). The project aimed to improve the road network management and
          maintenance modernization and improve road safety. The project was strategically relevant and in
          line with the Bank strategies and Government priorities regarding both road asset management
          and road safety (see section 3 for details).
         Technical, financial, and economic aspects. The project featured disbursement-linked
          indicators (DLIs) that were incorporated into the design of the Investment Project Financing (IPF)
          operation. This aimed to incentivize the Government to adhere to the terms of the Loan
          Agreement and to the agreed sectoral reforms. However, the DLI concept was new to Albania and
          proved to be initially challenging. The project design aimed to address multiple road sector
          challenges, including road maintenance, institutional support, and road safety. Design featured
          addressing maintenance works through OPRCs which were successfully piloted in two regions.
          However, there was a significant gap between road conditions assessed at appraisal and actual
          road conditions when OPRCs contracts were awarded. This mainly stemmed from the lack of data
          combined with the lengthy elapsed time between the drafting of bid documents and the awarding
          of the contracts. This resulted in underestimation of the rehabilitation works needed to bring road
          sections up to the desired service level, consequently resulting in a sub-estimation of quantities
          and needs by a very large margin in the bid documents for both pavement and non-pavement
          works (ICR, paragraph 61). Financing project activities through a 50-50 split with the Government
          proved too demanding on the Government budget and had to be adjusted during
          implementation. The PAD included an economic analysis that adequately justified the project
          investments.
         Poverty, gender, and social development aspects. The project was expected to contribute to
          reducing poverty and promoting shared prosperity by providing regional opportunities for
          sustainable sources of employment and income for the poor. The maintenance programs initiated
          under RRMSP could create skills and long-term jobs. Feedback from both the STS and road
          safety improvement consultations would differentiate responses on gender basis. Overall, gender
          was not a focus of this project.
         Environmental and fiduciary aspects. The project design included appropriate environmental
          and social risk assessments with adequate mitigation strategies. Procurement functions were

                                                                                                    Page 13 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     RRMSP (P132982)



         undertaken by the ARA PMT. Despite identifying relevant procurement risks and mitigation
         measures, procurement was problematic and contributed to implementation delays. This was
         mainly due to insufficient experience in procuring and implementing OPRCs; insufficient PMT
         capacity and knowledge of Bank procurement guidelines; and insufficient OPRC experience on
         the part of contractors. Financial management capacity and arrangements were adequate.
        Implementation arrangements. The project was implemented under ARA. However,
         capacity issues posed significant challenges throughout implementation. Overall, implementation
         arrangements were not optimal and contributed to implementation delays.
        Risk assessment. The overall implementation risk was rated Moderate. The identified substantial
         risks related to three main areas: political and governance risk, macroeconomic risk, and fiduciary
         risk. While risks were clearly defined, risk mitigation measures were inadequate to address
         capacity issues on the part of ARA and local contractors, and in particular the lack of
         understanding of OPRCs. Also, weak capacity at the project management team (PMT) was under
         estimated and resulted in implementation delays.
        M&E arrangements. The collection of the data required for the monitoring and evaluation of the
         project was under the responsibility of ARA through its Project Management team
         (PMT). However, M&E design suffered from shortcomings as the Results Framework (RF) lacked
         a PDO level indicator to assess road safety. Also, attribution for the outcome indicator on road
         fatalities could have improved if the indicator only focused on the road sections maintained by the
         project (see section 9 for details).

  Summary of QAE Assessment. The project was strategically relevant. Design featured disbursement-
  linked indicators (DLIs) that were incorporated into the design of the Investment Project Financing (IPF)
  operation. Design featured addressing maintenance works through OPRCs which were successfully
  piloted in two regions. However, DLIs and OPRCs proved more challenging than initially anticipated. A
  notable shortcoming in terms of quality at entry was the inadequacy of the road condition study and the
  severe underestimation of the scope and scale of rehabilitation needed to bring roads to maintainable
  conditions. Implementation arrangements suffered from weak capacity at ARA. Risks
  were clearly defined but mitigation measures did not adequately address capacity issues on the part of
  ARA and local contractors. M&E had adequate implementation arrangements, but M&E design suffered
  from minor shortcomings. Overall, Quality at Entry is rated Moderately Satisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
       The project faced challenging conditions with 2019 earthquake and the outbreak of COVID-19 in
        early 2020. The Bank conducted 17 supervision missions over the course of the implementation
        duration. Implementation benefited from the team’s local presence in the country which ensured
        constant communication with the PMT and close supervision.
       The Bank team’s focused on problem solving and supported ARA in addressing implementation
        issues. This was facilitated by the strong relationship between the Bank team and ARA, particularly
        the PMT.


                                                                                                  Page 14 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     RRMSP (P132982)



       There was stability at the project leadership with only two Task Team Leader (TTL) changes. The
        third TTL was an experienced local Bank staff supported by co-TTLs, and environmental and social
        safeguards and fiduciary specialists based in-country or regionally nearby.
       While strengthening procurement was a major focus of supervision as the Bank worked to ensure
        adequate capacity was built and maintained (despite frequent turnaround of ARA staff), the ICR
        (paragraph 79) correctly pointed out that "more could have been done to promote greater
        sensitization and understanding of OPRCs, for ARA but more importantly for contractors."
       The project restructuring required a long time to process as it was agreed to during the MTR in April
        2019. However, the restructuring approval was granted in April 2021, despite that uncertainties over
        loan financing already existed since 2019 (according to the Semiannual Report).

 Summary of Bank Supervision Assessment. The Bank provided close supervision and support to ARA
 counterparts, and steadily guided the project toward a successful completion. The quality of supervision is
 rated Satisfactory.

 Based on the assigned ratings for QAE and Bank Supervision, Bank Performance is rated Moderately
 Satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
      The PAD did not include a Theory of Change (ToC) which was not required by the Bank at the time
        of appraisal. Nonetheless, the ICR included a ToC that was constructed based on the
        project activities, outputs, and outcomes as described in the PAD. The ToC reflected the underlying
        assumptions that underpinned the achievement of the PDO.
       The PDO was measured through three PDO outcome indicators: (i) Road Condition, as a function
        of the average International Roughness Index (IRI) of the Project network does not deteriorate (IRI
        measured as m/km / Maintenance); (ii) Fatalities on an annual basis across the national road
        network (Y/N / Safety); (iii) Preparation and implementation of fully-costed multi-year maintenance
        plans on an annual basis (Y/N / Sustainability).
       The PDO outcome indicators were relevant, measurable, and reflected reasonable targets. Also,
        the attribution of the outcome indicator measuring road fatalities could have been improved if its
        measurement was only focused on the road sections maintained by the project. The ICR
        (paragraph 70) correctly pointed out that measuring traffic accidents rather than fatalities could have
        been a more representative indicator given the larger sample size.




                                                                                                   Page 15 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     RRMSP (P132982)



       The Results Framework included eight intermediate results indicators (IRIs) to track the progress of
        the project and measure achievements of different activities. The IRIs was a mix of quantitative and
        qualitative indicators, and all reflected baseline data established at appraisal.
       M&E design also included six DLIs that were clearly defined and aligned with development
        outcomes and contained a mix of scalable and binary (yes/no) indicators. However, the DLIs related
        to OPRCs, STS, RAMS, iRAP surveys were overly ambitious, given the novelty of some of the
        institutional reforms and limited capacity.
       Overall, M&E design was adequate. However, as discussed above there were some shortcomings
        related to the PDO indicators.



b. M&E Implementation
       Project reporting documents included Aide Memoires, monthly and semi-annual progress reports,
         annual technical audit reports, and annual DLI audit reports. According to the ICR (paragraph
         71) "the reports were of very good quality, clearly written, covering implementation progress over
         the reporting periods, and raising potential and actual issues affecting implementation."
        The Results Framework had no changes except adjusting the target dates to align with the new
         closing date. However, the IRIs related to preparation of Transport Sector Strategy and the
         Beneficiary Impact Assessments should have been dropped during the restructuring, because the
         former was not financed by the project and the latter could not be delivered as planned (ICR,
         paragraph 71).
        The MTR resulted in key decisions that led to the project restructuring.



c. M&E Utilization
       The ICR (paragraph 72) noted that M&E reporting documents raised issues that needed to be
         addressed, with subsequent reports noting the outcome of actions taken. For example: issues
         related to the OPRC amendments, capacity of contractors and PMT, inadequate counterpart
         funding, the urgency of the Bank’s restructuring, and RAMS.
        The M&E system monitored and performance indicators and the monitoring information was
         used to inform decision making. This included the DLI audit reports which informed the project
         management on the need for OPRC amendments and closing date extension, along with
         financing arrangements.
        The technical audit and DLI audit reports both included relevant analysis and provided insights
         on lessons learned, for example: the challenges contractors faced in collecting and analyzing
         road data given their limited experience and capacity, and the recommendation that such tasks
         be subcontracted to specialized firms.

  Summary of M&E Quality Assessment. M&E design was adequate, but there were some weaknesses
  related to PDO outcome indicators. M&E implementation generated enough information to track the
  progress of the project activities and assess outcomes. Utilization was evident in helping the
  management decisions and informing the ICR. Overall, M&E Quality is rated Substantial with moderate
  shortcomings related to M&E design that were not addressed during restructuring.



                                                                                                 Page 16 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     RRMSP (P132982)




  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
        The project was classified as and environmental category B. It triggered two
          environmental safeguards policies: Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) and Natural Habitats
          (OP/BP 4.04), and one social safeguard policy: Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12).
         A Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) was prepared that addresses all possible impacts that can
          trigger Social Safeguards Operation
          Policies. The RPF was disclosed on December 1, 2014. Also, an Environmental Management
          Framework (EMF) document was prepared
          and disclosed in country in October 2014.

   Compliance with Environmental and Social Safeguards. The ICR (paragraph 74) reported that "there
   were no substantial environmental safeguard issues that arose and the project complied with applicable
   safeguards policies." There was some limited land acquisition associated with a few of the rehabilitation /
   improvement works. The PMT ensured that site-specific land acquisition plans, resettlement action plan
   (RAP), and the compensation of project affected people (PAPs) were prepared and implemented prior to
   the start of works. According to the ICR (paragraph 75) "there were no substantial social safeguards issues
   and the project complied with OP 4.12."




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management (FM). FM capacity benefited from financial specialists at the PMT who had prior
   experience with Bank operations. International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRs) was used to report
   eligible expenditure, and annual financial statements covering both DLI-based components and non DLI-
   based components were subject to a financial audit. Financial audits were unqualified, including the last
   audit, and no issues were reported. However, audit reports experienced some occasional delays,
   particularly due to the COVID-19 lockdown. Inadequate counterpart funds was a concern as this resulted
   in delayed Interim Payment Certificates (IPCs) of the contractors/consultants, and their partial payment,
   which led to claims of interests for delayed payments, and accumulation of arrears. By the end of 2020
   ARA managed to reallocate the needed resources in its budget, and no obligations were carried forward to
   2021. Overall, FM capacity and arrangements were adequate.

   Procurement. Procurement functions were undertaken by the ARA PMT. While ARA addressed a large
   number of contract amendments and order changes on a timely basis, procurement was overall
   problematic and contributed to significant implementation delays. Three procurement risks identified in the
   PAD materialized during implementation: (i) insufficient experience in procuring and implementing OPRCs;
   (ii) insufficient PMT capacity and knowledge of Bank procurement guidelines; and (iii) implementation
   delays and insufficient OPRC experience on the part of contractors. The Bank attempted to address
   procurement challenges through a considerable investment in capacity building. However, frequent


                                                                                                 Page 17 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     RRMSP (P132982)



   turnover of ARA staff combined with the limited understanding by the contractors for OPRCs burdened the
   Bank's efforts. The Bank and ARA worked to bring in international short-term consultants to provide direct
   support and guidance on procurement processes and technical issues.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None.



d. Other
   None.



11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                     IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Satisfactory           Satisfactory
                                                                                  QAE had some moderate
Bank Performance                Satisfactory           Moderately Satisfactory
                                                                                  shortcomings.
Quality of M&E                  Substantial            Substantial

Quality of ICR                  ---                    High


12. Lessons

The ICR included two lessons which are emphasized with some adaptation of language.

1. Road maintenance is critical to improving resilience and climate change adaptation, but
Output and Performance-based Road Maintenance Contract (OPRCs) must continually adjust
as climate variability grows. Critical to the success of OPRCs is the assignment of risk between
parties. Climate change has major implications for OPRC contracts because it affects the risk
exposure of both parties. Without clear expectations around climate risk, neither the asset owner nor
the companies bidding for performance contracts will adequately address the risks. Contractors
cannot be held accountable for risks that are not specifically cited or linked with performance criteria.
At present, climate change risks are generally carried by the asset owner through force majeure
provisions of the contract, and treated as ‘unforeseen’ events, with repair costs reimbursed to the
contractor. This impacts the overall cost of the OPRC, and where extreme weather events are
becoming commonplace, reduces the efficacy of OPRC as a contracting modality. In the case of the
RRMSP, the project financed emergency works on roads affected by adverse weather events at a
total cost that was 10% higher than budgeted. As weather becomes more erratic and severe,
OPRCs will need to adapt, without which they could lose their cost efficiency.


                                                                                                     Page 18 of 20
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       RRMSP (P132982)



2. OPRCs can help strengthen sustainable and efficient road asset management as they
create both in the market and within government an expectation of stable and predictable
funding flows through medium-term budgeting. In turn, the efficient use of resources through the
OPRCs increases the credibility of budget requests, leading to increased outlays for maintenance,
as evidence in the increased funding allocated to the new OPRCs. These are important steps
towards accessing commercial financing via bonds and market instruments that will allow the
country to finance the road sector in a more efficient manner. However, more needs to be done to
add credibility to the process. In this context, a well-functioning RAMS, anchored by a SLA, can
provide the critical foundation for adequate road sector financing for the country’s ambitious road
sector development program.

The following lesson is emphasized by IEG:

3. Road rehabilitation and maintenance projects need to reflect updated reports on road
conditions and limit the time needed to process and award contracts to ensure smooth
implementation by contractors. The project experience demonstrated that the lengthy time that
took place from the identification of road conditions to awarding contracts resulted in costlier
rehabilitation because the conditions of the roads continued to deteriorate, and more work was
needed.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

Quality of Evidence. Overall, the ICR provided an adequate evidence base to support the achievements
reported.

Quality of Analysis. The ICR provided clear linking between evidence and findings and used the evidence base
to serve the arguments under the different sections, in particular, the discussion on outcomes.

Lessons. Lessons reflected the project experience and were based on evidence and analysis.

Results Orientation. The ICR included an adequate discussion on the achievement of the PDO. The outcome
discussion was balanced between reporting on the achievement of outcome indicators and what the project
actually achieved on the ground.

Consistency with guidelines. The ICR used the available data to justify most of the assigned ratings.

Conciseness. The ICR provided comprehensive coverage of project activities and candidly reported on most
shortcomings in a concise form.

Summary of the Quality of ICR Assessment. The ICR was well written and provided a comprehensive
account of the project achievements and candidly reported on implementation challenges. It reflected relevant

                                                                                                   Page 19 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     RRMSP (P132982)



lessons, and most sections were concise and reflected relevant information. Overall, the Quality of the ICR is
rated High.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      High




                                                                                                   Page 20 of 20
