     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Power Sector Ref.& Sus. Hydropower Dev. (P150066)



                                                                                Report Number: ICRR0023552

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P150066                                   Power Sector Ref.& Sus. Hydropower Dev.

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Nepal                                     Energy & Extractives


 L/C/TF Number(s)                         Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-57280,TF-18570,TF-B4904              30-Jun-2020                                         11,022,003.72

 Bank Approval Date                       Closing Date (Actual)
 25-Sep-2015                              30-Dec-2022

                                          IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                          22,500,000.00                                    3,500,000.00

 Revised Commitment                           13,171,955.75                                    1,164,798.72

 Actual                                       11,301,623.10                                    1,164,798.72




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator        Group
 Kishore Laxmikant          Joel J. Maweni               Ramachandra Jammi             IEGSD (Unit 4)
 Nadkarni




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objectives (PDOs) were to: (a) strengthen the capacity of the power sector
   agencies to plan and prepare hydropower and transmission line projects following international standards and
   best practices; and (b) improve the readiness of the power sector agencies for regulatory and institutional
   reforms. (Financing Agreement Schedule 1, dated February 4, 2016, and Project Appraisal Document para.
   27, dated September 3, 2015).



                                                                                                Page 1 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Power Sector Ref.& Sus. Hydropower Dev. (P150066)



   The PDOs and target values for related outcome indicators remained unchanged during project
   implementation.

   For the ICRR, the PDOs are parsed as follows:

   Objective 1: To strengthen the capacity of the power sector agencies to prepare hydropower and
   transmission line projects.

   Objective 2: To improve the readiness of the power sector agencies for regulatory and institutional reforms.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   (Reference PAD paras. 30 to 32 and ICR para. 10).

   The project components at appraisal are indicated below. Changes in the components during
   implementation are discussed under Restructurings below.

   Component A: Preparation of Hydropower and Transmission Line Investment Projects (estimated
   cost at appraisal US$16.75 million; actual cost at completion US$8.2 million). This component aimed to
   finance (i) preparation activities for the Upper Arun Hydroelectric Project (UAHEP) and the Ikhuwa
   Khola Hydroelectric Project (IKHP), including detailed engineering designs and bid documents; (b)
   Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) including a Cumulative Impact Assessment (CIA); (iii)
   hiring of panels of experts for dam safety and environmental and social matters; and (iv) preparation of
   feasibility study, basic design, route survey, ESIA, and bid documents for the transmission line (that was to
   be identified).

   Component B: Studies and Preparation for Policy Recommendations and Sector Reform (estimated
   cost at appraisal US$5.35 million; actual cost at completion US$2.3 million). This component aimed to
   support (i) river basin planning with an Integrated Water Resource Management (IWRM) approach; (ii)
   improvement of Water Resource Management (WRM) and related regulations including updating of the
   Water Resources Act (WRA) and capacity building at the Water and Energy Commission Secretariat
   (WECS); (iii) establishment and operationalization of a power trading company; and (iv) restructuring of the
   Nepal Electricity Authority (NEA) for improved management and efficiency of the power distribution
   operations, including through provision of computerized management tools and installation of smart meters.

   Component C: Capacity Building for Safeguard Management and Hydropower Development
   (estimated cost at appraisal US$0.4 million; actual cost at completion US$0.3 million). This component
   aimed to support (i) conducting a Strategic Environmental and Social assessment (SESA) as part of the
   IWRM activities under Component B; (ii) preparing recommendations for environmental and social




                                                                                                   Page 2 of 21
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Power Sector Ref.& Sus. Hydropower Dev. (P150066)



  guidelines for hydropower development; (iii) safeguards capacity building for management of transmission
  line Right of Way (ROW) issues; and (iv) carrying out of project management activities.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost: At appraisal, the estimated total project cost was US$25 million. The estimated total cost at
  project completion was US$12.46 million. (ICR Data Sheet). There are discrepancies in the ICR in regard to
  reporting the total cost at completion. The ICR Data Sheet reports actual cost at US$11.30 million (financed
  by IDA $10.14 million and Grant Financing US1.16 million). The ICR's Annex 3 reports it as US$10.80
  million. The Project Team informed IEG on November 22,2023 that this amount was financed by IDA
  US$9.6 million and SAWI US$1.2 million.

  Financing: At appraisal, the total World Bank financing for the project was US$23.5 million through an IDA
  (International Development Agency) credit of US$20 million and a grant of US$3.5 million from the South
  Asia Water Initiative (SAWI) Phase 2 Multi-Donor Trust Fund. At project completion, the total amount
  disbursed was US$11.30 million, including US$10.14 million under the IDA credit and US$1.16 million
  under the SAWI Multi-Donor Trust Fund. (ICR Data Sheet). The Project Team informed IEG on November
  22,2023 that the figure of US$10.14 million included an unutilized balance in the amount of US$ 297,619
  that was returned to IDA by the Borrower on September 4, 2023 (after the preparation of the ICR). Adjusting
  for this amount, the amount disbursed under the IDA financing was US$9.84 million. The final figure
  reported by the Borrower was US$9.857 million.

  Borrower Contribution: At appraisal, the Borrower's contribution was estimated at US$1.5 million.
  No contribution was made by the Borrower during project implementation. (ICR Data Sheet).

  Dates: The Project was approved on September 25, 2015. The planned effectiveness date was January 1,
  2016, and the actual effectiveness date was June 2, 2016, reflecting a delay of five months. The original
  planned closing date was June 30, 2020. It was extended three times by a total of 30 months (2.5 years)
  to December 30, 2022, to allow for completion of project activities, including those impacted by the COVID
  pandemic.

  Mid-Term Review (MTR): The PAD does not indicate the originally planned date for the MTR. It was
  carried out in December 2018.

  Restructurings: (Reference ICR paras. 11 to 21).

  The Project underwent seven Level 2 restructurings during the implementation period.

  First Restructuring (June 30, 2017, disbursed amount US$0.30 million): An amount of US$2 million was
  cancelled from the SAWI grant due to changes in funding availability under the SAWI-P2 Multi-Donor Trust
  Fund (MDTF) and slow implementation progress. The closing date for the SAWI grant was extended to
  June 30,2018. Reallocations were made between disbursement categories.

  Second Restructuring (June 28, 2018, disbursed amount US$2.0 million): The closing date of the SAWI
  grant was extended to June 30, 2019. Some changes were made in components and costs.




                                                                                                 Page 3 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Power Sector Ref.& Sus. Hydropower Dev. (P150066)



   Third Restructuring (October 25, 2019, disbursed amount US$6.46 million): Changes were made to
   Intermediate Results Indicators (IRIs) for Components B and C as follows: For Component B: The IRI for
   "Preparation of an Action Plan for NEA business restructuring" was dropped. Two new IRIs were added: (i)
   "Conducting of Asset Valuation and Verification" and (ii) "Reduction in NEA's audited financial statements
   time" with a baseline of 12 months and a target of 6 months. For Component C: Two IRIs regarding carrying
   out of workshops on benefit sharing guidelines and resettlement guidelines were dropped. The IRI on
   recommendations for SESA/CIA guidelines for hydropower development was amended to remove the
   reference to CIA and replace "guidelines" by "framework". The IRI in regard to citizens' engagement was
   changed to "Guidelines on stakeholder consultation and grievance redress mechanism systems for energy
   sector projects developed and adopted by NEA". Some changes were made within components and
   associated costs.

   Fourth Restructuring (June 16, 2020, disbursed amount US$7.28 million): The loan closing date was
   extended by seven months to January 31, 2022, to allow for completion of activities.

   Fifth Restructuring (December 8, 2020, disbursed amount US$7.28 million): The loan closing date was
   extended by 12 months to December 30, 2021, to allow for completion of activities.

   Sixth Restructuring (December 7, 2021, disbursed amount US$10.40 million): The target under the IRI for
   "Reduction in NEA's audited financial statements audited time" was changed from 6 months to 9 months.
   The loan closing date was extended by 12 months to December 30, 2022, to allow for completion of
   activities.

   Seventh Restructuring (December 1, 2022, disbursed amount US$11.30 million): At the request of GoN,
   an amount of US$8 million was cancelled from the IDA credit since this could not be utilized prior to the
   closing date. Reallocations were made between disbursement categories.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
(Reference PAD paras. 1 to 24 and ICR paras. 1 to 6 and para. 22).

Country Context: At appraisal in 2015, Nepal's economic development lagged behind that of the South
Asia region with its gross domestic product (GDP) per capita and economic growth rate below the averages
for the region. However, Nepal had made significant progress in poverty reduction, with the percentage of
the population living below the poverty line declining from 38 percent in 2000 to about 21 percent in 2015.
Nepal was emerging from a long period of political instability and conflict, and the effects of two devastating
natural calamities. Following a decade-long conflict (1996-2006), and the subsequent peace accord,
Nepal's new constitution was promulgated in 2015 with a federal system of governance as the main feature.
National priorities thereafter involved progressively transitioning from peace building and social
transformation to infrastructure development, including hydropower development, and

                                                                                                     Page 4 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Power Sector Ref.& Sus. Hydropower Dev. (P150066)



industrialization. However, two major earthquakes (7.8 and 7.3 magnitude) in April and May 2015 severely
affected the country's human and physical infrastructure, thereby requiring substantial resources for post-
disaster reconstruction. While Nepal has large hydropower potential, the political instability referred to
above was a barrier to the development of this potential. Investment in key infrastructure sectors, including
hydropower, was negligible. A World Bank study estimated that, between 2011 and 2020, Nepal needed to
invest 3 to 5 percent of its GDP in the power sector compared to actual expenditure of about 1.7 percent of
GDP. Furthermore, the country needed to undertake critical regulatory and administrative reforms and
institutional capacity development to implement the rule of law, promote transparency and accountability,
and attract private investment. (ICR paras. 1 to 3).

Sector Context: At appraisal, the power sector in Nepal faced significant challenges, affecting its ability to
serve the domestic market. At the time, Nepal's installed electricity capacity was approximately 790 MW
(megawatts) of which 93 percent was in hydropower. Although the electrification rate was high (about 82.5
percent), most consumers connected to the grid lacked sustainable access to electricity due to
supply/demand imbalances. To address this challenge, the GoN had liberalized the conditions for private
sector participation in the power sector. However, the response from the private sector was limited, and by
2015, only about 255 MW of private generation capacity had been constructed as compared to the 1,000
MW capacity that was expected. This limited response resulted from a combination of factors, including the
absence of a comprehensive generation and transmission master plan to guide investment decisions, and
lack of creditworthiness of NEA as the country's single buyer/off-taker. Hydropower development was
further constrained by uncertainties in planning, designing and completing power transmission projects.
Institutional capacity limitations affected the ability of the relevant GoN agencies to (i) prepare large-scale
power generation and transmission projects and (ii) develop and enforce appropriate environmental and
social (E&S) policies and regulations. Meanwhile, given its large hydropower potential, the GoN entered
into regional cooperation initiatives, particularly with India, that were expected to create hydropower export
opportunities for Nepal. Trade-related agreements signed with India included a Power Trade Agreement
and two Project Development Agreements (PDAs) between the GoN and Indian companies for large scale
exports of hydropower from Nepal. A major 400 kV cross-border transmission line was under construction.
(ICR paras. 4 to 6).

The IDA-supported Power Sector Reform and Sustainable Hydropower Development Project was prepared
to support Nepal in addressing the development of necessary reforms and increasing power capacity
required for the efficient growth of the sector.

Alignment with National Priorities: The Project Development Objectives (PDOs) were aligned with the
national priorities at the time of appraisal as well as at project closure. At appraisal, the PDOs were
consistent with the priorities under the GoN's Five-Year Plan for the Period FY2014-2018, and the GoN's
commitment to power sector development was reflected in Nepal's signing of regional cooperation
agreements, including a Power Trading Agreement (PTA) with India and a South Asian Association for
Regional Cooperation (SAARC) Framework Agreement. The PDOs remain consistent with the GoN's
priorities under the currently prevailing Five-Year Plan for the Period FY2019-2024 which aims to enable
higher access and connectivity to modern infrastructure and to quadruple generation capacity in clean
energy. (ICR para. 22).

Alignment with the World Bank Group (WBG) Country Partnership Frameworks: The PDOs were well-
aligned with the priorities in the WBG Country Partnership Frameworks (CPFs) at the time of appraisal
(CPF FY2013-2017) as well as those at project closure (CPF FY2019-2024). The Project's objective of
strengthening capacity in NEA and other power-sector related agencies is consistent with Focus Area 1 in

                                                                                                     Page 5 of 21
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                     Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Power Sector Ref.& Sus. Hydropower Dev. (P150066)



               the CPF for FY2019-2024, which indicates that the WBG will support the GoN's efforts and will scale up
               analytical work to better inform future interventions and to support more evidence-based decision-
               making. (CPF para. 26). The PDOs are also consistent with the CPF's Objective 2.1 (Improve power
               generation capacity and access to electricity) which provides that the WBG will seek opportunities to
               contribute to increasing power supply through promotion of hydropower generation, renewable energy
               solutions, and energy efficiency that will also contribute to climate change co-benefits. (CPF para. 32).
               Finally, the Indicative IDA Lending Program under the CPF FY2019-2024 specifically includes the Power
               Sector Reform and Sustainable Hydropower Development Project in the indicative lending program for
               FY2019-2020.

               Prior Bank Experience: The World Bank has been involved in Nepal's energy sector for several years,
               including hydropower, transmission line investment projects as well as sector work. At the time of project
               appraisal, ongoing IDA-supported projects included the Kabeli A hydropower project (37 MW capacity) and
               some transmission line and grid-access projects. Ongoing sector work included a Transmission Master
               Planning Study, technical assistance for scaling-up of hydropower projects, and a South Asia Regional
               Cooperation initiative.

               Relevance of Project Development Objectives: Given the context described above, the PDOs were
               consistent, and remained consistent, with the priorities in the national programs and the WBG Country
               Assistance Strategies. The PDOs were pitched at an appropriate level taking into account the country's
               development needs, implementation capacities, and the multi-phase nature of the sectoral investment
               program.




               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To strengthen the capacity of the power sector agencies to prepare hydropower and transmission line
                             projects.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change (TOC): A TOC was not articulated in the PAD. However, the ICR has constructed a TOC
                             based on the information derived from the PAD, and it provides a diagrammatic presentation of the theory of
                             change (TOC) and the results chain from activities to outcomes. The overall TOC (applicable to Objectives 1
                             and 2) was that a lack of adequate power generation capacity and weaknesses in the power transmission and
                             distribution system were proving to be constraints to economic growth and were adversely impacting
                             electricity consumers through a combination of inadequate availability, reliability and access. Moreover,

                                                                                                                           Page 6 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Power Sector Ref.& Sus. Hydropower Dev. (P150066)



although Nepal had abundant hydropower resources and hydropower was determined to be the least-cost
option for power generation, Nepal had not been able to achieve its potential to increase power exports to
neighboring countries, including India. Securing the required improvements in power supply was being
constrained by inadequacies in the relevant legal and regulatory frameworks and by weaknesses in planning
and implementation capacity in the relevant GoN agencies. To address the situation, it was necessary to
undertake a set of complementary actions including strengthening the capacity of the power sector agencies
to (i) prepare hydropower and transmission line projects (Objective 1); and (iii) improve their readiness for
regulatory and institutional reforms (Objective 2). The Project aimed to provide relevant technical assistance
to the power sector agencies to help them achieve these objectives. In regard to Objective 1, the Project
would provide inputs through financing of technical assistance, including expert advice, training, and
supporting hardware and software. The resulting outputs would be preparation of (i) hydropower projects
(UAHEP and IKHP) including detailed engineering studies; relevant E&S documents; reports from panels of
experts on dam safety and E&S matters; and bidding documents; and (ii) priority high-voltage power
transmission lines including feasibility studies; basic route surveys; relevant E&S documents; and bidding
documents. The outcome would be strengthened capacity in the power agencies to undertake hydropower
and transmission line project preparation. Assuming that the identified hydropower generation and power
transmission line projects were subsequently implemented, the longer-term outcome would include economic
growth, economic benefits to the population, and contribution to green, inclusive, sustainable and climate-
resilient development.

The causal links and results chain in the TOC in regard to Objective 1 were adequate. To measure the
achievement of Objective 1, two PDO indicators and three Intermediate Results Indicators (IRIs) were used.
The selected indicators were relevant and measurable.

Key assumptions were: (i) the priorities set by the GoN at appraisal would continue; and (ii) the
implementation agencies would successfully internalize the capacity strengthening activities provided under
the Project.

Outputs and Intermediate Results Indicators: (as reported in the ICR Annex 1 - Results Framework and
paras. 24 to 26).

Key outputs included the following:

      Feasibility studies prepared for the UAHEP and IKHP projects.
      Detailed site and geotechnical surveys prepared for transmission lines.
      Environmental and Social Impact Assessments (ESIAs), including Resettlement Action Plans,
       prepared for UAHEP and IKHP.
      ESIAs, including Resettlement Action Plans, prepared for up to four transmission lines.

Intermediate Results Indicators (IRIs): Reported achievements under the three IRIs were as follows:

IRI 1-1: Detailed engineering studies and ESIA report prepared for Upper Arun Hydroelectric Project
(UAHEP): The baseline was an existing feasibility study prepared in 1991. The target was completion of
detailed engineering studies and ESIA report for the UAHEP. At appraisal, it was anticipated the UAHEP
would provide a power generation capacity of 335 MW. However, during the preparation of the analytical
studies, it was determined that the optimal size of the UAHEP would be 1,061 MW. This represented a
substantial scaling up of the preparatory work from that originally envisaged. As a result, not all the originally


                                                                                                     Page 7 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Power Sector Ref.& Sus. Hydropower Dev. (P150066)



planned activities could be completed prior to project closing. The ICR reports (Annex 1 - Results Framework)
that the original feasibility studies were updated, the detailed engineering studies and ESIA reports were at an
advanced stage. The completed studies included (i) project optimization report; (ii) feasibility study; and (iii)
ESIA report including CIA (Cumulative Impact Assessment), SEP (Stakeholder Engagement Plan), IPP
(indigenous Peoples Plan) and RAP (Resettlement Action Plan). The ongoing studies included: (i) detailed
project design; (ii) draft bidding documents; (iii) biodiversity and high-resolution ecological flows. The ICR
(para. 26) indicates that completion of this work would be pursued during further preparation of the
UAHEP. The Project Team informed IEG in September 2023 that the ESIA was completed and was being
reviewed by the specialists in the World Bank. However, completion of the detailed engineering studies and
bidding documents were still pending the appointment of a new consultant. Consequently, the target for this
IRI was partially achieved.

IRI 1-2: Detailed engineering studies and ESIA report prepared for Ikhuwa Khola Arun Hydropower Project
(IKHP): The baseline was a feasibility study and initial environmental examination prepared in 2014. The
target was completion of detailed engineering studies and ESIA reports for the IKHP. The ICR reports (Annex
1 - Results Framework) that completion of the detailed engineering studies and ESIA reports was at an
advanced stage at project closing. Completed studies included: (i) feasibility study; (ii) ESIA report
including CIA, SEP, IPP, and RAP. Ongoing studies include: (i) detailed project designs; (ii) draft bidding
documents; (iii) biodiversity study; and (iv) high-resolution ecological flows. The ICR (para. 26) indicates that
completion of this work would be pursued during further preparation of the IKHP. The Project Team informed
IEG in September 2023 that the work was still ongoing. Consequently, the target for this IRI was partially
achieved.

IRI 1-3: Detailed engineering and ESIA reports prepared for selected high-voltage transmission line
projects: The baseline was that no candidate transmission lines had been identified at appraisal. The target
was completion of detailed engineering studies and ESIA reports for selected transmission lines. The ICR
reports (Annex 1 - Results Framework) that, at project closing, the work on the detailed engineering and ESIA
reports was at an early stage of preparation. A detailed route survey was completed, but other activities
including preparation of detailed designs, draft bidding documents, and ESIA work, including biodiversity
management plan, was ongoing. The Project Team confirmed in September 2023 that the work is sill
ongoing. Consequently, the target for this IRI was substantially underachieved.

PDO Indicators: For Objective 1, two PDO indicators (PDOI) were utilized.

PDOI 1-1: Capacity of hydropower projects prepared (in megawatts - MW): The target was to prepare two
hydropower projects with a total capacity of 360 MW. As a result of optimization studies carried out during
project implementation, it was determined that the optimal capacity of the two hydropower plants (UAHEP
and IKHP) was 1,101 MW. This substantially increased capacity resulted in a major scaling-up of the
preparatory work envisaged under the Project. While some of the planned activities were completed prior to
project closing (as indicated above under achievement of IRIs), other activities were still ongoing. These were
intended to be pursued under the subsequent preparation of the scaled-up UAHEP. The Project Team
informed IEG that, as of September 2023, some of these ongoing activities had been completed but others,
including completion of detailed engineering designs and bidding documents and some ESIA-related
activities, was still ongoing. Consequently, this PDO indicator was partially achieved.

PDOI 1-2: Length of transmission line projects prepared (in kilometers - km): The target was to prepare
transmission line projects with for a total of 150 km. The baseline at appraisal was that no candidate
transmission lines had been identified. During implementation, four transmission lines with a total length of

                                                                                                   Page 8 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Power Sector Ref.& Sus. Hydropower Dev. (P150066)



303 km were identified for project preparation. The ICR indicates (Annex 1 - Results Framework) that, at
project closing, activities completed were the preparation of feasibility studies for the four transmission lines.
However, as indicated above under achievement of IRIs, the other planned activities (detailed engineering
studies; bidding documents; ESIAs) were at an early stage of preparation. The Project Team confirmed in
September 2023 that the work was still ongoing. Consequently, this PDO indicator was underachieved.

Outcomes: Objective 1 was to strengthen the capacity of the power sector agencies to prepare hydropower
and transmission line projects. This was to be achieved through assisting the power sector agencies to
complete preparation of two identified hydropower projects and selected transmission lines (that had not been
identified at appraisal). During implementation, for the hydropower projects, the preparatory work had to be
substantially scaled up since, for optimization reasons, the generation capacity required was increased from
360 MW to 1,101 MW. As a result, while some of the planned preparatory work was completed prior to project
closing, other work, including preparation of detailed engineering designs and bidding documents, and some
ESIA-related work, was still ongoing and was intended to be pursued under the further preparation of the two
hydropower projects. For the transmission line projects, at project closing, while feasibility studies had been
prepared, other preparation work was ongoing. As of September 2023, this ongoing work was still in
progress. In regard to achievement of Objective 1, while the increased scale of the hydropower and
transmission line projects substantially increased the complexity of the preparatory work for the power sector
agencies and contributed thereby to a strengthening of capacity, including through the technical assistance
provided, a significant part of the activities had not been completed prior to project closing. Completion of
these activities is envisaged under the further preparatory work that is in process for the planned UAHEP and
IKHP projects. The GoN has confirmed the high priority that it attaches to these projects and the World Bank
has confirmed its interest in supporting the projects. Although the intention is to address these unfinished
activities under the further preparation of UAHEP, IKHP, and the transmission lines, the completion of these
activities cannot wholly be attributed to the Project. Consequently, measuring the efficacy of Objective 1 by
the partial achievement of the related PDO indicators, the ICRR rates the efficacy of Objective 1 as Modest.




Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To improve the readiness of the power sector agencies for regulatory and institutional reforms.

Rationale
Theory of Change (TOC): The overall TOC for Objectives 1 and 2 was provided above under Objective 1.
For Objective 2, the TOC was that the Project would provide inputs through financing of technical assistance,
including expert advice, training, and provision of supporting equipment, including hardware and software.
The resulting outputs would include: (i) implementation by the WECS (Water Energy Commission Secretariat)
of integrated water resource planning; (ii) improvement of the regulatory and institutional framework for water
resources management and hydropower development, including updating of the Water Resources Act and
capacity building of WECS; and (iii) preparation of NEA's power system expansion plan and update of the
generation master plan; and (iv) the restructuring of NEA, including valuation of its assets, for improved

                                                                                                     Page 9 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Power Sector Ref.& Sus. Hydropower Dev. (P150066)



management and efficiency of its power distribution business. The outcome would be strengthening of the
capacity of the power sector agencies to carry out sector reform and planning activities. The longer-term
outcome would be increased efficiency in water resources planning and power sector development.

The causal links and results chain in the TOC in regard to Objective 2 were adequate. To measure the
achievement of Objective 2, one PDO indicator and one Intermediate Results Indicators (IRI) were used. The
selected indicators were relevant and measurable.

Key assumptions were: (i) the priorities set by the GoN at appraisal would continue; and (ii) the
implementation agencies would successfully internalize the capacity strengthening activities provided under
the Project.

Outcomes and Intermediate Results Indicators (as reported in the ICR Annex 1 - Results Framework and
para. 27).

Key outputs included the following:

      Nine River Basin Planning studies were prepared for selected river basins.
      Ten Hydropower Development Master Plans were prepared.
      Power system planning hardware and software were provided.
      The Generation Master Plan was prepared.
      Drafts of the Water Resources Act, the Electricity Act, and the Electricity Regulatory Commission Act
       were prepared.
      Gender Equality and Social Inclusion Guidelines were prepared.
      Asset verification and valuation completed for NEA.
      A Business Plan for the Nepal Power Trading Company (NPTC) was prepared.

Intermediate Results Indicators (IRIs): Achievements under the IRIs were as follows:

IRI 2-1: Number of river basin plans prepared utilizing an IWRM (Integrated Water Resources Management)
approach. Against the target of two river basin plans (RBPs), a total of nine RBPs were prepared, including
10 hydropower development master plans (HDMPs). The target was substantially exceeded.

IRI 2-2: Generation Master Plan (GMP) prepared. A GMP was prepared as targeted. The target was
achieved.

IRI 2-3: Action Plan for NEA's business restructuring prepared. The Action Plan was not prepared as it was
assessed to be outside the control of the Project. Instead, a Financial Viability Plan for NEA was to be
prepared but it was not specified as an indicator. Two related new IRIs (IRI 2-4 and 2-5 were added at the
restructuring in 2019. The original target in regard to IRI 2-3 was not achieved.

IRI 2-4: NEA's asset verification and valuation carried out. This was carried out as planned. The target was
achieved.




                                                                                                Page 10 of 21
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Power Sector Ref.& Sus. Hydropower Dev. (P150066)



                            IRI 2-5: Reduction in submission time for NEA's audited financial statements: Against a baseline of 12
                            months, the original target was 6 months, which was increased in 2021 to 9 months. The actual achievement
                            at completion was 12 months. Thus, both the original and revised targets were not achieved.

                            PDO Indicators: The single PDO indicator was "number of key policy and sector reform actions validated and
                            endorsed at the institutional level by MOEWRI (Ministry of Energy, Water Resources, and Irrigation), NEA
                            and WECS. The target was 5 actions to be validated and endorsed. The target was achieved. The sector
                            reform actions validated and endorsed by the power sector agencies included drafts of the Water Resources
                            Act, the Electricity Act, the Electricity Regulatory Commission Act, the Gender Equality and Social
                            Inclusion Guidelines, the Environmental and Social Impact Assessment Manual for Hydropower, the Financial
                            Viability Action Plan for NEA, and the Business Plan for the Nepal Power Trading Company (NPTC). In
                            addition, a physical verification of NEA's assets (generation, transmission and distribution) and inventories
                            was carried out, including the development of standard operating procedures and manuals for NEA's tangible
                            assets, and recommendations for adjustments to be made conform with the stipulations in the Nepal Financial
                            Reporting Standards.

                            Outcomes: Objective 2 to improve the readiness of the power sector agencies for regulatory and institutional
                            reforms was substantially achieved. As discussed above, at the institutional level, the technical assistance
                            and training provided under the Project contributed to strengthening the capacity of WECS to undertake
                            preparation of RBPs and HDMPs using the IWRM (Integrated Water Resource Management) approach. In
                            regard to NEA, its capacity to prepare Generation Master Plans (GMPs), including medium-term and long-
                            term generation plans, was enhanced through provision of improved planning tools and relevant training. As
                            seen from the key outputs and IRIs discussed above, several important actions in regard to water resources
                            management and power sector reform were undertaken as targeted. The ICR reports that the actions were
                            validated and endorsed at the institutional level by the respective power sector agencies involved (ICR para.
                            28). One action that was not carried out was the originally targeted preparation of an Action Plan for NEA's
                            business restructuring as this was assessed to be beyond the control of the Project. Based on the foregoing,
                            the ICRR rates the efficacy of Objective 2 as Substantial.




                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The Project's overall efficacy is assessed on the basis of the efficacies for achievement of Objectives 1 and 2.




                                                                                                                              Page 11 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Power Sector Ref.& Sus. Hydropower Dev. (P150066)



  As discussed above, the efficacy of achievement of Objective 1 is rated Modest since the targets for
  achievement of the planned outcomes were only partially achieved. The efficacy of achievement of Objective
  2 is rated Substantial since the targets for achievement of the planned outcomes were fully achieved.

  Rating of Overall Efficacy: Although Objective 1 was only partially achieved, the underlying reasons, including
  the increased scope and complexity of the preparatory work due to the almost tripling in the size of the
  UAHEP on optimization considerations, contributed to significant strengthening of NEA's capacity to
  undertake preparatory works for design of hydropower projects. Work on completion of unfinished activities,
  including detailed engineering and project design, is in process and the prospects for its completion are good
  since the GoN has confirmed the high priority it attaches to implementation of the identified projects, including
  the UAHEP, IKHP, and selected transmission lines. Objective 2 was achieved. Taking into account these
  considerations, the ICRR rates the Project's overall efficacy as Substantial with moderate shortcomings.



  Overall Efficacy Rating
  Substantial



5. Efficiency
Economic Efficiency

 A quantitative analysis of the project's costs and benefits was not carried out at appraisal and at project closing.
This was due to the difficulties in valuing in monetary terms the benefits of the project activities which were
mainly in the form of technical assistance for capacity strengthening to carry our project preparation and sector
planning activities. On a qualitative basis, the project resulted in benefits to the main power sector agencies
(WECS and NEA) by strengthening their capacity for carrying out project management with attention to
technical, environmental, and social aspects. These are expected to result in economic benefits by enabling
more efficient preparation and implementation of hydropower and transmission line projects, and improved
water resources management.

Given the lack of adequate quantitative information, the ICRR does not rate the economic efficiency of the
Project.

Implementation Efficiency

Project Cost: The project cost at completion was substantially lower than the estimate at appraisal. Against the
appraisal estimate of US$25 million, the actual cost at completion was US$11.30 million (ICR Data Sheet). The
lower cost was mainly due to (i) non-completion of some activities due to implementation delays as a result of
which US$8 million was cancelled from the IDA credit at the request of the GoN; and (ii) the intended transfer of
some of the planned activities (detailed engineering designs, bidding documents; completion of ESIA-related
activities) to the intended preparation of the scaled-up UAHEP, IKHP, and transmission line projects. Delays in
implementation also contributed to the inability to utilize fully the funds provided under the grant from the SAWI
Phase 2 Multi-Donor Trust Fund in support of WECS-related activities.




                                                                                                       Page 12 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Power Sector Ref.& Sus. Hydropower Dev. (P150066)



Project Duration: The originally planned implementation period was 49 months (4 years). The closing date was
extended three times by a total of 30 months to allow adequate time for completion of activities. Nevertheless, at
project closing, several activities remained to be completed (as discussed above in Section 4).

Based on the foregoing, the ICRR rates the Project's implementation efficiency as Modest.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     0
 Appraisal                                                  0
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     0
 ICR Estimate                                               0
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The Project's outcome is assessed on the basis of underlying ratings for (i) Relevance of Objectives, (ii) Overall
Efficacy, and (iii) Efficiency.

As discussed in Section 3, the Relevance of Objectives was rated High since the Project's objectives were well-
aligned with the national priorities prevailing at the time of appraisal and at project closure.

As discussed in Section 4, Overall Efficacy is rated Substantial with Moderate Shortcomings. Although Objective
1 was partially achieved due to the increased scope and complexity of the preparatory work due to the much
larger than planned UAHEP (for optimization reasons), the additional work contributed to strengthening of NEA's
capacity for design of hydropower projects. Prospects for completion of the unfinished activities, including
detailed engineering and bidding documents, are good given the high priority accorded by GoN to
implementation of the UAHEP and selected transmission lines.

As discussed in Section 5, the Project's Efficiency is rated Modest. The ICRR does not rate the economic
efficiency for lack of relevant information. Implementation efficiency is rated Modest given the non-completion of
project activities despite extensions of the closing date by two years.

Based on the foregoing, the ICRR rates the Project's outcome as Moderately Satisfactory.




                                                                                                    Page 13 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Power Sector Ref.& Sus. Hydropower Dev. (P150066)



a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

(Reference ICR paras. 64 and 65).

Technical Risks: These are rated Moderate. While the power sector agencies in Nepal have carried out
several hydropower generation projects, they have been of a much smaller scale than that envisaged under
the scaled-up UAHEP (1,061 MW). Further preparation and implementation of the UAHEP would likely
require continuing technical assistance, including completion of the unfinished activities (design
works, bidding documents, and some ESIA-related activities) carried over from the Project. Provision of
adequate and timely funding would be essential. The ICR indicates (para. 64) that this risk would be
mitigated by the intention that these activities are expected to continue under the proposed IDA-funded
UAHEP (P178722) that is currently under preparation.

Institutional Risks: These are rated Moderate. The ICR (para. 65) indicates that institutional capacity will
remain a challenge for the foreseeable future, particularly given the magnitude of the future infrastructure
program and the institutional and regulatory reform agenda. While the technical assistance provided under
the Project has strengthened the institutional capacity in the power sector agencies, particularly WECS and
NEA, the ICR (para. 65) indicates that NEA and UAHEL (Upper Arun Hydroelectric Company) will require
substantial continued capacity building in key functions including project management, particularly
procurement, contract management, E&S systems management, and engagement of adequately qualified
staff.

Financial Risks: These are rated High. NEA's financial viability has been weak. Adequate and timely
availability of funds would be essential for the power sector agencies to carry out the required actions,
including preparing, planning, and implementing the sector reforms and projects. This will require that
appropriate actions are taken to improve NEA's financial viability.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  (Reference ICR para. 60).

  Project preparation benefited from the Bank's experience gained from earlier projects and sector work.
  The strategic relevance was well-aligned, and continues to be well-aligned, with the national priorities and
  priorities in the World Bank Group (WBG) CPFs for Nepal. The project design drew on completed and
  ongoing studies, including the Transmission Line Master Plan, and included elements on the expectation
  that they would support the preparation of planned energy sector Development Policy Credit (DPC)
  operations by formulating policy recommendations and reform actions for inclusion under the DPCs.
  However, the ICR (para. 60) indicates that combining the infrastructure development and sector reform
  agendas risked overwhelming the capacity of the GoN counterparts. This risk was to be mitigated to

                                                                                                     Page 14 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Power Sector Ref.& Sus. Hydropower Dev. (P150066)



  some extent by the establishment and operation of a multi-agency Project Steering Committee (PSC).
  The ICR (para. 60) also indicates that the World Bank overestimated the E&S, procurement, and contract
  management capacities of WECS and NEA. There were some shortcomings in regard to the M&E
  system and the Results Indicators - some of the original Intermediate Results Indicators (IRIs) were later
  dropped as they were determined to be beyond the control of the Project (e.g preparation of an Action
  Plan for NEA's Business Restructuring and planned workshops on resettlement and benefit sharing
  guidelines).

  The ICRR rates Quality-at-Entry as Moderately Satisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 (Reference ICR paras. 47, 48, 50, 61 and 62).

 Overall, the Bank's team worked proactively with the counterparts to anticipate and resolve issues affecting
 implementation progress. A Mid-Term Review (MTR) was carried out in 2018 and the findings informed the
 project restructuring in October 2019. One shortcoming during project supervision was the inability of the
 Bank team to ensure, with GoN, that the high-level multi-agency Project Steering Committee (PSC) would
 meet regularly and address issues that needed to be resolved to enable efficient implementation of the
 Project. The ICR (para. 47) indicates that lack of coordination between NEA and the other GoN agencies
 delayed decision-making and implementation. The ineffective coordination affected the launch of critical
 activities and substantially limited access to data, including on-site E&S data and resource mobilization for
 different project activities. The ICR (para. 50) indicates that uncertainty accompanying the transition to the
 Bank's new Environmental and Social Framework (applicable to all investment projects initiated on or after
 October 1, 2018) delayed implementation. The GoN had to renegotiate awarded contracts to align them
 with the ESF. Also, the ESF introduced new requirements that were not fully specified. There was lack of
 clarity and differences in approach among the Bank staff that delayed the implementation of the E&S-
 related activities.

 During the implementation period, the World Bank supervision team conducted regular supervision
 missions (a total of 16 over the implementation period of 6.5 years) to assess implementation progress and
 to agree with the GoN counterparts on remedial actions to resolve issues and expedite implementation
 progress. The missions were adequately staffed with E&S, procurement and financial management (FM)
 specialists. Specialized technical assistance through external experts was provided where needed. The
 Project had three Task Team Leaders (TTLs) over the implementation period. Back-to-office reporting was
 generally candid in identifying issues and recommending necessary actions. Implementation Status and
 Results Reports (ISRs) were filed in a timely manner.

 Based on the foregoing, the ICRR rates the Quality of Supervision as Moderately Satisfactory.




                                                                                                   Page 15 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Power Sector Ref.& Sus. Hydropower Dev. (P150066)



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 (Reference ICR paras. 51 to 55).

 Although not articulated in the PAD, the theory of change (TOC) and results chain (as inferred in the ICR)
 were adequately covered in the Project's M&E system. As designed, the Project's M&E system included
 specific M&E procedures and arrangements for data collection, monitoring, and reporting. The Results
 Monitoring Framework (RMF) included three PDO indicators and 10 Intermediate Results Indicators (IRIs)
 to track implementation progress. NEA and WECS were responsible for collecting data and submitting
 progress reports on a trimester basis. The indicators were generally relevant and measurable. However,
 during implementation, some of the IRIs were dropped as they were assessed to be outside the control of
 the Project and substituted by new indicators. The reports covered implementation status and issues,
 disbursements and financial statements, results achieved, and necessary adjustments to the
 implementation schedule. A Project Steering Committee (PSC) chaired by the Secretary for Energy and
 composed of representatives from various GoN agencies, was expected to provide oversight for NEA's and
 WECS's activities. The constitution of the PSC was a legal covenant under the Financing Agreement
 between IDA and the GoN.



b. M&E Implementation
  As indicated above, some IRIs were dropped and others revised to provide greater clarity. One
  shortcoming was that, as indicated in the ICR (para. 47), there was a lack of coordination between the
  power sector agencies which significantly affected access to data, including on-site E&S data collection
  and resource mobilization for different project activities. As designed, the PSC was expected to ensure
  adequate coordination between the different GoN agencies. However, the ICR (para. 53) indicates that
  there is no evidence that the PSC was ever constituted and performed its coordination functions. There is
  also no evidence of submission of quarterly implementation progress reports by the implementing
  agencies. The ICR indicates that the absence of the PSC was mitigated to some extent by some other
  forums for a joint discussion such as the monthly energy sector portfolio review meetings between the
  NEA and the World Bank and review meetings between the MOEWRI (Ministry of Energy, Water
  Resources and Irrigation) and the World Bank.



c. M&E Utilization
  The ICR (para. 54) indicates that the M&E data informed project management and decision-making,
  including restructurings that were carried out to respond to the shift in emphasis in the agenda from


                                                                                                  Page 16 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Power Sector Ref.& Sus. Hydropower Dev. (P150066)



  reform to infrastructure development. The M&E data were utilized to ensure stronger attribution to the
  project activities and to reallocate/cancel funds as appropriate.

  Rating of M&E Quality: As indicated in the ICR, the lack of a well-functioning Project Steering Committee
  led to substantial problems in timely and sufficient collection and sharing of relevant data between the
  various GoN agencies involved. Impacts were felt in particular in regard to sharing of data related to
  E&S aspects. Further, progress reports were not prepared and submitted on time.

  Based on the foregoing, the ICRR rates M&E quality as Modest.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   (Reference ICR paras. 56 to 59).

   Environmental and Social Safeguards

   At appraisal, the Project was classified as Category A. The safeguard policies triggered were Environmental
   Assessment (EA) - OP/BP 4.01); Natural Habitats (NH) - OP/BP 4.04; Physical Cultural Resources (PCR) -
   OP/BP 4.11; Indigenous Peoples (IP) - OP/BP 4.10; Involuntary Resettlement (IR) - OP/BP 4.12; Safety of
   Dams (SOD) - OP/BP 4.37; and Projects on International waterways (PIW) - OP/BP 7.50.

   Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01): The World Bank required NEA to prepare specific
   safeguards instruments for each hydropower and transmission line project included under the Project to
   ensure compliance with the relevant policies. These instruments included ESIAs including CIAs (Cumulative
   Impact Actions), Stakeholder Engagement Plans (SEPs); Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs), and
   Indigenous Peoples Plans (IPPs).

   Indigenous Peoples Plans (OP 4.10): The ICR (para. 57) indicates that the Project was a first for both
   Nepal and the World Bank to initiate the FPIC (Free, Prior, and Informed Consent) related to the rights of
   indigenous peoples and other traditional communities. This was the first World Bank project to support the
   FPIC under the new Environmental and Social Framework (ESF) and resulted in a lack of clarity regarding
   the World Bank's procedures for confirming the FPIC process and for review and clearance of the IPPs.
   This delayed progress and affected the decision-making process. Notwithstanding this, the FPIC process
   provided a first-time opportunity for the World Bank to test governance structures for conducting FPIC. The
   IPPs include specific community development recommendations to ensure that the UAHEP creates
   economic opportunities for local communities. These innovative features have raised the standards for
   hydropower development in Nepal.

   Other Triggered E&S Safeguards: Although some other safeguards (NH, PCR, IR, PIW) were triggered at
   appraisal, the ICR does not specifically discuss them.



                                                                                                  Page 17 of 21
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Power Sector Ref.& Sus. Hydropower Dev. (P150066)



  Compliance with E&S Safeguards: The ICR (para. 56) indicates that NEA substantially complied with the
  World Bank's E&S requirements. However, there were significant delays due to the limited institutional
  capacity in assessing and managing E&S aspects, and the limited staffing in relation to the heavy workload
  stemming from preparation of large and complex infrastructure projects. Support was provided from the
  ESPOE (Environmental and Social Panel of Experts) supplemented by activities to develop the capacity of
  NEA's Environmental and Social Department (ESSD) and other relevant personnel.

  The last ISR filed before project closing indicates E&S safeguards performance as Moderately Satisfactory.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  (Reference ICR paras. 58 and 59).

  Procurement: The ICR (para. 58) indicates that procurement of large consulting packages followed the
  World Bank's procurement guidelines. Both WECS and NEA maintained adequate records of all
  procurement and contract documents. However, there were no transparent mechanisms to handle bidders'
  and contractors' complaints. The limited procurement and contract management capacity of the
  implementing agencies to implement high-value consulting activities with an international approach
  compromised the efficiency of the procurement process and contract administration. The ICR (para.
  58) indicates that unresolved disputes concerning the execution of the largest procurement package led to
  an early termination and a re-tendering. However, the Project closed before the new contract could be
  awarded. The ICR does not report any case of mis-procurement or other non-compliance.

  Financial Management (FM): The ICR (para. 59) reports that compliance with the World Bank's financial
  management requirements differed between the two implementing agencies. Despite initial quality issues,
  WECS maintained an acceptable level of FM controls and submitted audited financial statements in time.
  NEA faced significantly more challenges. The main shortcomings were (i) delays in submitting to the World
  Bank audited financial statements and (ii) recurrent audit qualifications from the external auditors. The
  primary external audit qualifications were (i) irregularity of internal audits and (ii) flawed accounting of
  Project funds. Both the GoN counterpart financing and the IDA financing were not adequately accounted
  for in the reports. The ICR (para. 59) reports that these issues remained outstanding at the end of the
  Project.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  The ICR does not report any significant unintended impacts. (ICR para. 41).



d. Other
  (Reference ICR paras. 36 to 40):




                                                                                                 Page 18 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Power Sector Ref.& Sus. Hydropower Dev. (P150066)



   Gender: The Project was not gender-tagged. It did not include activities to reduce gender disparities. (ICR
   para. 37).

   Institutional Strengthening: The Project financed the participation of GoN officials to regional conferences
   to enhance cross-country collaboration and training to strengthen their project management capabilities. In
   synergy with activities under the Project, the World Bank implemented a two-year training program to
   strengthen NEA's institutional capacity in regard to E&S aspects. In addition, the World Bank organized
   training on hydropower sustainability practice for key actors in the sector. These interventions provided
   knowledge and expertise on the practical measures, methodologies, and approaches to identify and
   manage sustainability issues in hydropower development and operation. (ICR para. 38).

   Mobilizing Private Sector Financing: The Project did not directly contribute to mobilizing private sector
   financing. However, the sector and policy reforms supported by the Project, which are expected to be
   continued and further enhanced, would increase the interest and willingness of the private sector to invest
   in the sector. (ICR para. 39).

   Poverty Reduction and Shared Prosperity: Through strengthening the institutional capacity for
   hydropower infrastructure and transmission line development, the Project indirectly contributed to increasing
   reliable access to the power grid, one of the main drivers of inclusive growth and poverty reduction. (ICR
   para. 40).



11. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                   IEG
                                                                                Disagreements/Comment
                                Moderately
Outcome                                              Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
                                Moderately
Bank Performance                                     Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
                                                                                The absence of a Project
                                                                                Steering Committee led to
                                                                                substantial delays in inter-
                                                                                agency collection and sharing of
Quality of M&E                  Substantial          Modest
                                                                                relevant data, expecially in
                                                                                regard to E&S issues. Project
                                                                                progress reports were not
                                                                                submitted on time.
Quality of ICR                  ---                  Substantial


12. Lessons

(Reference ICR paras. 66 to 70).




                                                                                                  Page 19 of 21
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Power Sector Ref.& Sus. Hydropower Dev. (P150066)



The ICR (paras. 66 to 70) lists a number of lessons derived from the experience under the Project.
From these, IEG derives the following lessons that are relevant for similar projects implemented in
comparable environments.

Efficient preparation and execution of a policy agenda affecting more than one sector and
involving agencies in different sectors, as in the case of the Project, can be adversely
affected by weaknesses in the coordination between the key institutions and agencies
involved. It is essential to have the proper mechanisms in place to ensure strong inter-agency
coordination arrangements to facilitate smooth and successful implementation. The Project would
have benefited from the oversight provided by a well-constituted and empowered Project Steering
Committee.

During implementation, shifts in the client's priorities and emphasis in regard to project
content, as in the case of the Project, can be accommodated by re-aligning the project to the
new priorities. In the case of the Project, there was a subtle evolution of the Project's focus from
the institutional and sector reform agenda to infrastructure project preparation. Specifically, the
significant increase in the supported hydropower capacity required substantially more attention to
project preparation capacity while the parallel DPC operations exclusively focused on the reform
agenda. In the case of the Project, the targeted institutional and sector reform actions were
achieved. However, for future operations, depending upon the degree and significance of the
changes, the need for a formal restructuring should be examined as well.

Training, targeted technical assistance and on-the-job training can enhance the capacity of
the implementing agencies, but the gains can be constrained in the absence of adequate
institutional-level human capital development plans. These plans should ensure that an
adequate number of people are trained, people with adequate skills and experience are hired, and
talent is retained, including embedding highly skilled staff in the organizational structure to support
decision-making and stimulate institutional learning.

Inadequate specification of the specific modalities to be followed under newly placed World
Bank policies and requirements can adversely affect implementation by causing uncertainty
and implementation delays. In the case of the Project, the Bank's ESF did not fully specify how to
carry out specific measures, and implementation of the FPIC process was complex and difficult.
Conducting small pilots before mandating the application of complex policy requirements can reduce
uncertainty and provide for a smoother project-level implementation process.




13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR



                                                                                                     Page 20 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Power Sector Ref.& Sus. Hydropower Dev. (P150066)



The ICR is generally well-written, candid, and follows the OPCS guidelines. The ICR provides an adequate
theory of change in regard to the causal links and the results chain. The reporting is generally outcome-focused
but was constrained in some cases by weaknesses in the Project's M&E system (which has been rated Modest
in the ICRR). The ICR provides a number of lessons derived from the Project's experience that are relevant for
similar projects undertaken in comparable environments. The ICR does have some shortcomings. There are
discrepancies in the reporting of the Project's actual cost at completion between the ICR Data Sheet and Annex
3 on Project Cost. The discussion in regard to E&S safeguards is limited and does not cover all the
safeguards triggered at appraisal.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                  Page 21 of 21
